Social identification and risk dynamics: how perceptions of (inter)personal
and collective risk impact the adoption of COVID-19 preventative behaviours
Mark Atkinson1,2, Fergus Neville1*, Evangelos Ntontis3, and Stephen Reicher2
1School of Management, University of St Andrews
2School of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of St Andrews
3School of Psychology & Counselling, The Open University
*Corresponding author
This work was supported by the UK Research and Innovation/Economic and Social Research Council
(grant reference number ES/V005383/1).
Abstract
Public adoption of preventative behaviours to reduce the transmission of COVID-19 is crucial to
managing the pandemic, and so it is vital to determine what factors influence the uptake of
those behaviours. Previous studies have identified COVID-19 risk perceptions as a key factor,
but this work has typically been limited both in assuming that risk means risk to the personal
self, and in being reliant on self-reported data. Drawing on the social identity approach (Reicher,
Spears and Haslam, 2010), we conducted two online studies in which we investigated the effects
of two different types of risk on preventative measure taking: risk to the personal self and risk
to the collective self (i.e. members of a group with which one identifies). Both studies involved
behavioural measures using innovative interactive tasks. In Study 1 (n = 199; data collected 27
May 2021), we investigated the effects of (inter)personal and collective risk on physical
distancing. In Study 2 (n = 553; data collected 20 September 2021), we investigated the effects
of (inter)personal and collective risk on the speed at which tests are booked as COVID-19
symptoms develop. In both studies, we find that perceptions of collective risk, but not
perceptions of (inter)personal risk, influence the extent to which preventative measures are
adopted. We discuss the implications both conceptually (as they relate to both the
conceptualisation of risk and social identity processes) and also practically (in terms of the
implications for public health communications).
Keywords— COVID-19, pandemic, personal risk, collective risk, preventative measures
1 Introduction
One key lesson from the COVID-19 pandemic has been the importance of behaviour in determining
the spread of infection. Widespread public adherence to preventative measures is a crucial
component in the management of COVID-19. Physical distancing1, getting tested in the event of
developing symptoms, and self-isolating while infectious, for example, all play a role in reducing the
spread of the virus, allowing schools, businesses, public transport, and other public spaces to remain
open and safe. The ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control) note that behavioural
interventions “have played a critical role in reducing transmission rates and the impact of COVID-19”
(2021).
Identifying the factors which determine the extent to which members of the public adopt such
preventative measures is therefore vital. It has implications for how they are promoted by
Government and health authorities and, more specifically, how they should be communicated to the
public.
Accordingly, there is a large and rapidly growing literature devoted to the question of adherence
(Moran et al., 2021, Noone et al., 2021). While there are multiple factors beyond psychological
motivation which impact adherence (for instance, in order to abide by COVID-19 measures, people
need both the necessary information and the necessary resources to do so – see Michie, van Stralen
& West, 2011; Reicher & Drury, 2021) and while there are multiple psychological determinants of
adherence (van Bavel et al., 2020), one consideration which has consistently been found to be of
importance is the perception of risk. This has been shown across a range of pandemics (Tang and
Wong, 2004; Rubin et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2015; Webster et al., 2020). The effects of risk perception
have been demonstrated during the COVID-19 pandemic across a range of behaviours, influencing, for
1 We prefer this term to the more often used ‘social distancing’ since prevention of infection transmission depends
upon physical, not social distance, and indeed maintaining social proximity is important to maintaining both physical
and mental health.
example, hand washing (Wise et al., 2020; Cabrera-Alvarez et al., 2022), physical distancing (Abu-Akel
et al., 2021; Rothgerber et al., 2020; Wise et al., 2020), self-isolation and lockdown adherence (Siegrist
et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2020), vaccination intentions and uptake (Caserotti et al., 2021; Butter et al.,
2022), and engagement with relevant media (Zhou et al., 2022).
At one level, this makes good sense – after all, unless something constitutes a threat and hence poses
a risk, why would one devote efforts to mitigating against it, especially if one is required to act in ways
that are onerous (such as self-isolating) and restrictive (such as physical distancing). At the same time
however, the existing evidence is limited in two important ways.
The first limit is conceptual. Research on (perceived) risk and adherence generally fails to address who
is (perceived to be) at risk. It either presupposes that risk means risk to the individual self (as opposed
to other individuals) or else it doesn’t address the question at all. Yet, over recent years, social
psychologists have made a distinction between personal identity and social identity, the former
referring to defining oneself in individual terms, the latter to defining oneself in terms of membership
of a social group (Reicher, Spears & Haslam, 2010; Tajfel, 1974). In addition to personal identity, we
all have a range of collective (or social) identities corresponding to the different groups we belong to
which will be salient in different contexts. Moreover, which identity is salient is crucial to the
cognitions, emotions and behaviours of the actor. Notably, when social identities are salient, people
will act in terms of the norms, values and interests of their group and not of themselves as individuals
(Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher & Wetherell, 1987).
In the context of risk, this would imply that our estimates of the threat posed by any specific
phenomenon could vary considerably as a function of whether we think in terms of personal or social
identity. Something that is of little risk to us as individuals may be of great risk to the wider group and
vice-versa. Therefore, in estimating the impact of risk upon behaviour we must ask ‘which risk?’ – or
rather, to be more precise, ‘risk in relation to which identity?’.
The overall relevance of social identification processes in the COVID-19 pandemic has been amply
demonstrated, notably by a range of studies showing that social identification at various levels (local
community, state, nation) is related to adherence to mitigation measures (Cardenas et al., 2021;
Stevenson et al., 2021; van Bavel et al., 2022; Vignoles et al., 2021). In this paper, we are specifically
interested in the relevance of social identification processes to the perception of COVID risk. There is
already evidence that the pandemic is viewed as riskier to the community than to oneself (Siegrist et
al. 2021) but do people think in terms of the community risk rather than their personal risk when
making decisions about physical distancing, getting tested and other preventative behaviours? To put
it slightly differently, is it risk to the personal self or to the group which impacts adherence to COVID
mitigations? The question is not only of theoretical interest. It also has practical implications for the
design of public health messaging..
The second limit of research on risk and adherence is the widespread reliance on self-report measures
of behaviour – as is true more generally in COVID-19 research (Davies et al, 2022). These measures are
subject to a series of limitations such as social desirability biases, selective recall and problems of
judgement (Prince et al., 2008; Shephard, 2003). These are not reasons for simply rejecting self-reports
and indeed the problems are clearly greater with some behaviours than others, such as those where
actors are less observed and where judgements of compliance are less clear cut. Thus, in a study of
adherence during the COVID-19 pandemic, Davies, Weinman & Rubin (2021) show that self-report
measures are highly discrepant from observational data for some behaviours (hand-washing and
physical distancing) but not for others (mask wearing in public spaces).
While Davies et al. (2021) make an understandable call for more observational research, the obvious
problem is that this is not always practical or indeed possible, especially where the behaviours
themselves are private or else (as in the present case) there is a need to collect additional non-
observable data. One alternative is to exploit the possibilities of digital technologies. A number of
studies have demonstrated the effectiveness and validity of immersive Virtual Reality techniques in
studying social interaction (e.g. Gonzales-Franco et al., 2018; Pan & de C. Hamilton, 2018), including
for phenomena which are difficult to research (e.g. Gonzalez-Franco et al., 2018; Rovira et al., 2021).
Other studies have developed simpler and more accessible computer-based versions of the
behaviours that concern them. Luckman et al. (2021), for example, used a computer-based task in
their work on the effects of face mask usage on physical distancing in a COVID-19 context. In different
stylised scenarios, participants were required to select the minimum (horizontal) distance they would
intuitive, computer-based tasks to study our behaviours of interest.
We report two studies which address the impact of (a) perceived individual risk, and (b) perceived
collective risk on two key behaviours necessary to the reduction of COVID-19 transmission. The first
study looks at physical distancing (how far participants keep from others). The second study looks at
testing for COVID-19 (how quickly people participants choose to get a test after symptoms start
developing).
2 Study 1
For this first study, we focussed on the effect of individual and collective risk perceptions on physical
distancing, one of the components of the ‘Hands. Face. Space’ campaign in the UK.
To measure distancing, we have developed an intuitive, interactive task in which participants position
an avatar of themselves in relation to others in different scenarios. At the time of data collection, 27
May 2021, the UK guidelines were to be mindful of surroundings and keep a 2 metre distance from
people who were not members of your household.
2.1 Methodology
We first collected 6 single-item measures of participants’ perceptions of COVID-19 risk: the risk to
themselves, other people in their household, their family and close friends, and their local, national,
and world communities. We also collected their vaccination status and their sense of shared identity
with their local community. See SI Section 1.1.1 for details.
The participants then took part in a physical distancing task. They were presented with 20 trials in
which they indicated where they would position themselves relative to another individual in different
hypothetical scenarios. This allowed us to investigate how a participant’s physical distancing was
affected by (their perceptions of) different types of risk. We also manipulated whether the other
individual was a friend or a stranger (anticipating less physical distancing between friends in line with
the “Friend-Shield” account; De Vries and Lee, 2022), and whether they were or were not wearing a
mask (anticipating less physical distancing when the other individual was wearing a mask in line with
a “risk compensation” account; Luckman et al., 2021). The first 16 trials involved scenarios in which
both the participant and the other individual were standing. In the final 4 trials, they were both seated.
Our trials bear similarity to those of Luckman et al. (2021), discussed above, although we used a
different set of scenarios, and our distances were based on both the horizontal and vertical positions
The task was developed using jsPsych (de Leeuw, 2015).
2.1.1 Standing trials
In each of the 16 standing trials, the participant was presented with a bounded area (550 x 550 pixels
a person (also 150 pixels in height), wearing a blue t-shirt with a “YOU” logo on it — represented the
it to indicate where they would stand relative to the other individual in each scenario. We then
figures’ heights of 150 pixels as 169cm (the mean of the UK average male [175cm] and female [162cm]
heights), then 178 pixels would be equivalent to a 2m physical distance.
Each of the 16 standing trials involved a different scenario, unique in its combination of (i) which of 4
different locations the figures were presented in, (ii) whether or not the other individual was wearing
a mask, and (iii) whether or not the other individual was a friend or a stranger. The 4 different
locations, which were used to introduce some contextual variability including a mix of public/private
outdoor scenarios, they were not wearing a mask. For each of the 4 trials involving a given location,
illustrating two different scenarios.
talking to a stranger who is not wearing a mask in a park. The distance between them is 267 pixels.
The distance between them is 99 pixels.
position was randomly determined for each trial. When the participant was happy with the position
and were unable to progress until they had done so. Before the first scenario, the participant was
of them.
2.1.2 Seated trials
For each of the 4 seated trials, the participant was presented with a 7x7 grid of tiles representing seats
in a doctor’s waiting area. The centre seat was taken by another individual. The participant’s task was
to select the seat they would sit in. One trial had the other individual as a friend wearing a mask, one
as a friend not wearing a mask, one a stranger wearing a mask, and one a stranger not wearing a mask.
The trials were presented in a random order for each participant. An example trial is illustrated in
select a seat in a doctor’s waiting room where the other individual was a friend wearing a mask. They
have chosen a seat which places them at a distance of 2.24 seats.
Seated physical distance was taken as the distance between the centre points of each seat, using seat
as unit of measurement (e.g. if the participant had left 1 empty seat between them and the other
individual but sat in the same row, the distance would be 2 seats, while if they had sat in one of the
closest seats directly diagonal to the other individual, the distance would be √2 = 1.414 seats; the
maximum distance was 4.243 seats).
Note that throughout both the standing and seated physical distancing trials, all the figures had the
same haircut and the same yellow skin colour. We did not intend the figures to represent people of a
particular gender or skin colour (and so, rather than privileging one skin colour over others, we selected
yellow skin following its typical use in the emojis of human figures to indicate individuals who could be
of any skin colour). It is, however, possible that our participants varied in how much they perceived the
figures as comparatively in-group or out-group, and that this may have influenced their perceptions of
risk in a way which affected their avatar placements (see Yee & Bailenson, 2007, for relevant discussion
of the Proteus Effect). We do not anticipate that this would have affected our overall results, however,
controlled for gender in our statistical analyses.
After the physical distancing tasks, we used response scales to collect additional, reported, data on the
participants’ intentions to take other preventative measures in the next week and the measures they
had taken in the previous week. See SI Section 1.1.2 for details. We also collected the participant’s age,
gender, and pre-tax income (in £10,000 bands) to control for the effects these variables in our analyses,
previous work having indicated associations between them and adherence with preventative
behaviours (e.g. Smith et al., 2021, with respect to adherence to the test, trace, and isolate system in
the UK). We collected participant location as a check that we had successfully pre-screened our
participants to only recruit those in the UK. As part of a wider project, we also collected additional data
- employment situation, number of adults and children in their household, and the amount of time they
had been working at home due to the pandemic - which is not relevant to this particular paper.
Participants were free to withhold any of this information.
This was an exploratory study. We wanted to see if there was a distinction between different types of
risk, such as perceptions of risk to the individual and perceptions of risk to the group, and, if there were
any differences, to investigate whether each predicted behaviour. Though we anticipated, based on
previous work (e.g. Siegrist et al., 2021), that some type of risk would influence behaviour, we did not
make any firm predictions about the effects of any different types of risk.
2.1.3 Participants
Data from 200 participants was collected using Prolific on 27 May 2021. Each was paid £2. Though we
used Prolific’s prescreening to only recruit participants who had indicated that their current location
was the UK, one participant reported that they were currently living in Poland, and so we removed their
data from the analysis. Our final sample was therefore of 199 UK-based participants (142 female, 54
male, 3 other/undisclosed gender; age 18-89, mean 33.6; age distribution illustrated in SI Section 3.
175 participants lived in England, 13 in Scotland, 8 in Wales, and 2 in Northern Ireland, with 1
undisclosed. 105 (53%) participants had had at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and 93 (47%) had
not, with 1 undisclosed (i.e. the participant responded “don’t know/prefer not to say”). A technical
issue during the data collection resulted in all of one participant’s physical distancing and test- booking
measures not being recorded. We retained the rest of the participant’s data, however, and included it
in appropriate analyses.
2.2 Results
Mean standing physical distance (mean of individual participant means) was 167 pixels (sd = 62.0),
which would be equivalent to 1.9m. Mean seated physical distance (mean of individual participant
means) was 3.04 seats (sd = 0.667).
To investigate the effects of different types of COVID-19 risk perception on physical distancing, we first
factor analysed the 6 risk items (see SI Section 1.1.1). We determined a two-factor split through parallel
analysis (using the psych package; Revelle, 2021). Our factor analysis (using the lavaan package;
Rosseel, 2012) then indicated an (inter)personal risk factor of the first three items (personal risk,
household risk, and family and close friends risk) and a collective risk factor of the remaining three items
(local community risk, national community risk, and world risk).
For illustration purposes, mean (of individual participant means) standing and seated physical distance
by low and high (inter)personal and community risk are shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
(inter)personal and collective risk, measured by distance in pixels. (Inter)personal and collective risk
are split into low (less than mean (inter)personal/collective risk) and high (greater than mean
(inter)personal/collective risk) risk for illustration purposes here. Our statistical analyses, however,
treated (inter)personal and collective risk as continuous variables.
Collective risk
Low High
152 178
(n = 84) (n = 114)
162 148 181
Low
(n = 93) (n = 54) (n = 39)
(Inter)personal risk
172 158 177
High
(n = 105) (n = 30) (n = 75)
inter(personal) and collective risk, measured by seat distance. (Inter)personal and collective risk are
split into low (less than mean (inter)personal/collective risk) and high (greater than mean
(inter)personal/collective risk) risk for illustration purposes here. Our statistical analyses, however,
treated (inter)personal and collective risk as continuous variables.
Collective risk
Low High
2.85 3.18
(n = 84) (n = 114)
2.99 2.83 3.23
Low
(n = 93) (n = 54) (n = 39)
(Inter)personal risk
3.08 2.89 3.16
High
(n = 105) (n = 30) (n = 75)
We carried out our analyses using linear mixed effects modelling. As expected, both standing and
seated physical distance decreased if the other individual was a friend (for standing trials, b = -18.531,
SE = 0.861, t = -21.523, p < 0.001; for seated trials, b = -0.564, SE =0.023, t = -25.043, p < 0.001), or if
they were wearing a mask (for standing trials, b = -17.117, SE = 0.863, t = -19.847, p < 0.001; for seated
trials, b = -0.181, SE = 0.023, t = -8.045, p < 0.001). Higher collective risk was associated with greater
standing (b = 12.975, SE = 3.650, t = 3.555, p < 0.001) and seated (b = 0.127, SE = 0.038, t = 3.321, p =
0.001) physical distancing, and this was the case both when the other individual was a friend and
stranger and both when they were and were not wearing a mask. There was no evidence of an effect
of (inter)personal risk on physical distancing. See SI Section 1.2 for full details.
Greater collective risk, but not (inter)personal risk, was also associated with greater adoption of the
additional COVID-19 preventative measures: the measures the participants intended to take over the
next week and took over the previous week. See SI Section 1.2.3 for details.
Note that though we have focused on the distinction between (inter)personal and collective risk in our
analyses here, an alternative approach would be to assess the specific effects of personal, as opposed
to (inter)personal, risk (i.e. the participant’s response to the single-item measure “I am at risk from
COVID-19”) alongside some measure of collective risk. If we repeat our analyses, replacing
(inter)personal risk with personal risk alone and taking any of local community risk, national community
risk, world risk, or our factor-analysis-determined measure of collective risk as a measure of collective
risk, we get the same pattern of results. Participants take more preventative measures, including
increasing physical distancing, with higher perceptions of collective risk, but there is no evidence of any
effects of personal risk.
2.3 Discussion
Three points emerge from the findings of this study. First, they confirm the validity of a distinction
between different types of risk, organized around who is at risk. They also help us to elaborate this
distinction. That is, risk to the individual self forms a factor with risk to those with whom one has
relations as an individual – one’s friends and family. This is separate from risk to members of the various
groups to which we belong. Accordingly, we term these respectively (inter)personal and collective risk.
Second, these different types of risk relate differently to behaviour. Thirdly, and more specifically, it is
collective risk rather than (inter)personal risk which impacts on physical distancing. This is true whether
we are standing or seated, in the presence of a friend or a stranger, someone who is masked or
unmasked. It is true whether we compare personal risk with collective risk as a whole or to risk to any
specific collectivity we belong to. It is true whether we compare collective risk to (inter)personal risk as
a whole (including those with whom we have individual relations) or just to our individual selves.
However, one might still ask whether these findings are specific to physical distancing or whether they
apply more generally to behavioural COVID-19 mitigations. Accordingly, in the next study we address
the impact of (inter)personal and collective risk on a very different mitigation behaviour.
3 Study 2
The test, trace, and isolation system can play a critical role in minimising the spread of COVID-19. To be
most effective, it is important that individuals who are symptomatic, or have been in contact with
someone infected, are tested as early as possible. In the event of a positive test result, it is also crucial
that they self-isolate. At the time of our data collection, they were also required to provide contact
tracing information.
We primarily focus on the first step of that process here, using an interactive task to assess how long
participants waited while symptoms, possibly indicative of COVID-19, developed before they booked a
test. Following our results of Study 1, we predicted that test booking speed would be primarily
motivated by perceptions of collective risk over perceptions of (inter)personal risk.
At the time of data collection, 20 September 2021, the UK public were instructed to self-isolate if they
received a positive test result, or to self-isolate and book a test if they either developed COVID-19
symptoms or were a close contact of someone with COVID-19.
3.1 Methodology
As in Study 1, we first collected 6 single-item measures of the participants’ perceptions of different
types of COVID-19 risk and their vaccination status. We also collected two additional measures of
whether the participants perceived COVID-19 infection as unimportant, one measure relating to
personal infection (including, e.g., the item “It doesn’t matter if I catch COVID-19”) and one measure
relating to infection of the general public (including, e.g., the item “It doesn’t matter if people catch
COVID-19”). See SI Section 2.1.1 for details.
To focus the participant on the scenario of self-isolation, we asked them to imagine how they would
feel if they tested positive for COVID-19 and were required to self-isolate. They briefly described (a)
“the financial challenges (e.g. due to reduced income)”, (b) “the practical challenges (e.g. related to
getting food, essentials, and medicines, or caring responsibilities)”, and (c) “any other challenges (e.g.
emotional)” they would face if self-isolating.
They were then presented with details of the current (at time of data collection) £500 support package
which could be available to them if they tested positive for COVID-19 and were required to self-isolate.
They were informed that they may be eligible for this support if they were employed or self-employed,
they could not work from home, and they received benefits or were on a low income (as defined by
their local council). We then asked how likely they thought they were to be eligible for this support (7-
point response scale from “Extremely unlikely” to “Extremely likely”).
They were then asked the extent to which they agreed that it would be difficult to self-isolate due to
financial, practical, and other (e.g. emotional) challenges, each on a 7-point scale. The participant then
completed the interactive test-booking task (which was again developed using jsPsych). They were first
given a summary of the symptoms of COVID-19 as used by the NHS (at the time of data collection), i.e.
that there are three main symptoms — a high temperature, a new, continuous cough, and a loss or
change to your sense of smell or taste — and that a test should be booked if any of them are present.
We specified that the test referred to was a PCR test which would be sent away to a lab, as opposed to
a test that could be completed at home. The participants were then shown a three-panel visual
representation of a person having none of the symptoms to any extent (a temperature described as
“normal”, 0 coughing episodes over the last 24 hours, and a sense of smell/taste described as “10 out
having all of the symptoms to a severe extent (a temperature described as “boiling”, 9 coughing
bottom panel).
told the main three symptoms of COVID-19 as used by the NHS. The image in the top panel was used
to illustrate a person with no symptoms of COVID-19. The image in the bottom panel was used to
illustrate a person with severe symptoms of COVID-19.
The participants then undertook 4 trials. In the first trial only temperature symptoms were present, in
the second only coughing symptoms, and in the third only loss of smell/taste symptoms. In the fourth
trial, all three symptoms were present together. For each trial the participant was told that they had
no symptoms at the start of the week (Step 0, displayed as “Mon am” [indicating Monday morning]).
When they were ready to begin the trial, the symptoms worsened every 3 seconds. At any point the
participant could either click a button to “book a test” or wait to see how the symptoms developed.
The trial ended either when the participant elected to book a test, or if they did not book a test before
involving all four symptoms at Steps 0 and 4.
start (Step 0) of the trial involving all three symptoms. Once the participant started the trial, this
visualisation remained on the screen for 3 seconds, before changing to the Step 1 visualisation (not
shown). If the participant did not elect to book a test, the symptoms continued to worsen every 3
seconds. The bottom image is the visualisation at Step 4.
Our measurement of test booking was the step number at which the participant booked a test. This
was treated as an ordinal variable, with Step 10 recorded for trials in which no test was booked. After
the test-booking task, we used response scales to collect additional, reported, data on the participants’
intentions to provide contact tracing details and self-isolate in the event of a positive COVID-19 test.
See SI Section 2.1.2 for details.
As for Study 1, we also collected the participant’s age, gender, and pre-tax income (in £10,000 bands)
to control for the effects these variables in our analyses. We collected participant location as a check
that we had successfully pre-screened our participants to only recruit those in the UK. As part of a wider
project, we also collected additional data - the participant’s employment situation, number of adults
and children in their household, caring responsibilities, and the amount of time they had been working
at home during the pandemic - which is again not relevant to this particular paper. Participants were
free to withhold any of this information.
Optional text boxes were available at regular intervals for participants to comment on any of their
responses if they wished, and there was additional space at the end of the study for them to add
anything else they wanted to tell us about their experience of COVID-19 or to provide feedback on the
study. Two attention checks were included (one within the COVID-19 risk items and one within the
contact tracing items, where the participant was instructed to select “Strongly agree” and “Strongly
disagree”, respectively).
Based on the results of Study 1, we predicted that there would again be a distinction between
(inter)personal risk and collective risk, and that while collective risk would predict the adoption of the
preventative behaviour, (inter)personal risk would not.
3.1.1 Participants
We collected data from 601 UK-resident participants via Prolific on 20 September 2021. Prolific’s
prescreening was used to prevent participants from Study 1 from taking part. To get a spread of
participants of different ages, we also pre-screened to collect data from 200 participants aged 29 and
under, 200 participants aged 30–59, and 200 participants aged 60 and over. We inadvertently collected
data from one additional participant in the aged 30–59 category, due to their initially having trouble
submitting their responses at the end of the study and another participant having been automatically
recruited to take their place. Each participant was paid £2.
Data from 48 participants who failed one or both of the two attention checks was excluded. Our final
sample therefore included data from 553 participants (383 female, 166 male, 4 other/undisclosed
gender; age 18–88, mean 43.1, excluding one participant who did not disclose their age; age
distribution illustrated in SI Section 3). 475 lived in England, 43 in Scotland, 27 in Wales, and 7 in
Northern Ireland, with 1 undisclosed.
504 (91%) participants had had at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and 46 (8%) had not, with 3
(1%) undisclosed (i.e. the participant responded “don’t know/prefer not to say”). 131 (24%) participants
had caring responsibilities for at least one child aged 15 and under, and 419 (76%) did not, with 3 (1%)
undisclosed. 56 (10%) participants had caring responsibilities for at least one adult, and 489 (88%) did
not, with 8 (1%) undisclosed.
3.2 Results
Mean test-booking step (mean of individual participant means if we treat test-booking step as a
continuous variable) was 4.91 (sd = 1.77). We followed the same approach as in Study 1 to investigate
the effects of different types of (perceptions of) COVID-19 risk on test-booking. Parallel and factor
analysis indicated the same two-factor split: an (inter)personal risk factor of the first three items
(personal risk, household risk, and family and close friends risk) and a collective risk factor of the
remaining three items (local community risk, national community risk, and world risk).
For illustration purposes, mean (of individual participant means) test booking step by low and high
(inter)personal and collective risk. (Inter)personal and collective risk are split into low (less than mean
(inter)personal/collective risk) and high (greater than mean (inter)personal/collective risk) for
illustration purposes here. Our statistical analyses, however, treated test booking step as an ordinal
variable and (inter)personal and collective risk as continuous variables.
Collective risk
Low High
5.09 4.76
(n = 251) (n = 299)
5.03 5.20 4.71
Low
(n = 261) (n = 173) (n = 88)
(Inter)personal risk
4.80 4.86 4.78
High
(n = 289) (n = 78) (n = 211)
We carried out our analyses using cumulative link mixed effects modelling. Higher perceptions of
collective risk were associated with earlier test booking (b = -0.191, SE = 0.088, z = -2.175, p = 0.030).
There was no evidence of any effects of perceptions of (inter)personal risk on test-booking step (b =
0.022, SE = 0.076, z = 0.286, p = 0.775). See SI Section 2.2 for full details.
The additional data on the participants’ intentions to provide contact tracing details and self-isolate in
the event of a positive test indicated that increased perceptions of collective risk and, contra the other
findings we present here, increased perceptions of (inter)personal risk were both associated with
greater adoption of preventative measures. See SI Section 2.2.1 for details.
Of course, there may be other factors, such as employment type, which prevent higher risk individuals
from being able to comply with authority guidelines (e.g. Sheth and Wright, 2020). Exploratory analyses
of participant personal circumstances also suggested that lower household income and older age were
associated with waiting longer until booking a test. See SI Section 2.2.2 for details, where we also
include additional details about the role of personal circumstances on the difficulties of self-isolation.
As in Study 1, we have focussed on the distinction between inter(personal) and collective risk in our
analyses here, but an alternative approach would be to assess the specific effects of personal risk (i.e.
the participant’s response to the single-item measure “I am at risk from COVID-19”) alongside collective
risk. If we repeat the analyses above, replacing (inter)personal risk with personal risk alone and taking
any of local community risk, national community risk, world risk, or our factor-analysis-determined
measure of collective risk as a measure of collective risk, we get the same pattern of results. Participants
take more preventative measures, including booking a test sooner, with higher perceptions of collective
risk, but there is no evidence of any effects of personal risk.
We also get the same pattern of results for test booking if, instead of investigating the effects of
different risk perceptions, we use measures of how much it matters if the participant gets infected and
how much it matters if people in general get infected (see SI Section 2.1.1 for items). Consistent with
our findings for (inter)personal risk and collective risk, seeing general infection as important reduced
test booking steps, while there was no evidence that seeing personal infection as important had any
effect. See SI Section 2.2.3 for details.
3.3 Discussion
The findings of this second study very largely corroborate those of the first. Once again we get a
distinction between risk to the individual/those with whom one has individual relations ((inter)personal
risk) and risk to members of the various communities with which one is associated (collective risk).
Again, (inter)personal risk and collective risk have different relations to behaviour. And again, it is, by
and large, collective rather than (inter)personal risk which is associated with greater adherence (getting
a COVID-19 test sooner after the onset of symptoms).
The one exception to this pattern is that both (inter)personal and collective risk relate to the expressed
intention to adhere to other elements of the test, trace and isolate process (providing contact-tracing
details and self-isolate in the case of a positive test). However, it is, perhaps, telling, that these are
measured through self-report rather than computerised behavioural simulation.
In combination, however, the two studies show that, across two very different behaviours, it is the
perception of collective risk – that is risk to the groups to which one belongs – that impacts adherence.
Let us finish by considering the general implications of these findings.
4 General discussion
This paper had two aims. First to develop our understanding of the relationship between risk and
adherence by addressing whether, in the context of adherence to COVID mitigations, people think in
terms of personal or social identity (and hence of risk to their individual self or to members of the group
they identify with). The answer from both studies is clear. Whether it is a matter of physical distancing
or of taking a COVID test as symptoms develop, our respondents adhered as a function of the level of
risk to the group and not because they or their friends or their family were perceived to be at risk. It is
worth noting that this common finding was observed both in the presence of other people (avatars) in
Study 1, and in the absence of other people in Study 2. This is unsurprising given that social identity
processes do not depend on the presence of others since social identities may be salient even when
individuals are alone and thus shaping their psychology and actions.
It is important to be clear here. Our argument concerns the importance of distinguishing between these
different types of risk associated with different levels of identity (the inter-personal and the collective)
and addressing which is relevant in any given context for shaping behaviour. It is not to claim that
collective risk will always trump (inter)personal risk. To the contrary, the social identity approach
concerns the variability of the self-concept – and hence of associated cognitions, emotions and
behaviours – in different contexts. Consequently, whether collective risk trumps (inter)personal risk, or
vice-versa, will depend upon which identity is salient in the context of concern.
Our specific findings, we suggest, are due to the fact that in the early stages of the pandemic (when our
data were collected) the stress was predominantly on collective identity and the need to act in ways
that kept everyone in the community safe. Thus, in his letter of March 2020, sent to all households in
the UK (and hence to all our participants), Prime Minister Boris Johnson praised those healthcare
workers and volunteers who were helping the most vulnerable and continued: “It is with that great
British spirit that we will beat coronavirus and we will beat it together” (Civil Service World, 2020). As
the emphasis shifts from the collective to the individual – from social solidarity to personal
responsibility – later in the pandemic, we would expect the relative impact of collective and
(inter)personal risk to shift from the former to the latter.
Of course, in order to validate this suggestion, it will be necessary to conduct future studies in which
we manipulate the relative salience of different identities and look at the impact on different types of
risk and their relationship to adherence. For now, there are two important implications of the argument
we wish to emphasise. The first is conceptual and concerns both how we think of the social identity
approach and of risk. Social identity is often thought of as a social psychological theory both in terms
of the explanans (how it seeks to explain phenomena) and the explanandum (what phenomena it seeks
to explain). Hence it is seen as limited to such phenomena as social stereotyping, social influence, group
relations and so on. However, this is a misunderstanding. While the explanatory focus is on the
structure of the social self in context, the theory was always directed towards an explanation of human
understanding in general (Turner, Oakes, Haslam & McGarty, 1994). Accordingly, Xiao, Coppin and van
Bavel (2016) document the way in which social identification impacts on the various forms of
perception – visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile and gustatory. They acknowledge that most of the work
is in the visual domain but to invoke just one exception from our own work, people find the smell of
sweaty t-shirts less disgusting if they are ingroup (i.e. bearing the logo of participants own University)
than outgroup (Reicher, Templeton, Neville, Ferrari & Drury, 2016).
However, we can go further. The full radicalism of a social identity approach becomes clear once we
realise that the notion of a variable self necessarily problematises all self-related concepts (Reicher &
Hopkins, 2016). We can no longer ask about, say, self-esteem or self-efficacy or self-realisation. We
always have to ask ‘what is the self of self-esteem, self-efficacy, self-realisation?’. The implications are,
perhaps, most profound when we address two concepts that are foundational in psychology and the
wider human sciences: self-relevance and self-interest. Thus, whether an event holds any significance
for ourselves, whether we respond to it, attend to it, devote any cognitive resource to it may depend
on whether we think of ‘ourselves’ individually or collectively (McClung & Reicher, 2018) and in terms
of what collectivity. For Britons, an earthquake in Italy will be of less relevance and concern if they think
of themselves in terms of national rather than European identity (Levine & Thompson, 2004).
Similarly, whether and how an event impacts our interests (and hence what sort of risk the event
represents), will be a function of identity salience. This is not only a matter of who is affected (impact
on fellow group members affecting evaluations when group membership is salient), but also how. Thus,
for instance, the risk of a visually disfiguring condition is taken more seriously when gender identity is
salient while the risk of a physically disabling condition is taken more seriously when sporting identity
is salient (Levine & Reicher, 1996).
In all these various ways, we suggest that evaluations of risk will vary as a function of identity salience.
Risk is always risk to someone or something. Risk calculations involve an implicit self term. Hence, we
cannot answer questions of risk without asking ‘what self?’. This is not just a conceptual issue. As we
saw during the COVID-19 pandemic, it has life-and-death practical implications. That is, if people were
to focus purely on personal risks, many who are in relatively low-risk groups (in the case of COVID-19,
younger age-groups and those without comorbidities) may be disinclined to adhere to mitigation
measures. However, if they were to consider collective risk and the ways that their actions might pose
a severe risk to vulnerable members of their community, adherence would be more likely. Thus, by
stressing collective over personal identity it would be possible to increase adherence in otherwise
recalcitrant groups. There are important implications here for health messaging (Bonnell et al., 2020;
Neville et al., 2021).
Let us turn now to our second aim, which was to develop innovative methodologies which reduce our
reliance on self-report measures of adherent behaviour. For each study, we developed simple and
easily used computer-based tasks: for Study 1, instead of asking people how far they would stand from
others, getting them to place an avatar of themselves amongst others; for Study 2, instead of asking
participants how soon people book a test after symptom onset, getting them to choose when to book
a test as symptoms develop.
We do not suggest that these remove all the problems of self-report but they do address some,
particularly memory and judgement biases. Clearly, future studies would need to compare the findings
using these types of tasks to both self-report and observational data. Nonetheless, we consider that
they show considerable promise as an additional methodological option to be used alongside – and
triangulated with – other approaches.
In conclusion, then, we consider that our paper has largely succeeded in both its aims. It shows the
importance of considering the impact of different types of risk (collective and (inter)personal) on
adherence. and It does so using innovative methods. More generally, it points both to the conceptual
importance of addressing variable selfhood in risk analysis and to the practical interventions that can
help deal with COVID-19 and other pandemics.