THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 1
Digital Maturity: Development and Validation of the Digital Maturity Inventory (DIMI)
Franziska Laaber1, Arnd Florack1, Teresa Koch1, and Marco Hubert2
1 Department of Occupational, Economic, and Social Psychology, Faculty of Psychology,
University of Vienna, Austria
2 Department of Management, Aarhus University, Denmark
Author Note
Franziska Laaber 0000-0003-3040-5933
Arnd Florack 0000-0001-9906-0043
Teresa Koch 0000-0002-5301-3257
Marco Hubert 0000-0001-7967-2421
This is a preprint. The article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication in
Computers in Human Behavior. Please cite as: Laaber, F., Florack, A., Koch, T., & Hubert,
M. (in press). Digital Maturity: Development and Validation of the Digital Maturity
Inventory (DIMI). Computers in Human Behavior.
Data and supplemental materials will be made openly available at the project’s Open
developed in the context of the Digymatex project. This project has received funding from
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 870578. We have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Arnd Florack,
Department of Occupational, Economic and Social Psychology, Faculty of Psychology,
University of Vienna, Universitätsstraße 7, A-1010 Wien, Austria. Email:
arnd.florack@univie.ac.at.
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 2
Abstract
Building on research of psychosocial maturity and self-determination theory, we introduced
and investigated the concept of digital maturity as a novel view on young people’s digital
technology use. We conceptualized digital maturity as the self-determined use of digital
technologies supporting psychological growth and well-being while shielding potential
threats and considering needs of the social environment. To measure digital maturity, we
developed the Digital Maturity Inventory (DIMI). In Study 1 (N = 390, age 12-18), we
developed and selected items for the ten dimensions based on an exploratory factor analysis.
In Study 2 (N = 558, age 12-18), we examined the scale’s factor structure and internal
consistency using confirmatory factor analysis, and tested the convergent, discriminant, and
incremental validity. The results confirmed that digital maturity is linked to personality
maturity (agreeableness, conscientiousness, negative emotionality), and a hierarchical linear
regression analysis revealed the unique influence of digital maturity in predicting problematic
mobile device use beyond individual differences in personality, age, and amount of mobile
device use.
Keywords: digital maturity, information communication technology (ICT), self-
determination theory, scale development, addiction, DIMI
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 3
Introduction
A large body of research has demonstrated negative effects of young people’s digital
technology use, including the use of mobile devices and the Internet. Researchers
investigated problems of high screen time (Domingues-Montanari, 2017; Paulich et al., 2021;
Twenge & Campbell, 2018), various types of digital addictions (Hawi et al., 2019; Kim et al.,
2021; Kuss et al., 2013; Kwon et al., 2013; van den Eijnden et al., 2016), safety and privacy
concerns (Livingstone et al., 2017; Park, 2013), and problems that relate to the social nature
of digital technologies such as cyberbullying (Bastiaensens et al., 2016; Shin & Ahn, 2015).
However, the concerns regarding young people’s use of digital technologies are contrasted
with findings that technology brings various opportunities for them as well (Haddon &
Livingstone, 2017). When using mobile devices and the Internet, young people engage in a
broad range of activities, from schoolwork, playing games, watching videos, messaging,
creating digital content (i.e., images, videos, blogs), to expressing themselves and engaging in
civic or political activity (Ólafsson et al., 2013). Indeed, the ubiquitous interaction with
mobile devices offers new opportunities for young people, such as the development of new
skills (e.g., digital literacy; Livingstone & Helsper, 2010), finding ways to form and express
their identity (Buckingham, 2008), using the Internet for learning and education (Livingstone
& Bober, 2004), or connecting with others online (Valkenburg & Peter, 2009).
While these benefits of digital technologies are evident, parents are often insecure
about whether their children are taking advantage of the opportunities offered by these
technologies for their positive development, or whether potential harm caused by immature
use of digital technologies outweighs the benefits (Hwang et al., 2017). This insecurity
emphasises that young people need to develop a specific kind of maturity when interacting
with digital technologies which goes beyond technical competences to use mobile devices.
However, while a large body of research has studied negative effects of young people’s
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 4
digital technology use (e.g., Huang, 2010; Kuss et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2019), there is a lack
of research considering the mature use of digital technologies not only as the absence of
addiction, but as a multi-facetted construct including several different competences.
Therefore, in this paper, we introduce a holistic concept and measure of young people’s
digital maturity which integrates goals of positive individual development and goals of
socialization in digital contexts. Specifically, we define digital maturity as the capabilities
and attitudes which enable individuals to use digital technologies in ways which support
individual development (growth) and integration into society (adjustment).
Building on a humanistic framework derived from theories of psychosocial maturity
and self-determination theory (Bleidorn, 2015; Deci & Ryan, 2000; Greenberger et al., 1975;
Wehmeyer et al., 2017), we describe measurable characteristics of a mature and self-
determined digital technology use. The introduced concept of digital maturity provides a
novel view on young people’s digital technology use which advances the current narrow and
problem-focused approaches towards the investigation of a beneficial technology use. The
concept of digital maturity allows to measure young people’s digital maturity, to study and
detect differences in digital maturity (e.g., in relation to social class), to investigate the
development of digital maturity over time, as well as to study determinants (e.g., personality),
and outcomes of digital maturity (e.g., less problematic use behaviours), and to evaluate
potential measures to strengthen digital maturity (e.g., interventions).
Theoretical Background
Personality Maturity and Digital Maturity as Interrelated, but Different Concepts
From the perspective of personality development, psychosocial maturity is based on
adjustment and growth (Staudinger & Kunzmann, 2005). Adjustment refers to an effective
functioning of an individual within the society (Greenberger et al., 1975; Helson & Wink,
1987). It is related to traits like agreeableness (e.g., compassion, politeness, and trust in
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 5
others), conscientiousness (e.g., organization, industriousness, and reliability), and emotional
stability (e.g., ability to cope with negative experiences, and low emotional volatility;
Bleidorn, 2015; Roberts & Mroczek, 2008; Soto & Tackett, 2015). Growth, on the other
hand, refers to individual aspects of personality development that transcend integration into
social structures, and reflects individual insights and self-determination, hence, a person’s
ability to make choices and manage their life autonomously (Deci & Ryan, 2000;
Greenberger et al., 1975; Staudinger & Kunzmann, 2005).
Our understanding of digital maturity follows this view on psychosocial maturity and
considers psychological growth and adjustment as two interrelated aspects of human
development which are highly important for the use of digital technologies. We define digital
maturity as the capabilities and attitudes which enable individuals to use digital technologies
in ways which support individual development (growth) and integration into society
(adjustment). Hence, we base our conceptualization of digital maturity on the idea that
growth and adjustment are the pillars of psychosocial maturity, but we extend this perspective
to the field of digital technology use because digital environments pose specific threats and
challenges to individuals.
First, technology influences and manipulates users in novel and powerful ways and
thus entails specific challenges for self-determination (Cara, 2020; Gaggioli et al., 2017).
Because a lot of apps are designed to capture and keep users attention, users are at risk of
using technology in a highly passive manner which can potentially lead to digital overuse in
the long run (Cara, 2020). Second, the efficient and safe usage of digital technologies requires
specific knowledge and abilities which go beyond general self-regulatory capacities, such as
digital literacy and skills of digital problem-solving (Gretter & Yadav, 2016; Livingstone &
Helsper, 2010). Third, because social interactions online have different characteristics than
face-to-face interactions (Wright, 2013), a socially mindful technology use is particularly
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 6
relevant (Richardson & Milovidov, 2019). When individuals interact with others via mobile
devices and the Internet, misunderstandings occur easily (Chetty & Alathur, 2018) and
negative emotions can be amplified because of the biased transmission of information (Kim
& Florack, 2021). In such communication settings, it is often more difficult to respond to the
other person’s reactions and feelings (Wright, 2013), and increased psychological distance
can even pave the way for inadequate behaviour towards others such as cyberbullying or the
use of offensive communication (Bastiaensens et al., 2016; Chetty & Alathur, 2018).
Altogether, the mentioned characteristics of digital environments illustrate that specific
capabilities are necessary to use digital technologies in a way that supports psychological
growth and social adjustment.
Conceptualization of Digital Maturity as a Multi-Dimensional Construct
To address the various challenges of digital contexts, multiple attitudes and
competences are necessary. Hence, we regard digital maturity as a multi-dimensional concept
which is formed by the sum of its dimensions. Particularly, we consider three main capacities
which directly address the digital challenges for young people’s positive individual and social
use digital technologies in an autonomous and self-determined way; the capacity to master
increasing digital challenges and solve problems; the capacity to interact adequately with
others and to contribute to society. We derived these capacities by applying theoretical
assumptions based on psychosocial maturity and self-determination (Bleidorn, 2015; Deci &
Ryan, 2000; Greenberger et al., 1975; Nota et al., 2011; Wehmeyer et al., 2017) to the unique
challenges that young people face in the digital environment. We selected ten dimensions for
digital maturity applying a theory-driven approach in scale development (Hinkin, 1995;
Robinson, 2018) and ensured content validity of the new construct in focus groups with
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 7
children and by consulting experts (Hinkin, 1995) who confirmed the relevance of the
dimensions (see Pilot Study).
The Capacity to Use Digital Technologies in an Autonomous and Self-determined Way
This capacity addresses risks related to the technical features which young people face
when using digital technologies and which are designed to influence users’ attention and
behaviour. We assume that to use digital technologies in an autonomous and self-determined
way, two aspects of autonomous decision-making are crucial. First, the Autonomous Choice
to Use Mobile Devices reflects the extent to which young people use mobile devices out of
their own choice rather than a feeling of obligation or compulsion. Such a feeling of
compulsion can, for example, appear as the desire to stay connected and go online frequently
in order to prevent missing out on what others are doing online (Koessmeier & Büttner, 2021;
Przybylski et al., 2013). The second aspect of autonomous decision-making relates to
Autonomy Within Digital Contexts and refers to deliberately choosing and pursuing goals in
digital contexts according to own interests and values. Autonomy Within Digital Contexts
goes a step further than the autonomous decision to use mobile devices as it describes the
ability to select and pursue goals in digital contexts that are congruent with a person’s own
interests and values. We argue that the focus on pursuing own goals online supports users in
their autonomous decision-making online and in diminishing undesired influences (Cara,
2020).
The Capacity to Master Increasing Digital Challenges and Solve Problems
This capacity relates to the digital skills needed in rapidly changing technological
environments. We assume that to master increasing digital challenges and solve problems, it
is crucial to have basic technical skills (i.e., Digital Literacy) to use mobile devices and the
Internet in a safe and effective manner (Livingstone et al., 2021; Sonck et al., 2011).
However, the ability to use technology is not the same as using technology for individual
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 8
growth. Therefore, we included the ability to make use of digital contexts for personal
learning and growth as a separate dimension (i.e., Individual Growth in Digital Contexts).
When young people use technology for individual growth and skill development, they
navigate the digital environment with increasing mastery, contributing to their self-
determination, and supporting a beneficial digital technology use (Nota et al., 2011; Wang,
2001) which can positively contribute to well-being (Przybylski et al., 2010).
Furthermore, digital literacy does not prevent being influenced and manipulated by
technology (Livingstone & Helsper, 2006). For example, research has shown that even
literate adolescents are susceptible to influences of advertising which are targeted towards
their age group (Livingstone & Helsper, 2006). Hence, we regard the ability to manage risks
related to mobile devices and the online environment (i.e., Digital Risk Awareness) as an
important aspect of digital maturity as well.
In the same vein, we argue that a sense of personal safety and risk awareness is ideally
accompanied by support-seeking behaviours when one encounters digital problems (i.e.,
Support-Seeking regarding Digital Problems). These behaviours include talking to others
when encountering serious problems regarding mobile devices or digital contexts (Appel et
al., 2012). Indeed, active support-seeking behaviours are very relevant as young people are
often alone when they encounter challenging situations online and seeking help from parents,
siblings, or friends is a valuable resource in such situations (Staksrud & Livingstone, 2009).
The Capacity to Interact Adequately with Others and to Contribute to Society
Finally, the capacity to interact adequately with others and to contribute to society
integrates aspects of self-regulatory capacities and attitudes towards others which relate to the
social context of using mobile devices. For example, in situations during which someone
becomes frustrated or annoyed by others online, for instance by a critical comment, dealing
with such negative emotions is more difficult than in face-to-face situations (Wright, 2013).
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 9
The availability of emotion regulation strategies is especially relevant when young people are
interacting with others in the digital environment, as dealing with frustrations is aggravated
by the perceived psychological distance to others (Wright, 2013). Therefore, digital maturity
includes the ability to control and effectively regulate negative emotions (i.e., Regulation of
Negative Emotions in Digital Contexts) as well as to regulate impulses due to frustrations in
digital contexts (i.e., Regulation of Impulses in Digital Contexts).
Besides emotion regulation capacities, we consider respectful attitudes towards others
in digital contexts (i.e., Respect Towards Others in Digital Contexts) and a sense of
responsibility for overall society (i.e., Digital Citizenship) as relevant aspects for positive
social interactions online (Armstrong-Carter & Telzer, 2021). Respect Towards Others
includes, for example, the acceptance of different opinions in the online environment.
Further, Digital Citizenship describes using mobile devices and digital contexts to contribute
to society by showing active civic engagement for social, societal, and environmental causes.
This includes, for example, engagement of young people to improve their surroundings and
to stand up for important issues, such as environmental protection.
Operationalization of the Digital Maturity Construct
Following our conceptualization of digital maturity as a framework to assess young
people’s progress towards a beneficial digital technology use across several different
dimensions, we operationalize digital maturity as a second-order construct that is formed as a
dimensions are considered as defining characteristics of the construct and changes in the
dimensions are expected to cause changes in the construct (for an example see Rijsdijk et al.,
2007). This conceptualization reflects the idea that digital maturity is not a common factor
underlying its dimensions but rather that it is defined by the sum of its dimensions. Therefore,
we link the (second-order) construct of digital maturity to its (first-order) constituent
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 10
dimensions based on Law et al.’s (1998) description of aggregate models. As such, a
multidimensional construct can be a linear or non-linear function of its dimensions which
may have unit weights or differential weights when forming the construct (Law et al., 1998).
We operationalized the overall digital maturity score as a weighted linear combination of the
ten dimensions, as feedback from various experts emphasised that the dimensions differ in
their respective importance for overall digital maturity (see Pilot Study).
On the level of the single digital maturity dimensions, we consider each dimension a
single latent variable which is reflected in several indicators that represent specific
behaviours when using a mobile device. Accordingly, within a dimension, the indicators
share a common factor and reflect the underlying dimension, respectively. For example, we
assume that individuals vary in their digital risk awareness which is reflected in the
dimension scale items. However, on the level of digital maturity, our theoretical concept is
different. We do not argue that digital maturity is the result of a general process of
maturation, which is reflected in all dimensions at the same time. Also, we do not assume that
any of the digital maturity dimensions preclude another dimension and they do not
necessarily have to be related either. For instance, a young individual may have a high
technical competence to use mobile devices in an effective way (Digital Literacy), but at the
same time may not be able to regulate negative emotions when being frustrated online
(Regulation of Negative Emotions in Digital Contexts). Hence, an increase in any dimension,
independently of whether there is an increase of another dimension, will result in an increase
in overall digital maturity. Therefore, digital maturity is measured as a second-order construct
with ten (formative) first-order dimensions, which are measured by means of reflective
indicators. Following, throughout the scale development process, we aimed to develop
unidimensional and reliable multi-item scales for each dimension which, in a second step, we
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 11
weighted using the weights from the pilot study with experts to combine them into an
aggregate digital maturity score.
The Present Research
Based on our conceptualization and operationalization of digital maturity, we
conducted a pilot study with experts (Pilot Study) and two main studies (Study 1 and Study 2)
with adolescents to develop and validate the multidimensional Digital Maturity Inventory
(DIMI) to assess young people’s digital maturity. We developed and tested the measure for
adolescents between 12 and 18 years, a period during which they gradually develop towards
greater autonomy from their parents and towards increased psychosocial maturity (Bleidorn,
2015; Nota et al., 2011; Wehmeyer et al., 2017).
Development and Selection of Items for each Dimension
In Study 1, we developed and selected items for each digital maturity dimension and
used an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to assess whether the operationalization is justified.
We adapted and self-created items and defined an anchor item for each dimension.
Following, we selected items from the initial pool of items with the aim of developing brief
dimension scales which are easy to be used with adolescents. Items with high correlations
with the same-dimension anchor item and low correlations with other-dimensions’ anchor
items were selected. Additionally, we conducted an EFA to assess whether the
operationalization based on the ten dimensions is justified. Further, we used Harman’s one
factor method to test for common method bias (Podsakoff & Organ, 1986). We used results
from a pilot survey with experts (Pilot Study) to weigh the individual digital maturity
dimensions according to their relative importance as rated by the experts.
Construct Reliability and Nomological Network
Study 2 used data from a new sample to address two key objectives. First, we tested
the factorial structure of each dimension using confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) in the new
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 12
sample, and computed the internal consistency, construct reliability, and average variance
extracted for each dimension scale. Second, we positioned digital maturity within its
nomological network and tested discriminant and convergent associations (Furr & Bacharach,
2006; for a similar approach see Valshtein et al., 2022) with age, amount of mobile device
use, and personality traits which were reported by participants’ parents.
We assessed discriminant validity against general mobile device use and age to
demonstrate that these are related, yet distinct constructs. Using mobile devices in a self-
determined and socially responsible way (i.e., digital maturity) could, for example, also be
driven by young people’s age. It is reasonable to assume that as young people grow older,
they are more and more able to take autonomous decisions and to consider the needs of others
also in digital contexts. However, we believe that the unique challenges of digital
environments require specific capabilities and attitudes to act in a self-determined and
socially responsible way which do not develop automatically with age. Therefore, we
hypothesized that digital maturity is only moderately related to age. Furthermore, another
related construct of digital maturity is the general amount of mobile device use. For example,
parental advice on how to determine their children’s beneficial or harmful digital technology
use is often concerned with the quantity of digital technology use (Domingues-Montanari,
2017; Paulich et al., 2021; Twenge & Campbell, 2018). This suggests that a mature
technology use may simply reflect the competence to balance the amount of time which one
dedicates to using such devices. However, we assumed that although digital maturity is
related to general mobile device use, it is a distinct construct. Therefore, we hypothesized that
the aggregate digital maturity score has a small- to medium-sized association with the amount
of mobile device use.
Considering the theoretical background of personality maturity (Bleidorn, 2012, 2015;
Roberts & Mroczek, 2008), we expected that digital maturity is moderately correlated with
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 13
personality traits which are connected to young people’s personality maturation (i.e.,
emotional stability, conscientiousness, agreeableness; Roberts & Mroczek, 2008) and to a
lesser extent with the remaining personality traits (i.e., open-mindedness, extraversion). Thus,
we hypothesized that participants with higher digital maturity will show higher levels in
personality traits related to general personality maturity (i.e., emotional stability,
conscientiousness, agreeableness; Roberts & Mroczek, 2008). We assumed moderate
correlations for two reasons. First, the personality traits cover only a small part of personality
maturity, and second, digital maturity is defined as the capabilities and attitudes addressing
challenges in the digital environment, which are very specific in their nature. Therefore,
considering the digital context, we expected that digital maturity relates to personality
maturity, but is still a distinguishable construct. Further, we did not expect that digital
maturity is related to extraversion or open-mindedness, because these traits neither support
psychological growth nor social adjustment.
Finally, to investigate whether digital maturity really has a unique influence in
predicting relevant outcomes beyond existing constructs, we investigated the measure’s
incremental validity by assuming that digital maturity predicts problematic mobile device use
beyond the influence of age, general mobile device use, and personality traits, while also
controlling for social desirability. As digital maturity includes behaviours of using technology
to pursue own goals rather than being determined by technology, for example, by actively
choosing content that one engages with, we expected that problematic forms of mobile device
use, such as the inability to stop using a device, are negatively associated with digital
maturity. For example, high digital maturity is associated with behaviours such as deciding
autonomously when to use a device and using a device for one’s own goals, like learning
something new. Such self-determined behaviours contradict problematic forms of device use
such as the inability to stop using a device. Therefore, we expected that young people with a
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 14
high digital maturity show fewer problematic forms of mobile device use. We controlled for
social desirability because especially when assessing sensitive topics, such as risky online
behaviours, participants may tend to present themselves in a positive light by answering in a
way which is culturally approved or approved by parents (Crandall et al., 1965).
Pilot Study: Study with Experts to Weigh the Dimensions
Experts in the field of digital technologies and child development participated in an
online survey and provided feedback on the relative importance of all ten dimensions for the
overall digital maturity score. Our goal was to invite a very diverse and international pool of
researchers, the number of recruited experts was comparable to other similar studies (e.g.,
Petruzziello et al., 2022; Rijsdijk et al., 2007). We selected experts from several countries
who are conducting research on the impact of technological transformations on individuals
and society, as well as experts from the field of child and youth development. The sample
was diverse in terms of field of expertise (e.g., psychology, information technology,
neuroscience, sociology), level of seniority, and geographic origin. This was important to
ensure a holistic evaluation regarding the importance of the digital maturity dimensions by
experts on the subject, who should be less susceptible to bias their evaluation towards
prominent topics in media discourses (e.g., digital literacy; Hinkin, 1995).
In total, 14 experts rated the importance of the ten dimensions. The experts had on
average 3.5 years of experience in the field of technological transformations. First, they read
descriptions of the 10 dimensions and then rated how important they considered them for
overall digital maturity on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = totally unimportant to 7 =
very important. To determine the weights for the different digital maturity dimensions, we
divided the mean importance rating for each dimension through the sum of all mean
importance ratings and multiplied the score by 100.
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 15
Results
ten digital maturity dimensions. We calculated an ICC estimate and 95% CI based on the
experts’ mean-ratings, using the consistency definition in a 2-way mixed-effects model: ICC
= .609 [0.130, 0.885], F(9,117) = 2.56, p = .01 (McGraw & Wong, 1996). This suggests
acceptable interrater reliability (Koo & Li, 2016). Experts regarded all digital maturity
dimensions as important with mean ratings ranging between 4.64 and 6.43. The dimension
Digital Risk Awareness was regarded as the most important dimension (M = 6.43, SD = 0.65)
and Digital Citizenship was evaluated as the least important dimension (M = 4.64, SD =
1.39).
Study 1: Development and Selection of Items for Each Dimension
The purpose of Study 1 was to select items from the initial pool of items with the aim
of developing brief dimension scales. In Phase 1, we defined anchor items and selected items
with the highest correlations with the respective anchor item from the initial item pool. In
Phase 2, we used exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to assess whether the operationalization
based on the ten dimensions is justified. Further, we used Harman’s one factor method to test
for common method bias (Podsakoff & Organ, 1986).
Data, item pools, and supplemental materials will be made available on the Open
(Study 1 and Study 2) were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the university
of the first author (reference number 00615).
Method
Participants
A sample of 406 adolescents between 12 and 18 years was recruited via their parents
through an access panel in Germany. Ten participants failed two out of two attention check
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 16
items (e.g., “Please tick “Never” so that we know that you have read and understood this
sentence.”; Abbey & Meloy, 2017) and were removed from the analysis; 6 participants did
not fall into the intended age range and were also excluded from the analysis. The final
sample we used for the analyses consisted of 390 participants (51.3% girls, 48.7% boys) with
a mean age of 14.7 years (SD = 1.95).
Measures
The Digital Maturity Inventory (DIMI). To build an extensive pool of items, three
experts generated items for each dimension. Items were both self-created and adapted from
existing measures (see Supplemental Materials S1 for full item pool including the references
of the adapted measures). In total, the initial item pool consisted of 72 items.
In the study, following a definition of mobile devices, participants rated the frequency
of typical behaviours when using mobile devices such as mobile phones, tablets, iPads or
laptop computers on a 5-point Likert response scale ranging from 1 = never to 5 = always
(e.g., “When using a mobile device, I do the things that I like”). For the digital literacy items,
we used the same instructions as indicated in the youth digital skills indicator (Helsper et al.,
2020). Participants were asked to think about how they use the Internet and mobile devices
and rated how true the statements are of them if they had to do the behaviour now, on their
own, on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = not at all true of me to 5 = very true of me
(e.g., “I know how to change the privacy settings (for example, deactivate cookies)”).
Following our operationalization of digital maturity, we used the term “mobile
devices” in the measure for three reasons. First, the term “mobile devices” includes all hand-
held technical devices which can access the Internet including smartphones, tablets, and
laptops. Second, the omnipresence of mobile devices and the possibility to be online
anywhere and anytime (Basole, 2004) also increases the potential for impacts through digital
challenges. And third, for young people mobile devices are the most preferred devices to
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 17
access the Internet and, hence, an integral part of their daily lives which make them an ideal
reference to consider when completing the measure (Livingstone et al., 2018).
Sociodemographic Information. We collected participants’ basic sociodemographic
data such as age, gender, education, nationality, wealth, and family status through the parents
at the beginning of the questionnaire.
Further Measures. Participants further provided information on general mobile
device use and use of social networking sites at the end of the questionnaire.
Procedure
At the beginning of the online survey, one parent or guardian provided written consent
and was informed about the further procedure of the study. The parents further provided
socio-demographic information for both themselves and their participating child. After their
part of the survey was completed, parents were informed that the survey section for the
adolescent is about to start. They were informed about the further steps and were asked to
allow their child to answer the survey in private. Adolescents were also informed about the
study details and provided written assent prior to participation. After viewing an introduction
to the topic and a definition of mobile devices, the participants were presented with the
Digital Maturity Inventory items in random order. Further, they were asked to provide
information on their general mobile device use and use of social networking sites. At the end
of the survey, both the adolescent and the parent provided a final written consent to submit
their answers. We further guaranteed the participants’ anonymity and confidential handling of
data and provided a debrief at the end of the study.
Analyses
To select items for the Digital Maturity Inventory, in Phase 1 we defined an anchor
item for each dimension based on its ability to capture the intended domain (for a similar
approach, see Soto & John, 2017a; anchor items are indicated in Supplemental Materials S2).
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 18
Subsequently, we selected items which correlated strongly with the same-dimension anchor
item and low with other-dimensions’ anchor items. We aimed to select 3 to 5 items per
dimension to develop brief dimension scales.
In Phase 2, we conducted an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) with the selected items
to assess whether the operationalization based on the ten dimensions is justified. Further, we
used Harman’s one factor method to test for common method bias (Podsakoff & Organ,
1986).
Results and Discussion
Phase 1: Item Selection Using Correlations with Anchor Items
Following several correlations including the items of each dimension, their respective
anchor item, and the anchor items of the other dimensions, we removed 32 items in total and
retained 40 items (see Supplemental Materials S2 for selected items). Correlations with same-
dimension anchor items ranged between r = .47 and r = .76 and correlations with other-
dimension anchor items did not exceed r = .40.
Phase 2: Exploratory Factor Analysis with Selected Items
An exploratory factor analysis (EFA) with the selected items resulted in a ten-factor
solution based on the Kaiser criterium accounting for 61.71% of the total variance. All 40
items had their strongest loading on their intended factor, there were no substantial cross-
loadings, and all primary loadings were at least .48 in strength (M = .71; see Supplemental
Materials S3 for factor matrix). Cronbach’s alphas of the dimensions ranged between .81 and
.90. Furthermore, the first factor which was extracted accounted for only 19.12% of variance.
Following Harman’s one factor method, this result indicates that there was no general factor
in the unrotated factor structure and, hence, no substantial problem of common method bias
in the current study (Podsakoff & Organ, 1986).
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 19
Study 2: Construct Reliability and Nomological Network
The purpose of Study 2 was to test the factorial structure of each dimension using
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) in a new sample. We further investigated the internal
consistency, construct reliability, and average variance extracted for each dimension scale,
followed by an analysis of convergent and discriminant associations with measures of age,
subjective amount of mobile device use, and personality traits. Finally, we investigated the
measure’s incremental validity in predicting problematic mobile device use beyond the
influence of age, subjective amount of mobile device use, and personality traits, while also
controlling for social desirability.
Method
Participants
A sample of adolescents between 12 and 18 years was recruited via their parents
through an access panel (“Talk Online Panel”) in Austria. Overall, 603 participants took part
in the survey, of which 32 participants failed two out of two attention check items (e.g.,
“Please tick “Never” so that we know that you have read and understood this sentence.”;
Abbey & Meloy, 2017) and were removed from the analysis; 13 participants did not fall into
the intended age range and were also excluded from the analysis. The final sample we used
for the analyses consisted of 558 participants (47.3% girls, 52.3% boys; one did not report
gender and one self-described their gender) with a mean age of 14.7 years (SD = 1.86).
Measures
The Digital Maturity Inventory (DIMI). We used the selected items from Study 1
for the Digital Maturity Inventory (DIMI). Alpha reliabilities ranged between .74 and .87. We
computed the mean over the different items for each dimension and created an aggregate
digital maturity score by weighting the ten dimensions using the percentage weights we
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 20
into the aggregate digital maturity score.
Sociodemographic Information. We collected participants’ basic sociodemographic
data such as age, gender, education, nationality, wealth, and family status through the parents
at the beginning of the online questionnaire.
Subjective Perception of the Amount of Mobile Device Use. We used an item to
measure the participants’ subjective perceptions of their average amount of mobile device use
during the week. For this purpose, we focused on general mobile device use during leisure
time. As it is difficult for participants to assess the correct usage time, we used a subjective
measure (see for a similar approach, Booker et al., 2018). Respondents were asked: “On a
typical weekday (Monday-Friday), how much time do you spend on mobile devices in your
free time? Please think only about your free time. We do not mean times in which you use
mobile devices for school or work”. Respondents answered on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 =
none at all to 5 = a great deal. Participants’ subjective amount of mobile device use ranged
between 2 and 5 with a mean of 3.62 (SD = 0.79).
Problematic Mobile Device Use. We measured problematic mobile device use with
four items which we adapted from Hawi et al.’s (2019) digital addiction scale for children
and from Andreassen et al.’s (2012) Facebook addiction scale. The participants were
presented with statements concerning behaviours and feelings during mobile device use and
were asked to indicate how often such things happen while using a mobile device on a 5-
point Likert scale from 1 = never to 5 = always (“While using a mobile device, I feel
frustrated when I am asked to stop using it”; “While using a mobile device, I ignore my
family or friends”, “While using a mobile device, I get annoyed if I am asked to put it down”;
“While using a mobile device, I feel bad if, for different reasons, I cannot use it for some
time”). An EFA with varimax rotation including the four items resulted in a one-factor
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 21
solution explaining 60.57% of variance with factor-item loadings ranging from .61 to .87
with a mean of .77. Therefore, we averaged the items into a single score for problematic
mobile device use (Cronbach’s alpha =.85).
Personality Domains. We used Soto and John’s (2017b) 15-item BFI-2-XS scale to
measure the Big Five personality domains with three items for each domain. The items were
answered by the parents. They were asked to assess the main characteristics of their child by
indicating their level of agreement to statements such as “my child tends to be quiet”
(extraversion, reversed), or “my child worries a lot” (negative emotionality), on a 5-point
Likert scale from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. Alpha reliabilities for the Big
Five domains were .51 for extraversion, .58 for agreeableness, .72 for conscientiousness, .65
for negative emotionality, and .55 for open-mindedness.
Social Desirability. To control for a social desirability bias especially for questions
measuring sensitive topics such as problematic mobile device use or risky online behaviours,
we used four items from the short version of the Children’s Social Desirability (CSD-S) scale
(Miller et al., 2015) which has been used in previous studies (Alonso et al., 2018; Benita et
al., 2017; Stoesz & Los, 2019; Vlaanderen et al., 2020). Participants were asked to answer a
few general questions about themselves and to indicate their agreement or disagreement with
the statements using yes or no. The items were: “Are you always careful about keeping your
clothes neat and your room picked up?”; “Are you always polite, even to people who are not
very nice?”; “Do you ever say anything that makes somebody else feel bad?”; “Do you
always listen to your parents?”. As the statements describe typical behaviours which are
culturally approved but unlikely to always apply, statements indicating the culturally
approved answer (e.g., yes for “Do you always listen to your parents?”) were coded as
socially desirable. We combined the socially desirable answers to an overall social
desirability score by summing up the social desirability items (Cronbach’s alpha = .60).
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 22
Procedure
The recruitment of participants and the procedure during the online survey were
identical to Study 1. Study materials were presented in German language and in random order
during the online survey.
Analyses
We conducted a series of CFAs to test the factorial structure of each dimension. For
each dimension, we fitted one-factor models to the data. We dropped items that were not
unidimensional or showed low factor loadings on their respective latent factor to gain reliable
dimension scales. To determine the DIMI’s construct reliability and validity, we used the
Comparative Fit Index (CFI), the Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI), the Root Mean Square Error of
Approximation (RMSEA), and the Standardised Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) to
assess model fit for each dimension. We applied common recommendations that a CFI and
TLI greater than 0.90, with RMSEA and SRMR below 0.08, suggest a good fit (Hu &
Bentler, 1999). We further computed the average variance extracted (AVE) estimates for
each dimension which assess the variance captured by the construct in relation to the amount
of variance due to measurement error. To analyse convergent and discriminant associations,
we performed a series of correlations of the DIMI aggregate score with measures of age,
amount of mobile device use, and personality traits. Finally, we ran a stepwise hierarchical
regression to test the incremental validity of digital maturity in predicting problematic device
use which formed the dependent variable. In step one, we included the social desirability
score as the predictor and, hence, as a control variable for all following steps of the
regression. We added age and amount of mobile device use in step two, conscientiousness,
negative emotionality, and agreeableness in step three. All of these variables were included as
control variables because they are connected to young people’s general psychosocial and
personal maturity (Roberts & Mroczek, 2008). In the final step of the hierarchical regression,
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 23
we included the digital maturity score as the independent variable. We conducted the
analyses with SPSS and R, using the package lavaan (Rosseel, 2012) for the CFAs.
Results
Preliminary Analysis and Final Item Selection
Following the series of CFAs, we removed two items from Digital Literacy, and one
item each from Autonomous Choice to Use Mobile Devices, Autonomy Within Digital
Contexts, Individual Growth in Digital Contexts, Digital Risk Awareness, Regulation of
Impulses in Digital Contexts, and Digital Citizenship. Thus, we retained 32 items for the final
statistics and correlations among the ten digital maturity dimensions.
Construct Reliability and Validity
to those of existing validated measures (e.g., Firmin et al., 2017; Sailer et al., 2021). The one-
factor models show a very good fit for eight out of 10 dimensions, a satisfactory fit for one
dimension (Autonomous Choice to Use Mobile Devices), and a moderate fit for one
dimension (Regulation of Impulses in Digital Contexts).
The ten dimensions demonstrate high internal consistency, construct reliability,
discriminant validity, and unidimensional measurement models which are comparable to
existing validated measures (e.g., Matthes et al., 2022; Richter et al., 2000). All factor
demonstrating convergent validity, while the Cronbach alphas and construct reliabilities
indicate satisfactory internal consistency for nine dimensions by exceeding .70 and
acceptable internal consistency for one dimension (Autonomy Within Digital Contexts) with
Cronbach’s alpha and construct reliability of .70. Nine out of ten AVE estimates exceed the
minimum level of .50 (Fornell & Larcker, 1981), the AVE estimate of the dimension
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 24
Autonomy Within Digital Contexts is considered acceptable with a value of .44, as construct
reliability is at least .70 in strength (Fornell & Larcker, 1981).
Discriminant and Convergent Validity
We found a low positive correlation between digital maturity and age, r(555) = .14, p < .001.
Regarding amount of mobile device use, we observed a moderate negative correlation
between digital maturity and amount of mobile device use, r(555) = -.27, p < .001. The
findings support the discriminant validity of the newly developed digital maturity scale
compared to age and, most importantly, general mobile device use. However, the results also
show that digital maturity is not completely independent from the quantity of technology use.
Consistent with our expectations, digital maturity correlated moderately positively
with conscientiousness, r(555) = .41, p < .001, agreeableness, r(555) = .28, p < .00, and
negatively with negative emotionality, r(555) = -.36, p < .001. The correlation of digital
maturity and extraversion was not significant. However, we observed a moderate significant
positive correlation of digital maturity with open-mindedness, r(555) = .33, p < .001. This
correlation was not predicted.
Incremental Validity
problematic mobile device use. In step one, we included the social desirability score as the
predictor and, hence, as a control variable for all following steps of the regression. We added
age and amount of mobile device use in step two, conscientiousness, negative emotionality,
and agreeableness in step three. In the final step of the hierarchical regression, we included
the digital maturity score as the independent variable. Notably, in Step 3 of the regression,
conscientiousness and negative emotionality contributed significantly to problematic mobile
device use and the explained variance increased by 7.2%, F(6, 554) = 40.60, p < .001.
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 25
However, most importantly, by adding the digital maturity score in Step 4, the explained
variance increased by 10.4%. In Step 4, digital maturity and conscientiousness were
significant negative predictors of problematic mobile device use while amount of mobile
device use and negative emotionality were significant positive predictors of problematic
General Discussion
A large body of research has demonstrated negative effects of young people’s digital
technology use. However, there has been a lack of research considering the mature use of
digital technologies not only as the absence of addiction, but as a multi-facetted construct
including different capabilities. Building on research of psychosocial maturity and self-
determination theory (Bleidorn, 2015; Deci & Ryan, 2000; Greenberger et al., 1975;
Wehmeyer et al., 2017), we therefore introduced and investigated the concept of digital
maturity as a novel view on young people’s use of digital technologies. We conceptualized
digital maturity as a self-determined use of digital technologies which supports psychological
growth and well-being while shielding potential threats and considering needs of the social
environment. To measure digital maturity, we developed the Digital Maturity Inventory
experts confirmed the relevance of the ten dimensions, and two studies with adolescents
demonstrated the reliability and validity of the new measure. The findings contribute to our
theoretical understanding of digital maturity. We observed that digital maturity is linked to
traits reflecting personality maturity (i.e., conscientiousness, agreeableness, negative
emotionality), yet not so highly as to be conceptually indistinguishable from these related
constructs. In addition, digital maturity predicted problematic mobile device use beyond the
influence of personality. Hence, digital maturity is a construct embedded in existing
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 26
approaches of personality development but designed to measure specific competences needed
in digital contexts.
We developed the concept of digital maturity based on the idea that the use of digital
technologies can either support or impede psychological growth and positive social
adjustment. While the assessment of screen time, for instance, is limited in describing the
quality of technology use (Kaye et al., 2020), the developed DIMI enables researchers to
assess the beneficial or harmful use of digital technologies according to ten different
dimensions. These dimensions include capacities to use digital technologies in an
autonomous and self-determined way, capacities to master increasing digital challenges and
solve problems, and capacities to interact adequately with others and contribute to society
using digital technologies.
A pilot study clarified the relevance of the dimensions. Overall, the experts
participating in the study rated all dimensions as very relevant, with Digital Risk Awareness
being rated as most important and Digital Citizenship as least important. The large weight
assigned to Digital Risk Awareness in the assessment by the experts is not surprising and
corresponds to the fact that risk is a pertinent research topic in the field (Atkinson & Newton,
2010). Indeed, the reduction of risk can be considered a necessary precondition for positive
development, very similar to hygiene factors of motivation, which only lead to little
psychological growth, but are nevertheless important for the individual in order to avoid
unpleasant experiences (Sachau, 2007). In contrast, digital citizenship encompasses
behaviours that are ideally exhibited, but not expected of all individuals. Such behaviours are
rather associated with a high level of maturity.
The relation of digital maturity to traits like agreeableness, emotional stability, and
conscientiousness reflects the theoretical development of the concept of digital maturity, and
the correlation of digital maturity with open-mindedness, even if not predicted, further
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 27
stresses the importance of personality development for digital maturity. Indeed, differences in
the development of open-mindedness in early adulthood are considerable (Bleidorn, 2012),
and open-mindedness might facilitate the exploration of novel solutions to problems that one
encounters in digital environments, and, hence, prevent maladaptive responses to frustrations
using digital technology (Hadlington & Scase, 2018), providing a potential explanation for
the correlation with digital maturity.
While the derivation of the concept of digital maturity from theories on psychosocial
maturity and self-determination is important, it is essential that the concept of digital maturity
is still distinct from personality traits and explains variance in digital behaviours beyond
personality traits and other related constructs such as age and the general amount of device
use. Accordingly, Study 2 demonstrated the DIMI’s incremental validity and unique
contribution in predicting problematic mobile device use beyond the influence of age, general
amount of mobile device use, and personality. Thus, the results support the supposition that
digital maturity addresses specific threats and challenges of digital technologies which are not
sufficiently addressed with variables reflecting personality maturity.
Furthermore, as a multidimensional measure, the DIMI overcomes limitations of
existing measures which focus on single dimensions such as addiction (e.g., Hawi et al.,
2019). In particular, the DIMI is a novel multi-facetted measure of young people’s digital
maturity which integrates several dimensions of a self-determined and socially responsible
digital technology use. In our view, the proposed measure is particularly useful for future
research because of several reasons: First, using the DIMI researchers could detect
differences in digital maturity relating to specific dimensions with the DIMI and develop
tailored interventions to reduce such differences. Second, the DIMI enables researchers to
study the development of individual dimensions which do not necessarily change in parallel
and may vary according to the individual level of development during adolescence
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 28
(Maksniemi et al., 2022). And third, the multi-facetted approach of the DIMI allows the
further advancement of existing theories that combine positive psychology and technology
use.
Limitations and Future Directions
The focus on using digital technologies for individual growth and the positive
development of the social environment is a distinct quality of the DIMI. Research on such
positive uses of digital technologies is currently scarce (Terras & Ramsay, 2016). Hence,
future studies might apply the DIMI to investigate the relationship between digital maturity
and aspects of a beneficial technology use in more detail. For example, researchers could
investigate the impact of digital maturity on well-being and psychological need satisfaction.
Further, researchers could apply the DIMI to test hypotheses about positive effects of
technology use in different cultures. For example, it would be interesting to gain more
insights into whether digital citizenship is more pronounced in collectivist societies, in which
interests of the social group prevail over the interests of the individual (Chen & West, 2008).
Moreover, further research on digital maturity and its antecedents is crucial to advance our
understanding of this new construct.
A strength of the present research lies in the investigation of the DIMI’s position
within its nomological net and by demonstrating that digital maturity is, in fact, related to
personality maturity, yet has a unique influence in predicting relevant outcomes in the digital
context. The aggregate digital maturity score is useful to study such relationships with related
constructs. However, future studies may focus on the single dimensions of digital maturity
and their individual predictive validity by relating them to several outcomes of interest. The
unidimensional and reliable dimension scales are ideally suited for such investigations. The
focus on single dimensions of digital maturity may be particularly interesting when
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 29
individuals’ digital maturity is high on some dimensions (e.g., digital literacy) and low on
others (e.g., emotion regulation).
Furthermore, the present research highlighted an insightful pattern of convergent and
discriminant associations with age, amount of mobile device use, and personality traits, as
well as the unique influence of digital maturity in predicting problematic forms of mobile
device use beyond related, yet distinct, constructs (i.e., age, general mobile device use,
personality). In order to fully establish convergent and incremental validity, future studies
may investigate further convergent associations to comprehensive measures of digital literacy
(e.g., Helsper et al., 2020), measures of attitudes towards technology and media (e.g., Rosen
et al., 2013), digital media self-efficacy (e.g., Hammer et al., 2021), or digital citizenship
(e.g., Jones & Mitchell, 2006), while also testing the unique influence of digital maturity
against such similar, established constructs.
In the Pilot Study of the present research, the experts rated all dimensions of digital
maturity as very relevant, and their broad expertise and diverse background provided a solid
base to use their importance ratings as dimension weights. Yet, future studies may further
refine and validate the dimension weights by applying the digital maturity dimensions in
large-scale studies. For example, as an alternative way to derive the dimension weights,
structural equation modelling could be used to estimate digital maturity as a formative model
with several outcome variables. This would provide loadings for each dimension, thus
determining their respective weights statistically (Diamantopoulos & Riefler, 2011; Joreskog
& Goldberger, 1975; Riefler & Diamantopoulos, 2007). Such an approach could be tested in
further research with the use of machine learning techniques, provided a large sample size.
While it is a strength of the present research that young people were recruited to
answer the questionnaires, a challenge was to capture the characteristics of interest while
keeping the questionnaire as short as possible at the same time. For this reason, we used short
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 30
scale versions to measure personality (Soto & John, 2017b) as well as social desirability
(Miller et al., 2015) which led to lower internal consistencies of those measures in our
studies. Future studies may use longer or different types of measures for those constructs.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we conceptualized a multi-dimensional construct of digital maturity
building on a humanistic framework derived from theories of psychosocial maturity and self-
determination theory. We developed a reliable and valid new measure of young people’s
digital maturity (DIMI) comprising ten dimensions. We are confident that digital maturity
makes valuable theoretical contributions to the field. Further, the DIMI will facilitate research
on a beneficial digital technology use of young people.
THE DIGITAL MATURITY INVENTORY (DIMI) 31