Running head: ATTITUDE OF FANS TOWARD CHEATING IN SPORT
Gaudreau, P., & Schellenberg, B.J.I. (2022). Attitudes of sport fans toward the electronic
sign stealing scandal in Major League Baseball: Differing associations with perfectionism
and excellencism. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology.
Attitudes of Sport Fans toward the Electronic Sign Stealing Scandal in Major League
Baseball: Differing Associations with Perfectionism and Excellencism
Accepted for publication: Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology
© 2022, Human Kinetics Publisher. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate
the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission.
The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1123/jsep.2021-0136
Patrick Gaudreau
School of Psychology, University of Ottawa
Benjamin J. I. Schellenberg
Faculty of Kinesiology and Recreation Management, University of Manitoba
Author Note
Patrick Gaudreau was supported by research grant 435-2015-0649 from Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada and a teaching release awarded by the Faculty of Social Sciences from the University of Ottawa.
We thank Laurence Boileau for her help in reviewing the cheating literature. We have no known conflict of interest
to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Patrick Gaudreau, School of Psychology, University
of Ottawa, 136 Jean-Jacques Lussier, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1N 6N5. Email: patrick.gaudreau@uottawa.ca
Abstract
The winners of the 2017 baseball World Series were found guilty of illegally using electronic
devices to steal the signs of their opponents. Many but not all sport fans negatively reacted to this
cheating incident. We relied on the Model of Excellencism and Perfectionism (MEP; Gaudreau,
2019) to determine if perfection strivers are less unfavorable toward electronic sign stealing
(cheating) compared to excellence strivers. Sport fans (N= 321) completed a measure of
excellencism and perfectionism and we used three different approaches to measure attitudes
toward electronic sign stealing in baseball. Results of a multivariate multiple regression showed
that sport fans who are perfection strivers held more favorable attitudes toward electronic sign
stealing compared to excellence strivers. Perfection strivers also reported higher moral
disengagement and winning-at-all cost mentality. These findings are insightful because they
indicate that perfectionistic standards significantly relate to sport cheating-related attitudes once
we separate excellencism from perfectionism.
Keyword: perfectionism; excellencism; cheating; moral disengagement; bottom-line mentality;
fandom
Attitudes of Sport Fans toward the Electronic Sign Stealing Scandal in Major League
Baseball: Differing Associations with Perfectionism and Excellencism
Perfectionism is a multidimensional personality characteristic that shapes the actions that
a person is willing to undertake to satisfy one’s desire for achievement. Research in sport
psychology has mainly focused on the perfectionism of athletes to uncover how performers
behave and feel when having to train, compete, and react to the challenges of the sport
environment (Hill et al., 2020). In this study, we shifted our focus to investigate how
perfectionists react when witnessing achievement-related events in which they are not directly
involved as performers. Perfectionism acts as a blueprint that shapes ones’ personal and social
beliefs and attitudes across all walks of life. Perfectionism not only influences how individuals
strive toward performance, but it also filters how they interpret, construe meaning, and integrate
the cues and information about relevant achievement-related situations in their own lives and in
the world (e.g., Flett et al., 2018). Even in situations in which they do not directly participate and
cannot earn personal benefits (as when watching a sport game or reading sport-related news), we
assume that individuals who pursue perfection will bring with them some specific mental
representations about the self and the world that should make them react differently compared to
other sport fans. Therefore, in this study, we investigated how sport fans reacted to a specific,
recent, and controversial cheating incident with the goal of evaluating the extent to which those
who pursue perfection hold less unfavorable attitudes toward cheating.
The Recent Case of Cheating in Professional Baseball
Cheating has existed throughout history and across all walks of life (Cuadrado et al.,
2021). From the Chicago White Sox, who voluntarily lost in the 1919 World Series in exchange
of gambling money (Asinof, 1963), to the rampant usage of performance-enhancement drugs
(Mitchell, 2007), the history of baseball has sporadically been plagued by cheating incidents
(Zumsteg, 2007). The difference between success and failure in baseball is often decided by tiny
margins that remain undistinguishable to the naked eye. Trying to square-up a round ball pitched
at 95 miles-per-hour with a round baseball bat is a difficult task. Therefore, baseball players and
coaches have always tried to “steal the signals” of the catchers in order to relay this precious
information to batters in the batters’ box (Dickson, 2019). The margin for error is extremely
small, but hitting a baseball is significantly easier when the batter knows how (pitch type) and
where (pitch location) the pitcher will deliver the next pitch.
In November 2019, a former player of the Houston Astros accused his former team of
stealing the signs of the opposing teams with electronic devices (in violation of the league rules)
while using imaginative ways (e.g., making noise on a trash can) to communicate this
information to the batters. A formal investigation ensued and the team was found guilty and
received a $5 million fine. They also lost four draft picks. Both the coach and general manager
were suspended for a season and then fired by the team owner (The Washington Post, 2020).
This “electronic sign stealing scandal” has generated furiously negative comments from baseball
fans (ESPN.com, 2020; Vidvor, 2020). Baseball players from the Houston Astros have allegedly
received death threats and they have been widely criticized for undeservedly winning the 2017
baseball World Series (Associated Press, 2020). However, many fans have minimized the
importance of this incident and believed that other teams probably relied on similar schemes but
simply did not get caught (ESPN.com, 2020).
People may cheat to increase their chances of winning or to perform perfectly. Results of
a recent analysis did reveal that batters from the Houston Astros unfairly benefited from
electronic sign stealing in 2017 (Elmore & Matthews, 2021). Batters were swinging less often
(e.g., better decision making), made more contacts when they swung, and their contacts produced
greater exit velocity when signs were stolen. As such, many sports fans experienced anger and
frustration because they felt like the Houston Astros unfairly outperformed other teams because
of their illegal tactics. Breaking the rules to win more games is likely perceived as unethical by
many sport fans.
Getting caught tarnishes one’s reputation and casts doubts about all of one’s past
accomplishments (Vidvor, 2020). At the same time, however, such perceptions are often short-
lived. For example, home-game attendance in professional baseball has been found to drop by
8% after a positive anti-doping test, but the impact is limited to the first 15 days (Cisyk &
Courty, 2017). Although cheating is a socially undesirable behavior, not all sport fans appear to
hold long-lasting unfavorable opinions about it. Some sport fans may be more predisposed to
value the reasons or outcomes associated with cheating, to put themselves in the shoes of the
cheaters, and to activate the same types of beliefs and excuses they would potentially activate if
they were themselves faced with a similar complex social dilemma in their own lives. Therefore,
it is important to understand individual differences that may explain why not all sport fans
reacted the same way to the electronic sign stealing scandal.
Perfectionism and Attitudes Toward Cheating in Sport
Perfectionism is a complex personality disposition that involves the pursuit of
flawlessness accompanied by many doubts, concerns, negative self-evaluations, and perceived
social pressure to be perfect (e.g., Stoeber, 2018). The aiming and striving for perfection are
captured in the dimension of perfectionistic standards (also called perfectionistic strivings),
which is typically represented by the pursuit of extreme goals and a tendency to evaluate oneself
according to such standards. The negative self-evaluations often experienced by perfectionists
are captured in the dimension of perfectionistic concerns (also called evaluative concerns
perfectionism), which is represented by a tendency to be overly preoccupied by the likelihood of
experiencing the negative personal and social consequences associated with mistakes, failures,
and displaying imperfection. Aiming and striving for perfection can be taxing as it involves the
generalized quest to reach unattainable goals accompanied by the recurrent pressure and
frustration associated by a constant perception of falling short of self-imposed and socially
prescribed standards. “Perfection is what you are striving for, but perfection is an impossibility.
However, striving for perfection is not an impossibility” (Matheny & Jenkins, 2015, p. 96). This
quote from Mike Matheny, former manager of the St-Louis Cardinals, illustrates the self-
contradictory nature of the pursuit of perfection.
Perfectionism has been positioned as a risk factor for sport-related misconduct (e.g.,
Lazuras & Barkoukis, 2020). Sport-related cheating can take many forms. So far, studies have
looked at the performers themselves – the athletes – and focused on attitudes and behaviors
related to the use of performance-enhancement drugs. In this study, we investigated how sport
fans reacted to a specific, recent, and non-doping related cheating incident. Still, our literature
review drew from the literature on the doping attitudes of athletes because it provided a
springboard to inform our understanding of the associations of perfectionism with cheating-
related attitudes in sports.
Studies have found a relatively consistent association between perfectionistic concerns
and attitudes toward sport doping among athletes. Madigan and colleagues (2020) recently
performed a meta-analysis of five studies. Results revealed a significant positive correlation
between perfectionistic concerns and favorable attitudes toward doping. The correlation ranged
from .10 to .30 with a weighted average of .21 across the five studies (Bae et al., 2017; Bahrami
et al., 2014; Ismaili et al., 2013; Madigan et al., 2020; Madigan et al., 2016). Overall, athletes
with the elevated social and cognitive preoccupations that accompany the pursuit of perfection
are more inclined to tolerate illicit ways of boosting athletic performance.
Past studies have found a small and inconsistent association between perfectionistic
standards and attitudes toward the use of performance-enhancement drugs in athletes (Madigan
et al., 2020). Similar findings were observed in studies on the use of cognitive enhancers
(Stoeber & Hotham, 2016) and cheating behaviors/attitudes of students (Nathanson et al., 2006).
The meta-analysis of Madigan et al. (2020) reported a positive but not statistically significant
correlation between perfectionistic standards and favorable attitudes toward doping. The
correlation ranged from -.08 to .40 with a weighted average of .07 across five studies. Two
recent studies replicated (Hardwick et al., 2021) and failed to replicate these findings (Wang et
al., 2020). Overall, it is unclear why standards and concerns, as two positively related
components of perfectionism, are distinctively associated with attitudes toward sport-related
cheating.
Clarifying Perfectionistic Standards to Better Understand Sport-Related Cheating
In this study, we proposed that the extant literature has systematically underestimated the
harmful role of perfectionistic standards in attitudes toward cheating because past studies did not
separate the effects of excellencism from those of perfectionism. The Model of Excellencism and
Perfectionism (MEP) is a newly developed theory (Gaudreau, 2019) in which the goals pursued
by individuals are clearly divided along two axes: The pursuit of excellence and the pursuit of
perfection. Excellence and perfection are different goals or endpoints that form the basis for two
related but distinct dimensions. Wanting to reach excellence and wanting to reach perfection
both comprise a tendency to aim and strive toward high standards. However, the difficulty and
nature of both the aiming and striving separates perfectionism from excellencism. Perfectionism
involves the setting and striving toward much higher, unrealistic, and exacting ends than
excellencism. More precisely, excellencism entails a “tendency to aim and strive toward very
high yet attainable standards in an effortful, engaged, and determined yet flexible manner”
whereas perfectionism entails a “tendency to aim and strive toward idealized, flawless, and
excessively high standards in a relentless manner” (Gaudreau, 2019, p. 200). Only those who
pursue perfection are expected to express the many doubts and evaluative concerns associated
with perfectionistic standards. Even if the MEP relies on the word perfectionism, it reiterates that
perfectionism is multidimensional with a core definitional feature (i.e., perfectionistic standards)
related to many cognitive (e.g., concerns), socio-cognitive (e.g., social pressure), and socio-
behavioral expressions (e.g., imposing perfection to others) that frequently accompany the
pursuit of perfection (Gaudreau, 2021). As a result, perfectionism (used as a diminutive of
perfectionistic standards in the MEP) and excellencism are expected to be linked to different
antecedents, processes, and outcomes.
In a recent meta-analytical review, Osenk and colleagues (2020) concluded that the high
standards involved in excellencism are preferable to the more extreme perfectionistic standards.
The results of Gaudreau et al. (2022) provided more direct support for this position. Perfection
strivers – the people who pursue perfection beyond excellence as operationalized in the MEP –
experienced higher fear of failure and mixed feelings of both need satisfaction and frustration.
They pursued the goal to earn perfect A+ grades more often while ending up with lower grades
than students pursuing excellence (i.e., excellence strivers). They also more frequently felt like
imposters compared to excellence strivers. Perfection strivers engaged themselves in behaviors
that are characteristics of Type-A personality (i.e., excessive striving and impatience/irritability).
Their daily experience was daunted by a “tyranny of should” in which they felt the pressure to
constantly do more to achieve both their self-oriented goals and the goals that others are
expected of them. They ended up making more progress on socially imposed goals (compared to
their own personal goals) even if such goals did not significantly contribute toward their well-
being and life satisfaction. In another study with a sample of students engaged in sport activities,
perfection strivers experienced more difficulties in conciliating sport and school demands
compared to excellence strivers (Gaudreau et al., 2021). Overall, separating excellencism from
perfectionism is required to reveal the potentially harmful consequences associated with
perfectionistic standards.
Baseball is a zero-sum game with a clear winner and a clear loser. In that context, sports
fans who are perfectionists are likely to perceive electronic sign stealing as another acceptable
tactic or as an honest, fair, and acceptable way of winning more games. In contrast, excellence
strivers are less likely to fear the consequences of failure (Gaudreau et al., 2021) and to rely on
short-cuts to rapidly and easily boost their chances of success. They are expected to be less
tolerant toward cheating compared to perfection strivers.
When doing (as a performer) or seeing (as a spectator) antisocial behaviors, perfection
strivers (compared to excellence strivers) are more likely to use cognitive stratagems to justify
such wrongdoing. In other words, perfectionism and excellencism are expected to show different
associations with indicators of immoral or antisocial behaviors. For example, a propensity
toward moral disengagement has previously been linked with cheating acceptability and higher
intention to cheat (e.g., d'Arripe-Longueville et al., 2010). Bending the rules is not really
cheating for perfectionists because they rationalize, tolerate, and excuse such behaviors. This is
part of their tendency toward antisocial functioning (e.g., Grugan et al., 2020). Perfectionists are
also presumed to have a hyper-competitive winning-at-all-cost mentality (e.g., Flett & Hewitt,
2016). For many perfection strivers, winning would be the priority, a quest far more important
than the integrity of the game. Fans who are perfection strivers may be more likely to tolerate
wrongdoing on the field and to disregard the costs associated with behaviors of performers
invested in their quest for victory.
In summary, perfectionism and excellencism should show different associations with
moral disengagement, a winning-at-all cost mentality, and tolerance toward cheating. However,
it remains to be ascertained that their differential associations with tolerance toward cheating are
not spurious or a mere epiphenomenon reduceable to a general tendency toward immoral or
antisocial behavior. Therefore, in this study, we examined if excellencism and perfectionism can
incrementally predict attitudes toward electronic sign stealing in baseball after controlling for the
potential influence of moral disengagement and a winning-at-all-cost mentality.
This Study
Our goal was threefold. First, we investigated the associations of excellencism and
perfectionism with attitudes of sport fans toward the electronic sign stealing scandal in Major
League Baseball. This widely mediatized and debated incident offered a unique opportunity to
explore sport-related cheating with a different population (i.e., sport fans) who are observing
rather than participating in competitive sports. Second, we aimed to clarify the hardly explicable
non-significant association between perfectionistic standards and attitudes toward sport-related
cheating reported in the extant literature (e.g., Madigan et al., 2020). For that, we relied on the
newly developed MEP to differentiate excellencism from perfectionism. In the MEP,
perfectionism involves the aiming and striving toward a standard (i.e., perfection) that goes
beyond aiming and striving toward excellence. On that basis, and consistent with the
methodological recommendations of Gaudreau (2019), we hypothesized that perfectionism
should positively and significantly be associated with attitudes toward electronic sign stealing in
baseball over and above excellencism. In other words, fans who are perfection strivers
(compared to excellence strivers) should have a higher tolerance for electronic sign stealing in
baseball. Our final goal was to investigate whether perfection stivers exhibit higher moral
disengagement and winning-at-all-cost mentality compared to excellence strivers. If so, the
differential associations of excellencism and perfectionism with attitudes toward cheating could
potentially be seen as spurious or as an epiphenomenon reduceable to a general tendency toward
immoral or anti-social behavior. To rule out this alternative explanation, we conducted a
complementary analysis to examine whether excellencism and perfectionism are still
significantly associated with attitudes toward electronic sign stealing in baseball after controlling
for the potential influence of moral disengagement and a winning-at-all-cost mentality.
Method
Participants
th
We relied on Bosco et al. (2015) correlational effect size benchmark of .160 (50
percentile of the distribution of 147,328 correlations) and used G*Power to estimate the needed
sample size given statistical power (1- > .80), two-tailed significance test ( < .05), and effect
size (r = .160; f = .026) in a multiple regression with two predictors. We aimed for N = 300.
We recruited a sample of 334 sport fans from North America. Participants were recruited
from Prolific Academic (n = 280) and using social media advertisements (n = 54). Participants (n
= 13) were excluded from the study if they missed our validity check questions, did not correctly
answer an inclusion criteria question or were found to be multivariate outliers (Mahalanobis  >
26.13, df = 8, p < .001). The 321 participants were mostly males (76.3%) and they were between
18 and 71 years of age (M = 36.71; SD = 12.17). They self-identified as the fan of one of the 30
teams in Major League Baseball with higher participation rates for the fans of the Toronto Blue
Jays (n = 65), New York Yankees (n = 34), Los Angeles Dodgers (n = 23), and Boston Red Sox
(n = 22). Everyone provided an electronic informed consent before completing the online
survey. The study was approved by the research ethic committee at the University of Ottawa
Participants from Prolific Academic received a monetary compensation (£2) and those recruited
on social media entered in a draw to win one of the 30 gift certificates valued at $10.
Design and Measures
Participants were recruited to participate in an online study called “Your opinions about
electronic sign stealing in baseball” designed to take 12 to 15 minutes. We used a cross-sectional
design for four reasons. First, our goal was to estimate the association between personality and
attitudes toward a clear social situation. Personality is a blueprint that organizes and influences
the psychological experiences of individuals. Therefore, we assumed no grounding for the
possibility that attitudes toward a specific social event (i.e., electronic sign stealing scandal)
could influence the level of perfectionism and excellencism. Reverse directionality of the
associations tested in this study seemed highly improbable. Second, time is not an empty
phenomenon. Many incidents between two time points (e.g., winning streak of the cheating team,
unexpected cheating incidents in other players or teams) and new details about the electronic
sign stealing scandal could have altered the attitudes of sport fans in unanticipated ways. Third,
the effect of perfectionism over and above excellencism remains totally unknown. Establishing
1 Five fans of the Houston Astros participated. Analyses with and without them produced the same conclusions. All
participants were kept in our final analyses.
the existence of a non-null association was deemed prudent before studying any developmental
aspect of this relationship. Finally, we designed a measurement strategy to triangulate our
findings with different but complementary measures of attitudes. Overall, we believe that our
design matched the purposes of our study (Spector, 2019).
Participants completed socio-demographic questions (e.g., gender, age, favorite MLB
team). Before completing the survey, they read a description of the incident and their
implications to make sure that everyone was well aware of the electronic sign stealing scandal. In
Excellencism and Perfectionism. Participants completed the 10-item version of the
Scale of Perfectionism and Excellencism (SCOPE; Gaudreau et al., 2022) in which they were
instructed to refer to their lives in general using a 7-point scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (totally).
Excellencism (e.g., “my goal is to reach excellence”) and perfectionism (e.g., “my goal is to
attain perfection”) were each measured with five items. Results of a validation study with 8
samples provided evidence for the factorial, convergent, discriminant, concurrent, and predictive
validity of the scores from this scale (Gaudreau et al., 2022).
Attitudes Toward Electronic Sign Stealing. Electronic sign stealing in baseball was
envisioned as a special case of sport-related cheating for which no questionnaire was specifically
available. We used the sport doping literature as a proxy to create our measurement strategy. We
adapted sport doping questions to make them relevant and applicable to the case of electronic
sign stealing in baseball. We used different response formats (e.g., semantic differential, Likert-
scale) to assess attitudes and we also created two different hypothetical scenarios to evaluate
susceptibility to cheat under different circumstances. Overall, our approach was meant to
generate different but complementary scores to test the robustness of our findings.
First, we used a semantic differential scaling method in which participants were asked to
evaluate their opinion about electronic sign stealing in professional baseball using 8 statements
each representing opposite points of a continuum (e.g., unfair to fair; wrong to right).
Participants selected a point along a 7-point continuum that best represented their opinion. Items
were written using adjectives frequently used in the doping literature (e.g., Vargo et al., 2014)
and expressions heard on social media regarding the specific case of sign stealing in baseball
(e.g., a well thought out strategy, bad/good for baseball, dishonest attempt to win games). Three
items were reverse coded to minimize lenient responding.
Second, we adapted the short version of the Performance Enhancement Attitude Scale
(Nicholls et al., 2017) to measure beliefs about electronic sign stealing in baseball. The scale
contained 8 items assessed on Likert scale from 1 (not at all agree) to 7 (totally agree). For
example, the item “Doping is an unavoidable part of the competitive sport” was adapted to
“Illicit means of sign stealing have always been part of pro baseball”.
Third, we asked sport fans to put themselves in a different perspective (i.e., coach rather
than fan) as a way to triangulate our findings with different but complementary ways of
measuring their attitudes. We created two hypothetical scenarios. In the first scenario, we asked
sport fans if they would be tempted to use electronic sign stealing if they were coaching
2 On all the attitudes scales, higher scores denoted a more favorable attitude toward electronic sign stealing. Results
of factor analyses are presented in the supplementary file.
3 Measures, data, and Mplus codes for the analyses are available at OSF:
professional baseball. In the second scenario, we asked them if they would be tempted to use
electronic sign stealing if they were coaching young baseball players (e.g., high-school players
and younger) and had access to the needed electronic equipment. We adapted the cheating
subscale from the Adolescent Sport Doping Inventory (Nicholls et al., 2019) to assess attitudes
toward electronic sign stealing for each scenario. The six items in each scenario were rated on a
Likert scale from 1 (not at all agree) to 7 (totally agree). For example, the item “I would cheat if
I thought it would help me win” was adapted to “I would use electronic sign stealing if I thought
it would help my team win more games”. Also, we added the item “If it could help me to avoid
losing my job as a coach” to capture this unique aspect of the coaching profession.
Potential Confounders. Two potential covariates of cheating were measured: Winning-
at-all-cost mentality and moral disengagement. Winning-at-all-cost mentality was measured
using four items similar to the ones of Greenbaum et al. (2012). Each item was preceded with the
stem: “In my opinion, to be highly successful, a professional coach should…”. For example, the
item “care more about profits than employees’ well-being” was modified to “care more about
winning than about players’ well-being”. Each of the four items was rated on a Likert scale from
1 (not at all agree) to 7 (totally agree). Higher scores denoted the beliefs that a winning-at-all-
cost mentality is needed to be successful. Moral disengagement was measured using the short
version of the Moral Disengagement in Sport Scale (Boardley & Kavussanu, 2008). Each of the
8 items was rated on a Likert scale from 1 (not at all agree) to 7 (totally agree) on which
participants were asked to refer to their overall attitude about sports. Higher scores are meant to
denote a tendency to legitimize one’s transgressive behaviors in order to avoid negative feelings
and self-judgments.
Plan of Analyses
We conducted a multivariate multiple regression with excellencism and perfectionism as
predictors and six correlated dependent variables. The two predictors were mean-centered to
facilitate interpretation of the intercepts of the model. Using the intercept and the unstandardized
beta weights, we calculated the predicted values of each dependent variable for (a) non-
excellence/non-perfection strivers (-1SD of excellencism and -1SD of perfectionism), (b)
excellence strivers (+1SD of excellencism and -1SD of perfectionism), and perfection strivers
(+1SD of excellencism and +1SD of perfectionism). This plan of analyses is consistent with the
formal hypotheses and interpretational rules formulated in the MEP (Gaudreau, 2019). No
interaction effect is needed to estimate the effects and calculated the predicted values in the
the Robust Maximum Likelihood estimator to handle missing data and deviations from normal
distribution.
Results
Preliminary Analyses
Factor analyses were performed on the questionnaires that we adapted from the sport
doping literature. Results showed that the scores used in our analyses were unidimensional and
based on a trustable factor structure. Results are presented in the supplementary file.
correlation of the SCOPE (r = .432) was consistent with the idea that excellencism and
perfectionism are related but distinct pursuits. The correlations between the four scores of
attitudes toward electronic sign stealing ranged between .504 to .723, thus supporting their
inclusion in the same multivariate multiple regression. Finally, moral disengagement and the
winning-at-all-cost mentality were significantly associated and their correlations with the four
scores of attitudes ranged from .252 to .519.
Main Analyses
Results of the multivariate multiple regression on the six dependent variables are
four scores of attitudes. Sport fans with higher levels of excellencism had less favorable attitudes
toward electronic sign stealing. Perfectionism was significantly and positively associated with
each of four ways of measuring attitudes. Sport fans with higher levels of perfectionism had
more favorable attitudes toward electronic sign stealing. Similar results were found for moral
disengagement and the winning-at-all-cost mentality. Overall, excellencism and perfectionism
explained between 3.2% to 8.3% of the variance of the dependent variables.
Consistent with the MEP (Gaudreau, 2019), we compared the predicted values of (a) non-
excellence/non-perfection strivers, (b) excellence strivers, and (c) perfection strivers. On the one
hand, excellence strivers had less favorable attitudes toward electronic sign stealing and lower
moral disengagement and winning-at-all cost mentality compared to non-excellence/non-
perfection strivers. Cohen’s d effect sizes ranged from -.291 to -.603. On the other hand,
perfection strivers had more favorable attitudes toward electronic sign stealing and higher moral
disengagement and winning-at-all cost mentality compared to excellence strivers. Cohen’s d
Complementary Analysis
We conducted a complementary analysis in which we re-estimated the effects of
excellencism and perfectionism over and above winning-at-all-cost mentality and moral
disengagement. We also examined whether the fans of the three teams defeated by the Houston
Astros in the 2017 playoff (0 = no; 1 = yes) had different scores on the attitudes toward
electronic sign stealing. We included this variable to account for the possibility that fans of the
teams who were more directly impacted by the cheaters may have developed less favorable
attitudes toward electronic sign stealing in baseball.
four dependent variables whereas the winning-at-all-cost mentality significantly predicted three
dependent variables. The fans of the teams who lost against the Houston Astros during the
playoff reported higher likelihood of using electronic sign stealing in the hypothetical scenario of
coaching youth baseball. These predictors explained between 13.9% and 31.1% of the variance
of the dependent variable. Over and above the influence of these predictors, excellencism and
perfectionism remained significant predictors of three of the four dependent variables, and they
explained between 2.6% and 4.8% of these dependent variables. After neutralizing the
confounding effects of three covariates, we can conclude that the associations of excellencism
and perfectionism with three of the four pro-cheating attitudes should not be seen as spurious or
as an epiphenomenon reduceable to a general tendency toward immoral or anti-social behavior.
Discussion
Sport fans hold different attitudes about cheating. In this study, the mean scores of the
dependent variables were low, which indicates that fans mostly had an unfavorable attitude about
electronic sign stealing in professional baseball; all our results should be interpreted accordingly.
Consistent with our expectations, we discovered that sport fans who are perfection strivers held
more favorable attitudes about this form of baseball-related cheating compared to sport fans who
are excellence strivers. This study showed the potential of the MEP to help us understand why
some people are more tolerant toward moral misconduct in the sport domain.
Major Contributions
Perfectionism is a multidimensional construct. Past studies showed a positive association
between perfectionistic concerns and attitudes toward illicit ways of performing (e.g., Madigan
et al., 2020). However, perfectionistic standards were, for the most part, unrelated or even
negatively associated with these attitudes. Based on the MEP (Gaudreau, 2019), we proposed
that perfectionism standards and excellencism should be positively and negatively associated
with attitudes toward cheating in sport, respectively. If so, failure to separate excellencism and
perfectionism in past studies was responsible for the non-significant effects of perfectionism
standards. Results of this study provided support for this position.
Perfectionism is the setting and pursuit of extremely high standards beyond the setting
and pursuit of the more realistic and attainable standards involved in excellencism. Considering
perfectionism as a pursuit that goes over and above excellencism has the potential to reveal the
many undesirable characteristics associated with perfectionistic standards. In this study, we
found that perfectionism and excellencism were differentially associated with attitudes toward
sport-related cheating. Perfection strivers had more favorable views of electronic sign stealing in
baseball compared to excellence strivers. Excellence strivers also held less favorable attitudes
toward this form of cheating compared to sport fans who are aiming and striving toward lesser
standards (i.e., non-excellence/non-perfection). Overall, these findings supported the hypothesis
proposed in the MEP.
In this study, we relied on different approaches to measure the attitudes of sport fans
toward electronic sign stealing in baseball. Our results replicated across all measures of our
multimodal approach. Mean score of cheating attitudes was low across our four measures and
most participants had unfavorable attitudes about the sign stealing incident. First, stealing the
signs of the other teams was perceived as more fair, acceptable, and morally defendable for
perfection strivers compared to excellence strivers. They thought less negatively of this illegal
tactic. Second, we measured the typical beliefs involved in sport doping in order to draw on the
similarities between the electronic sign stealing scandal and other ways of illicitly boosting
performance. Perfection strivers were more likely to think that players and coaches should not
feel guilty about it and that legalizing it would be beneficial for baseball. They were more likely
to believe that the Houston Astros did not cheat because other teams were using similar illegal
tactics while endorsing the idea – expressed by many sport commentators – that illicit means of
sign stealing have always been part of professional baseball. Perfection strivers were more likely
to hold the beliefs that the outcomes of sign stealing were exaggerated – a belief also expressed
by the owner of the Houston Astros during his apology speech: “Our opinion is that this didn’t
impact the game. We had a good team. We won the World Series, and we’ll leave it at that”
(Bogage, 2020).
We also placed the sport fans in two hypothetical scenarios to evaluate how they would
behave if they were coaching professional baseball, on the one hand, and youth baseball, on the
other hand. Across both scenarios, we observed that perfection strivers would be more tempted
to use electronic sign stealing. When putting themselves in the shoes of a sport coach, the sport
fans who are perfection strivers would be more tempted to cheat if it would help their team win
more games, if it could help them avoid losing their job, or if they knew they would not get
caught. This effect was higher when participants imagined themselves as coaches in youth rather
than professional sports. Cheating in youth sports is potentially less socially acceptable because
it goes against the idea that coaches should be role models and prioritize the long-term
development and well-being of their athletes. Our finding is frightening as it suggests that
perfection strivers may be more susceptible to use illicit tactics in social contexts in which
cheating is even more morally inexcusable and when winning should not be prioritized. Attitudes
and susceptibility to act may or may not translate into real life behaviors. However, our similar
results across four different measures supported the robustness of the differential associations of
excellencism and perfectionism with attitudes toward electronic sign stealing in baseball.
Even in situations in which they do not directly participate and cannot earn personal
benefits (as when watching a sport game or reading sport-related news), perfection strivers will
bring with them some specific mental representations about the self and the world that should
make them react differently compared to other sport fans. In this study, perfection strivers scored
higher on moral disengagement and winning-at-all-cost mentality compared to excellence
strivers. On the one hand, perfection strivers were more likely to endorse cognitive stratagems to
rationalize and legitimize wrongdoing in the context of sports. Whether they would personally
activate these cognitive stratagems in situ to justify hurting an opponent, yelling at an umpire, or
playing unethically is a question that we need to explore. On the other hand, perfection strivers
are more likely to believe that prioritizing winning over well-being is required to be successful in
elite sports.
Although moral disengagement and winning-at-all-cost mentality significantly correlated
with the cheating attitudes of sport fans, excellencism and perfectionism remained significant
predictors for three of the four dependent variables in our complementary analysis. As expected,
moral disengagement and a winning-at-cost mentality are part of the complex associative
network of perfectionism, excellencism, and attitudes toward cheating in sport fans. Overall,
even after neutralizing potentially confounding influences, the results of our complementary
analysis showed that the associations of excellencism and perfectionism with attitudes toward
cheating are not spurious and cannot solely be attributed to anti-social functioning.
Two unexpected findings from our complementary analysis are worth discussing. First,
excellencism and perfectionism explained less incremental variance when attitudes were
measured in hypothetical coaching scenarios. Perfectionism and excellencism were measured at
the dispositional level (i.e., life in general). Future research could examine if contextual
perfectionism in coaching (or playing a sport) would correlate more strongly with hypothetical
moral responses in that context. Second, fans of the three teams who lost against the cheaters
during the 2017 playoff were more tempted to use electronic sign stealing in the hypothetical
scenario of coaching youth baseball. This was the only significant effect of this covariate in our
complementary analysis. Seeing one’s favorite team lose to cheaters may help these fans
normalize cheating and increase one’s intention to cheat in a similar context in which the
likelihood of being caught would be extremely low. This interpretation remains highly
speculative, but highlights the need to uncover how witnessing cheating behaviors can influence
one’s attitudes and responses toward cheating (e.g., O'Rourke et al., 2010).
Limitations and Future Directions
In this study, we assumed that a majority of baseball fans were personally impacted by
this widely mediatized cheating incident because the cheaters tarnished the reputation of the
game and took an unfair advantage over the other teams. Our results should be interpreted as
evidence for the associations between perfectionism and cheating attitudes among fans of teams
who were not guilty of cheating. Only four fans of the Houston Astros participated in this study.
Sport fans are likely to hold different attitudes depending on whether their team or another team
is convicted of sport-related cheating. Using a social identity perspective would be beneficial to
compare what happens to the tolerance of perfectionists toward cheating when their own group
cheated (i.e., we cheated) versus when their opponents cheated (i.e., they cheated). Moreover,
fans of the three specific teams who lost against Houston in the 2017 playoffs may have felt a
stronger moral response based on their personality. However, our sampling strategy did not
allow us to examine such an exploratory moderating hypothesis. Statistical power and a priori
theorizing would have been insufficient to specify how the associations of excellencism and
perfectionism with cheating attitudes could differ across fans of different teams.
This study relied on a cross-sectional design during a shortened baseball season due to
COVID-19. Players of the Houston Astros were systematically booed during the training camp
when spectators were still allowed to attend games (Goodall, 2020). Observing other fans
directly (at the stadiums) or indirectly (watching games’ highlights) displaying their disapproval
was not possible and limited the natural social learning that would have occurred in a normal
season outside of the COVID-19 pandemic. As such, it remains uncertain if the absence of
spectators during the regular season dampened the negative reactions of fans toward the Houston
Astros or if these reactions would have naturally decreased over the course of a normal season.
Finally, we focused on perfectionistic standards to test the hypotheses implied in the
MEP. Past studies reported unclear association for perfectionistic standards, but showed that
perfectionistic concerns are reliably and positively associated with cheating-related attitudes
(e.g., Madigan et al., 2020). By dividing excellencism and perfectionism, our findings now
indicate that perfectionistic standards are also involved in attitudes toward cheating. However, it
is important to reiterate that perfectionism is a multidimensional construct. Gaudreau (2021)
recently suggested that holding perfectionistic standards is the core definitional feature that sets
the wheel in motion for many of the cognitive (e.g., perfectionistic concerns), socio-cognitive
(e.g., socially prescribed perfectionism), and socio-behavioral (e.g., perfectionistic self-
presentation) expressions involved in dispositional perfectionism. Some of these expressions
unmeasured in this study may be stronger and more proximal correlates of cheating-related
attitudes. Furthermore, not all characteristics of perfectionism will operate hand-in-hand. For
example, it remains unclear how sport fans who expect other people to be perfect (i.e., other-
oriented perfectionism) have reacted to the electronic sign stealing scandal. Researchers should
be on the lookout for similar sport-related cheating incidents to replicate our findings using
perfectionistic standards and different expressions of dispositional perfectionism.
Conclusion
We hypothesized that perfectionistic standards are part of a conundrum of factors that
legitimize anti-social functioning and a winning-at-all-cost mentality and should therefore be
associated with a higher tolerance toward cheating. Our findings supported this claim and
contributed to a better understanding of the “dark side” of perfectionism (e.g., Flett & Hewitt,
2016). The propositions of the MEP were useful to clarify some of the inconsistent results
previously reported in the sport cheating literature. After separating excellencism and
perfectionism, the aiming and striving toward perfection became clearly associated with a higher
tolerance toward electronic sign stealing among sport fans. Although this study was limited to
sport fans, their attitudes about sport-related cheating matters. Sport fans are buying tickets and
merchandising. Without having sport fans on board and rooting for anti-cheating rules and
policies, the attainment of a safe and ethical sport environment appears unfeasible. We should
remain attentive to the behaviors of perfection strivers in our stadiums as their tolerance toward
cheating, hyper-competitiveness, and propensity toward moral disengagement could increase the
likelihood of turning some of them into dysfunctional sport fans.