Using a foreign language does not make you think more: Null effects of using a
foreign language on cognitive reflection and numeracy
Abstract
Aims and Objectives/Purpose/Research Questions
Using a foreign language is suggested to affect how we think, even reducing bias.
However, the exact mechanisms of its influence are still unknown. In this project, we tested
two variants of the “thinking more” mechanism driving the foreign language effect: increased
cognitive reflection and greater task engagement.
Design/Methodology/Approach
We analyzed previously collected data from 5 experiments employing the Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT) and/or the Berlin Numeracy Test (BNT), each administered in the native
or foreign language. If the increased reflection explanation is true, the CRT score should be
higher in participants using a foreign language; If the greater task engagement explanation is
true, the BNT score should be higher in participants using a foreign language.
Data and Analysis
We report data from N = 1288 participants who filled the CRT and N = 413 who filled
the BNT. Data were analyzed using the NHST approach and its Bayesian alternative over a
spectrum of liberal, default and conservative priors. Data is publicly available:
Findings/Conclusions
All the test results were non-significant and showed anecdotal to strong evidence that
neither the CRT nor the BNT scores improved in the foreign language condition, also when
controlling for proficiency. The proportion of intuitive to computational errors was also
unaffected.
Originality
We are the first to comprehensively test the thinking-more explanation of the foreign
language effect.
Significance/Implications.
Our results undermine the claim that using a foreign language promotes more cognitive
reflection or engagement. The foreign language effect likely has a different cause.
Keywords: foreign language effect; numeracy; cognitive reflection; dual process theory
Using a foreign language does not make you think more: Null effects of using a
foreign language on cognitive reflection and numeracy
Research on the Foreign Language Effect claims that people’s decisions and judgments vary
depending on whether they use their native language or a foreign language. The most robust
effects of using a foreign language, confirmed by three meta-analyses, are more utilitarian
moral judgments and reduced risk aversion (Circi et al., 2021; Maschio et al., 2022; Stankovic
et al., 2022). Despite its potential significance, little is yet known about the mechanisms of the
Foreign Language Effect. In this project, we investigate one of the proposed mechanisms of
the effect - increased cognitive engagement.
The Foreign Language Effect is best explained in the Dual-Process Theory framework
theory, cognition consists of two types of processes: autonomous Type I processes, which do
not employ working memory, and reflective Type II processes, which use working memory
and allow for running mental simulations. When facing a problem, people typically produce an
intuitive response to it; sometimes, even multiple intuitions are available. Cognitive reflection
is responsible for analyzing the intuitive output using metacognitive cues, e.g. Feeling for
Rightness (Thompson et al., 2011). When Feeling for Rightness is high, people tend to accept
this intuition as a solution to a problem. When the intuitions conflict, people experience low
Feeling for Rightness and proceed to reflect on the problem. This stage requires cognitive
resources and is contingent on people’s cognitive abilities. In other words, merely reflecting is
not enough to think and decide well - one also has to have the required knowledge how to
process a task, cognitive abilities to complete it and the motivation to find the correct solution
(i.e., through decoupling) rather than to rationalize the intuitive response (Kunda, 1990;
Mercier & Sperber, 2011). However, even gifted individuals will not think accurately if they fail
to engage in reflection.
One of the reasons why people operating in a foreign language may think differently
(and speculatively be less biased) is that using a foreign language motivates them to use Type
II processing more than they would so typically (Costa et al., 2014; Keysar et al., 2012) Such
a model could explain the assumed debiasing properties of using a foreign language. Several
mechanisms would account for how this greater engagement in reflection can be achieved
(Białek, 2023; Hayakawa et al., 2016): (1) increased willingness to reflect, (2) decreased
salience of intuitions and emotions, (3) more abstract construal level, or (4) distorted
metacognition. In this project, we thoroughly test the first model. There exists some
experimental evidence that the thinking more mechanism is the least plausible model, e.g.,
cognitive reflection (Costa et al., 2014; Vega-Mendoza et al., 2021) and performance in some
heuristic and biases task (Mækelæ & Pfuhl, 2019; Vives et al., 2018) were unaffected while
syllogistic reasoning deteriorated (Białek et al., 2020) when using a foreign language.
However, we believe a thorough test of this explanation can move the study of the interplay of
language and cognition forward by either focusing researchers’ effort on this model or
relocating it into the alternative models.
The thinking more model suggests that people using their foreign language reflect
more either because they think the task presented to them in a foreign language requires more
cognitive resources or because they use the disfluency of processing as a cue for the need
for greater engagement in the task (Hayakawa et al., 2016). In other words, perceiving a task
as more challenging when processing in a foreign language may cue people to invest more
resources into their cognitive processing. Both of these processes would, in turn, reduce the
role of intuition, a primary source of many cognitive biases (Pennycook et al., 2015a).
We propose two variants of the thinking more hypothesis: increased cognitive
variant, people may misinterpret disfluency caused by processing in a foreign language as a
sign of low Feeling for Rightness or otherwise adopt a more reflective thinking mode. This
would result in them being more willing to verify their intuitions and correct them when required.
Thus, we expect people using their foreign language to perform better in a task specifically
designed to test their willingness to reflect - the Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT, Frederick,
2005). Notably, some research investigated the effects of using a foreign language on CRT
and reported no changes (e.g., Costa et al., 2014). However, this thinking more hypothesis is
still being discussed as one of the potential mechanisms in subsequent literature.
The second variant of the thinking more hypothesis is that people using a foreign
language could reflect to a similar extent as those using their native language but do it with
greater dedication and, therefore, better results. People's attitudes and motivation seem to
play a significant role even in the most demanding cognitive tasks, such as IQ tests. To
illustrate, better-motivated individuals perform better in such tasks (Duckworth et al., 2011;
Ganuthula & Sinha, 2019), and those who expect to perform poorly, e.g., because they are
affected by a stereotype, tend to perform more poorly (Grand et al., 2010; Steele & Aronson,
1995). If people try harder, for example because they perceive a task in their foreign language
as more demanding and want to compensate for it, we expect their performance to improve
in tasks like the Berlin Numeracy Test (Cokely et al., 2012), which test the efficiency of
reflective processes and which unlike the CRT use no lures.
To test the ideas described above, we used data from our previous experiments on
the foreign language effect (combined N = 1515), where we collected data on people's
cognitive style (i.e., cognitive reflection) and cognitive abilities (i.e., numeracy). If the increased
reflection model is correct, any of the two measures should show an increase for the people
using a foreign language.
Decision-making is a function of intuitive response, cognitive reflection, and cognitive abilities.
Foreign language could aid decision-making either by boosting cognitive reflection (Panel A),
making one invest more resources into deliberation (Panel B), or both.
Overview of the experiments and methodological approach
All analyzed here data comes from bilingual participants who self-reported their
proficiency to be at least 5 on a scale of 101, who had no foreign language native speakers as
their parents, and who spent less than 6 months in a foreign-speaking country. Most of our
participants were tested in Polish (in the native language condition), or English (in the foreign
language condition), but some experiments also involved other foreign languages such as
French, Spanish, or German. Because specific language pairs are not numerous enough and
come from specific experiments rather than all experiments, we decided to leave this feature
In our experience, self-reports correlate very well (r > 0.75) with more detailed tests of proficiency,
i.e., standardized national proficiency tests for high-school leavers, or with author-designed tasks
testing understanding of the study materials.
aside and collapse all our data in one dataset, simply dividing participants into being tested in
native or foreign language conditions. This way, our sample was large enough to detect with
80% an increase in cognitive reflection of the magnitude d>0.14 and in numeracy of d>0.25.
Note that these are still fairly modest effects, corresponding to changes of the magnitude of 2
to 4 IQ points, respectively. However, even if using a foreign language had a robust effect
smaller than what we were able to detect, we would claim it to be insignificant in practice, i.e.,
it would not have a major impact on the real world outcome of cognitive processing.
Each experiment received an ethics committee approval, and the participants were
remunerated a flat fee of about $5, except for one study in which participants were
remunerated $0-15, according to their choices in a gambling task (Borkowska et al., 2023).
analyzed using Jamovi 2.2. (The Jamovi Project, 2021) and R version 4.0 (R Core Team,
2021). We utilized the following packages: GAMLj (Gallucci, 2019), emmeans (Lenth, 2020),
BayesFactors (Morey et al., 2018), Bayesian t-test for accepting and rejecting the null
hypothesis (Rouder et al., 2009), and car (Fox et al., 2012).
Because the hypothesis was clearly directional, predicting increased CRT and BNT
scores in the foreign language (FL), we used one-tailed t-tests (Lakens, 2022). Our reasoning
is that because we would reject the thinking more hypothesis regardless of whether the score
NL
was equal or larger than score it made no sense to additionally decrease statistical power
FL,
to decide between these two outcomes. For completeness, we report a separate analysis
using a traditional null-hypothesis-significance-test (NHST), an analysis with p-values, and its
or not, but are never evidence for it. This gap can be filled by using the Bayes Factor (BF)
analysis, which estimates relative support for compared models (Dienes, 2014). For example,
BF =3 states that the data is three times more likely to be observed under the alternative
model than the null model, whereas BF =3 states that the data is three times more likely to
be observed under the null model than the alternative model. Using BF, contrary to the NHST,
allows us to conclude that a null hypothesis is supported by the evidence (Domurat & Białek,
2016).
There are thresholds in BF that change the interpretation of the results (Andraszewicz
et al., 2015). For example, 1<BF<3 is considered anecdotal evidence for the hypothesis,
3<BF<10 is considered moderate evidence for the hypothesis, and 10<BF<30 is considered
strong evidence for the hypothesis. Anything above 30 is considered decisive. The Bayesian
analysis also incorporates the researcher’s predictions about the effect sizes that can be
observed under the null being true (i.e., prior). The prior is described by a Cauchy distribution
centered around zero and with a specified width parameter. We report analyses for three
Cauchy width distributions: liberal r = 0.16, default r=0.707, and conservative r = 1.414. These
priors correspond to a probability of 50% that the effect size (in Cohen’s d) under the null
hypothesis being true lies: (1) between 0 and: 0.16 for the liberal prior, (2) between 0 and
0.707 for the default prior, and (3) between 0 and 1.414 for the conservative prior. Even a
default prior can be classified as conservative because a modestly sizable dataset supporting
a true small effect can be classified as supporting the null as it is closer to zero than to the
average expected effect (Tendeiro & Kiers, 2019).
Experiment 1 - Cognitive Reflection
We analyzed data from 4 experiments (N =1288 after exclusions) that tested cognitive
reflection as a potential moderator of the foreign language effect. Each time, the CRT was
administered after the main task in a language congruent with the rest of the experiment, either
native (always Polish) or foreign (English, German, French or Spanish). The goal of this
analysis was to see whether people were more willing to reflect upon their intuitive responses
when using their foreign language. If this were true, we would see participants using a foreign
language perform better than those using their native language.
Method
Cognitive Reflection Test
The Cognitive Reflection Test (Frederick, 2005) is a brief, 3-item test measuring
people's cognitive style - cognitive reflection. Its items have intuitively appealing but invalid
responses. For example, a famous bat-and-ball problem read as follows:
A baseball bat and a ball cost $1.10 together, and the bat costs $1.00 more than the
ball, how much does the ball cost?
The first thing that comes to one’s mind is “10 cents”, but if this were the case, the bat
would have to cost a dollar more, $1.00 + $0.10 = $1.10. What follows, the bat and the ball
would cost jointly $0.10 + $1.10 = $1.20. Yet, in the task, the sum is $1.10. Hence, the ball
costs $0.05, the bat $1.05, and both cost $1.10. Such an analysis of the intuitive response we
just conducted is what researchers call cognitive reflection. People scoring higher in the CRT
tend to investigate their intuitions more thoroughly, reflecting on the problem more often than
people scoring lower in the CRT.
Although the cognitive Reflection Test is very popular among study participants,
especially those from crowdsourced panels such as mTurk, (Haigh, 2016), its scores remain
relatively stable (Stagnaro et al., 2018), and its predictive value is unaffected by prior exposure
(Białek & Pennycook, 2018).
Additional details of the experiments
Experiment 1A. – Experiments 1A and 1B data come from Białek et al. (2022). N = 240
participants responded to discounting items presented in four blocks: accelerating gains,
delaying gains, accelerating losses, and delaying losses. The task employed a matching
procedure (Hardisty et al., 2013). Let us illustrate the nature of the task. In the delaying gain
condition, a participant stated what amount of money they would accept in a month instead of
receiving 100 PLN immediately. This pen-and-paper discounting task was done either in the
participant’s native (Polish) or foreign (Spanish, English, or German) language. Following that,
the participants completed the CRT and provided foreign language proficiency information:
the understanding of the task, self-rated proficiency, standardized test scores, and age of the
foreign language acquisition.
Experiment 1B. - In this experiment, N = 310 participants filled out the Monetary Choice
Questionnaire (MCQ, Kirby et al., 1999) and the CRT in either their native or a foreign
language. Next, they reported their age of acquisition, national standardized foreign language
proficiency test results, and estimated proficiency in the foreign language on four dimensions:
general, writing, reading, and speaking. Lastly, they had to fill out the attention check question.
Experiment 1C. - In this pen-and-paper experiment, N = 552 participants responded to a
battery of twenty-four moral dilemmas adapted from Gawronski et al., (2017) in their native
(Polish) or a foreign language (English, German, Spanish, or French) (Białek et al., 2019).
Following that, the participants completed the CRT and assessed their understanding of the
dilemmas and foreign language proficiency on a 10-point scale.
Experiment 1D - This is a yet unpublished dataset intended to be an extension of Experiment
1C. Participants filled out the pen-and-paper version of the CNI battery of moral dilemmas
adapted from Körner et al., (2020), the Cognitive Reflection Test, as well as the Berlin
Numeracy Test. N = 186 participants were randomly assigned to the English or the Polish
version of the survey. All of the questions were presented in the same language. The BNT
data from this experiment were analyzed in Experiment 2 in this paper.
Results
experiment mean (SD) mean (SD) t-test (one- liberal BF default BF conservative
NL FL tailed, NL < Cauchy prior Cauchy prior BF Cauchy
FL) width=0.16 width=0.707 prior
width=1.414
1A (N = 240) 1.73 (1.16) 1.46 (1.18) t(238)=1.82, BF = 4.86 BF = 19.14 BF = 38.03
01 01 01
d=0.24 [-
0.02, 0.49],
p=.965
1B (N = 310) 1.07 (1.09) 1.17 (1.13) t(308) = - BF = 1.30 BF = 3.80 BF = 7.34
01 01 01
0.78, d= -
0.09 [-0.32,
0.14],
p=.218
1C (N = 552) 1.43 (1.18) 1.38 (1.15) t(550) =0.53, BF = 3.91 BF = 15.25 BF = 30.28
01 01 01
d= 0.05 [-
0.12, 0.21], p
=.703
1D (N = 186) 1.83 (1.17) 1.93 (1.16) t(184)= -0.62, BF = 1.34 BF = 3.64 BF = 6.95
01 01 01
d= -0.09 [-
0.38, 0.2],
p =.269
Pooled (N = 1.48 (1.18) 1.41 (1.17) t(1286)=1.02, BF = 7.29 BF = 30.74 BF = 61.35
01 01 01
1288) d=0.06 [-
0.05, 0.17],
p =.847
Note. The null model assumes the CRT scores are equal or lower in the native language
(NL) than in the foreign language (FL) condition; the alternative model that the CRT score is
higher in the FL condition.
condition. Although the results for some of the experiments are inconclusive when using the
most liberal prior, this conclusion holds for pooled data across all priors. Hence, consistent
with previous research, we conclude that our data suggest that the foreign language effect is
likely not driven by improved cognitive reflection.
Discussion
Overall, we found that cognitive reflection does not improve when participants use a
least biased against small effects, the evidence provided moderate evidence favoring the null.
Hence, it seems that people are not more willing to reflect. So, the increased reflection variant
of the thinking more model is unlikely to explain the Foreign Language Effect.
As we discussed above, an alternative mechanism can be that people reflect to the
same extent in both languages, but that their engagement in this reflective process is greater
in an FL. If so, we should expect them to perform better in tasks that require deliberation but
not overriding intuitive incorrect responses, as was the case for the CRT. Thus, we tested
whether participants using a foreign language would perform better in a numeracy test.
Experiment 2 - cognitive abilities (numeracy)
Performance in tests of cognitive abilities reflects not only these abilities at their
maximum but also depends on the level of engagement in the task (even if its impact is
modest, Bates & Gignac, 2022). That is, even really smart people may perform poorly in a
task if they do not invest time and effort into it. Because the true level of cognitive abilities
cannot be easily changed, brief interventions that affect the result of tests measuring cognitive
abilities likely simply increase task engagement. What follows, is that the performance in the
numeracy test (trait numeracy cannot be easily changed) tested whether people using a
foreign language invested more cognitive resources into the test (state motivation is
malleable). Considering these arguments, if participants' scores improve in the foreign
language condition, we could conclude they tried harder than those tested in a native
language, confirming the greater task engagement variant of the thinking more hypothesis.
We report an analysis of the data collected in two yet unpublished experiments, one
testing language differences in the understanding of probability expressions and the other
testing the foreign language effect on moral judgments. In each, numeracy was measured as
a potentially moderating variable and administered in the language congruent with the rest of
the study - either native (Polish) or foreign (English). We selected numeracy because it is a
component of cognitive abilities that may positively contribute to decision-making to an even
greater extent than fluid intelligence (Ghazal et al., 2014).
Method
Berlin Numeracy Test
In this pen-and-paper study, we presented participants with the Berlin Numeracy Test
(BNT, Cokely et al., 2012), either in their native or a foreign language. BNT asks people four
open-ended numerical questions, focusing mostly on probability estimation. Their difficulty
increases with each item. An example item is:
Imagine we are throwing a five-sided die 50 times. On average, out of these 50 throws,
how many times would this five-sided die show an odd number (1, 3, or 5)?
The correct answer is 30, but on average, only 20-30% of participants can find it.
Additional details of the experiments
Experiment 2A. In this yet unpublished online experiment, we asked 227 participants to
express numerically thirty English probability phrases and their Polish equivalents. All of those
expressions were adapted from (Willems et al., 2020). The materials were presented in both
languages, with counterbalanced order. Next, participants estimated how their peers would
evaluate them on four dimensions: intelligence, creativity, impulsiveness, and extraversion.
The metrics and the BNT were presented in the language of the second part of the probability
study.
Experiment 2B. This analysis uses the other part of the data described in Experiment 1C.
Results
experiment mean (SD) mean (SD) t-test (one- liberal BF default BF conservative
NL FL tailed, NL < Cauchy prior Cauchy prior BF Cauchy
FL) width=0.16 width=0.707 prior
width=1.414
2a (N=227) 2.12 (1.19) 1.91 (1.19) t(225)=1.33, BF =3.98 BF =21.27 BF =29.93
01 01 01
d=0.18 [-
0.08, 0.44],
p=.907
2b (N=186) 1.77 (1.33) 1.80 (1.39) t(184)=-0.19, BF =1.79 BF =5.38 BF =10.42
01 01 01
d=-0.03 [-
0.32, 0.26],
p=.424
pooled 1.96 (1.26) 1.86 (1.29) t(411)=0.83, BF =4.08 BF =15.83 BF =31.43
01 01 01
(N=413) d=0.08 [-
0.11, 0.28],
p=.796
Note. The null model assumes the BNT scores are equal or lower in the native language
(NL) than in the foreign language (FL) condition; the alternative model, that the BNT score is
higher in the FL condition.
condition. Despite being inconclusive for Experiment 2B when assuming the most liberal prior,
this conclusion holds for pooled data across all priors, even the liberal prior, i.e., assuming
really small effects are expected, it shows that the null model is better supported by the
evidence (B > 4 for pooled data), while the conservative prior claims the evidence to be
decisive (B >30). Hence, we conclude that the foreign language effect is likely not driven by
improved task engagement.
Discussion
We have observed no increase in performance in the BNT when using a foreign
language, which means that people were likely not investing more cognitive resources to
perform well in the task. Of course, trying harder is no guarantee that performance in a
demanding task like numeracy will improve (Bates & Gignac, 2022). Thus, our results are to
be treated with a dose of caution.
Exploratory analyses
Proficiency as a moderator of the Foreign Language Effect
Across the two analyses, we found that using a foreign language does not improve
performance in either the cognitive reflection or the numeracy test. However, the effect of
language can depend on language proficiency. For example, highly proficient bilinguals may
not benefit from using a foreign language, e.g., because their fluency is so high that they
experience no disfluency hypothesized to trigger greater reflection. Alternatively, moderately
proficient participants might perform worse, because the effort associated with comprehending
a task in a foreign language adds cognitive load and decreases the pool of available cognitive
resources. Next, proficiency may introduce noise in a reversed linear fashion, because of
increased chance of random responding in less proficient participants who could have failed
at comprehending the task correctly. Finally, the effect of proficiency may be non-linear as
being produced jointly by several of the effects mentioned above.
To investigate the moderating role of proficiency, we first visually confirmed the
performance and proficiency relationship to be linear. Having established that, we conducted
in CRT or BNT as dependent variables, both predicted by (1) the language used, (2) the self-
reported proficiency of participants, and (3) their interaction. If our speculation were true, we
would expect to observe a language by proficiency interaction at least in one of the models.
However, we found neither an effect of language nor a language by proficiency interaction.
We observed a main effect of proficiency in the CRT test and not in the BNT. Speculatively,
this suggests proficiency is confounded with another trait that corresponds to normatively
correct responding, e.g., the IQ.
type of errors made in the CRT.
Predictor CRT BNT
Intuitive vs
Performance Performance
computational error
B = 0.55 [0.07, 1.03], p B = 1.54 [1.08, 2.00], p B = 1.18 [0.05, 2.18], p
Intercept
= .025 < .001 = .040
Language (Native B = -0.03 [-0.71, 0.65], B = 0.27 [-0.39, 0.93], p B = 0.08 [-1.43, 1.60], p
– foreign) p = .927 = .415 = .913
B = 0.11 [0.05, 0.18], p B = -0.05 [-0.14, 0.04], B = 0.11 [-0.03, 0.25], p
Proficiency (0-10)
< .001 p = .281 = .115
Language x B = 0.02 [-0.07, 0.11], p B = 0.02 [-0.07, 0.11], p B = -0.02 [-0.22, 0.17],
proficiency =.690 =.690 p =.801
R2 .023 .001 .011
Alternative effects of reflecting more – computational vs intuitive errors
Reflection is not necessarily a panacea to judgment and decision errors. Even people
who reflect can err, e.g., because they fail to complete the required processing. Such
computation errors are more random than errors from biased but less noisy intuitive
processing (Kahneman et al., 2022). If people using a foreign language reflect but are unable
to complete the required cognitive processes, their CRT score would not improve, but instead
they would make computational instead of intuitive errors (Pennycook et al., 2016)2.
To verify this hypothesis, we regressed errors made in the CRT (classified as intuitive
or computational) on (1) proficiency, (2) language in which the task was administered, and (3)
errors made in the native language condition. However, we found none of the predictors to be
2 Because the BNT has no lures, all errors are by default computational, making it
unsuitable to test this prediction.
significant. Regardless of the language used by the participants, they predominantly made
intuitive errors (in native language CRT = 86.8%, CRT = 66.8%, CRT = 76.5%; in foreign
1 2 3
language CRT = 83.1%, CRT = 71.3%, CRT = 72.5%).
1 2 3
Discussion
On top of confirming that using a foreign language does not improve performance in either the
CRT or BNT, we also excluded alternative hypotheses: the effect is not moderated by
proficiency, nor does using a foreign language produce more computational instead of intuitive
errors. Therefore, we believe to have found additional support for refuting the thinking more
hypothesis.
General Discussion
We found no positive effect of using a foreign language on performance in the
Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) or the Berlin Numeracy Test (BNT). Moreover, in the CRT,
participants made the same number of intuitive vs computational errors regardless of the
language in which the task was administered. This way, although we still do not understand
the nature of the foreign language effect, we know that any of the two variants of the thinking
more mechanism should not be considered among the candidates for the actual explanation.
We have not discussed this thoroughly, but we believe none of the other explanations of the
foreign language effect was thoroughly tested, and as such, they are not consistently
supported by evidence, e.g., in the form of a meta-analysis. Therefore, understanding the
nature of the foreign language still requires further research.
Although the results seem compelling, there is one caveat. Specifically, some
individuals provide correct CRT responses intuitively, without the need to reflect (Raoelison et
al., 2020). In such individuals, the CRT could measure the accuracy of their intuitions rather
than their cognitive reflection. Yet, our analysis would still be able to detect whether using a
foreign language makes people think more: those who intuitively answered correctly and
would be prompted to reflect would retain their intuitive response or change their response by
producing a computational error. By analogy, those who intuitively answered incorrectly and
would be prompted to reflect would amend their response to either a correct one or make a
computational error. No such result was observed.
There are other limitations to our study, and the conclusions we draw from it. First, it
is possible that the hypothesized thinking more effect exists but is too small to be observed in
our data. If that is true, effects too small to be reliably detected on samples of ~1200 and ~400
participants are most likely smaller than the smallest effect size of interest, and thus have very
limited practical significance (Lakens, 2017). Secondly, there are measures of cognitive
reflection and numeracy that were not employed in this study and could have yielded different
results. Examples include a verbal cognitive reflection test, which allows one to disentangle
reflection from mathematical abilities, and for numeracy, there are behavioral measures
(Lipkus et al., 2001; Schwartz et al., 1997) as well as self-rate descriptive questionnaires
(Fagerlin et al., 2007). Thirdly, despite maximum engagement, a large proportion of the
participants may have not been able to improve their scores due to cognitive limitations. While
not completely out of the question, this interpretation is rather unlikely; effects of motivation
have been observed even in the case of standardized intelligence tests (Duckworth et al.,
2011). Hence, we assume that increased engagement would have resulted in a similar
performance increase in the present study. Alternatively, it may have been impossible for the
numeracy scores to improve because the participants were highly motivated and did their best
in the test, regardless of the language of the task presented to them. Again, this is not very
likely, given the usually observed low engagement of the participants in online surveys
(Fleischer et al., 2015).
To conclude, operating in a foreign language does not seem to increase cognitive
reflection or task engagement. Thus, the reflection-based model is less plausible than other
mechanisms proposed to account for changes occurring when thinking in a foreign language:
(1) decreased salience of emotions (“thinking less”), (2) more abstract construal level, or (3)
distorted metacognition. Which of these explanations is correct, if any, remains an open
question.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Wiktoria Wielińska for her help in collecting the data in Experiment
1B/2D.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article: This research was supported by grant no.
2020/38/E/HS6/00282 from the National Science Centre (NCN, Poland) to Michał Białek. The
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.