A Synonym-Compendium for Personality Descriptors:
Word-Net Synsets for 1,710 Personality Adjectives
Hanna Beriker and Gerard Saucier
University of Oregon
Author Note
Hanna Beriker, Department of Psychology, University of Oregon
Gerard Saucier, Department of Psychology, University of Oregon
December 2022
As is now commonly recognized within scientific psychology, personality differences are
validly measurable and predict important outcomes. And personality differences take many
forms. Allport and Odbert (1936) identified 17,953 unique terms descriptive of personality, from
a large unabridged dictionary of English. But obviously, 17,953 is far too many variables for
scientists (or laypersons) to easily handle, much less assess in a practical manner.
Warren Norman repeated the Allport and Odbert method with an updated edition of the
same dictionary, arriving at a similar initial number. But Norman (1967) went farther and
reduced the ungainly original set down to 2,797 terms, by excluding adjectives judged to be
archaic, obsolete, overly obscure or evaluative, specific to a dialect, or referring to characteristics
that are purely physical or otherwise only loosely related to personality. Lewis R. Goldberg took
Norman’s 2,797-term compendium and reduced it by approximately 40% in size; 1,666 were
retained, and 44 added. Of the 44 additions, 42 were omitted by Norman but found however in
Gough’s Adjective Check List, the other two (Rough and Smart) were Goldberg choices to add.
The result was a collection of 1,710 adjectives, which became the first large (or even substantial)
collection of natural-language terms to be administered to a decent-sized sample for self-report
data. (For a description of the dataset and important uses of it see Goldberg, 1990; Saucier &
Iurino, 2020; also Ashton, Lee, and Goldberg, 2004).
However, 1,710 adjectives is still a rather excessive volume, and indeed in the era in
which the data was collected (circa 1972) it was not even possible to analyze so many variables
at once. Goldberg’s first major publication with the data placed them within 75 clusters that
Norman had created for Goldberg’s set of adjectives. In fact, though, the 75 were only Norman’s
superordinate groupings, as there were 539 finer-grained clusters into which the 75 could be
subdivided. Saucier and Iurino (2020, Study 1) conducted analyses that included both the 75 and
the 539 clusters (as well as the full set of single items), supplementing the 539 with 61 additional
clusters empirically derived and drawing on terms that Norman had left out of all his clusters.
While 539 (or 600) clusters is a more workable number for purposes of assessment, an
undesirable feature of these clusters is their construction by a single individual, an expert but
nonetheless just one man (working some 50 years ago, circa 1972). It would be desirable to
investigate whether systematic linguistic investigations of semantic relations might yield a more
strongly defensible set of clusters, for use not only by psychologists but also those who analyze
text in approaches such as natural language processing.
Princeton University’s WordNet is a publicly available lexical database of not just
adjectives but also nouns, verbs, and adverbs, within which terms are grouped into sets of
synonyms called “synsets.” In all, WordNet organizes over 155,000 distinct terms, but of course
most of these terms are not adjectives, much less personality-descriptive adjectives. Of prime
interest here is how WordNet organizes that approximately one percent of its terms that are
found in the set of 1710 prime personality-descriptive adjectives described above.
Our method was to systematically examine the WordNet synset associations of each of
the 1710 adjectives, and construct a compendium reflecting those associations. Specifically, we
cataloged for each adjective what other terms were found within the one or more synsets within
which it was included. We also collected for each the sometimes numerous synsets that involved
derivationally related forms (e.g., noun constructions that use the same word root, for example
briskness and liveliness and zip for the adjective Brisk). All these associations were entered on a
single spreadsheet with 1,710 rows (one for each adjective.)
For the purpose of clustering the 1710 adjectives it would be ideal if (a) each adjective
belongs to one and only cluster (synset), with (b) all adjectives belong to a cluster. Property (a)
was characteristic of the Norman clusters referenced earlier, although (b) did not quite apply
there although it mostly did (i.e., 1491 terms were in a Norman cluster, 1638 if one adds the
additional clusters from Saucier and Iurino). But in WordNet, 373 of the terms belonged to no
cluster (synset), and 498 of the terms belonged to multiple clusters; specifically, 357 terms
belonged to two clusters, 105 to three, 16 terms belonged to four clusters, seven terms belonged
to five clusters, and three terms belonged to six clusters. Thus, only 1330 of the 1710 terms were
classified in WordNet, and just 839 of 1710 belonged to just one cluster (synset). So WordNet
classified only 49% of the terms unambiguously into the desirable single synonym-cluster. In
percentage terms, about 22% of the 1710 terms were not in WordNet at all, and of those that
were found in WordNet about 37% were in multiple synset clusters.
Particular extreme examples will highlight how these natural-language terms fail to
conform perfectly to the “one cluster for each term” ideal. The terms Quick, Tough, and Wild
each belonged to six clusters (synsets), and Fearful, Indifferent, Intimate, Lively, Rough,
Tolerant, and Unsympathetic each belonged to five clusters (synsets). The WordNet organization
of course hews closer to the naturally occurring semantic structure in the language, and these
examples illustrate how the natural polysemy (meaning-multiplicity) in single words goes
against the “psychometric ideal” of “one-cluster for each term” in a substantial fraction of cases
(a minority of cases, to be sure, but a quite substantial minority).
The reduced proportion of terms (in WordNet) classified within any cluster at all (78%
classified in WordNet versus 87% classified by Norman) might be attributed particularly to the
considerable number of amplification and negation terms in the 1710-adjective set. Included are
88 amplifications (e.g., Overcaring, Ultraspiritual) of which only 26 are in WordNet, and 370
negation terms beginning with the prefix un- (e.g., Unaccessible, Unzealous) of which only 206
are classified in WordNet. Thus, a majority of the terms in the 1710 not found in WordNet (226
of 380) are either amplifications or else negations beginning with the prefix un-. There were
however other terms (e.g., Loose-tongued, Perfectionistic) unclassified in WordNet that did not
fall into the categories of being amplifications, or negations beginning with the un- prefix.
The apparently undebatable conclusion from the above tabulations is that WordNet does
not provide a superior alternative to the Norman clusters as a way of reducing the number of
variables neatly from 1710 to a much smaller number. It is certainly a more careful reflection of
the natural semantic structure of the language than a single expert (e.g., Norman) can provide,
but is less straightforwardly useful to studies of personality structure where a one-cluster-for-
each-term organization would be more heuristic.
Nonetheless, the groupings of the 1710 adjectives into WordNet synsets may have
considerable use outside the narrow frame of personality-structure studies. And so we provide
our compendium of these WordNet associations in the form of a spreadsheet available to
researchers in whatever field of investigation it might prove relevant.