PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 1
Public Events Knowledge in an Age-Heterogeneous Sample:
Reminiscence Bump or Bummer?
Priscilla Achaa-Amankwaa1, Diana Steger2, Oliver Wilhelm3, & Ulrich Schroeders1
1 Institute of Psychology, University of Kassel, Germany
2 Leibniz Institute for Educational Trajectories, Bamberg, Germany
3 Institute of Psychology and Education, Ulm University, Germany
Author Note
We have no conflict of interest to disclose. We confirm that the work conforms to
Standard 8 of the American Psychological Association’s Ethical Principles of Psychologists
Amankwaa et al., 2023). We confirm that the ideas and data presented in the manuscript have
not been previously disseminated.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Priscilla Achaa-
Amankwaa, Institute of Psychology, University of Kassel, Holländische Straße 36-38, 34127
Kassel, Germany. E-Mail: Priscilla.achaa@uni-kassel.de
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 2
Abstract
The reminiscence bump describes an increased recollection of autobiographic experiences
made in adolescence and early adulthood. It is unclear if this phenomenon can also be found
for declarative knowledge of past public events. To answer this question, we assessed public
events knowledge (PEK) about the past six decades with a 120-item knowledge test across
six domains in a sample of 1,012 Germans that were sampled uniformly across the ages 30 to
80 years. General and domain-specific PEK scores were analyzed as a function of age-at-
event. Scores were lower for public events preceding participants’ birth and stayed stable
from the age-at-event of five to ten years onwards. There was no significant peak in PEK in
adolescence or early adulthood, arguing against an extension of the reminiscence effect to
factual knowledge. We examined associations between PEK and relevant variables such as
crystallized intelligence (Gc), news consumption, and openness to experience with structural
equation models. Strong associations between PEK and Gc were established, whereas the
associations of PEK with news consumption and openness were mainly driven by their link to
declarative knowledge.
Keywords: Crystallized intelligence, public events knowledge, reminiscence bump
Public Significance Statement:
The study found that public events knowledge is not subject to a reminiscence effect
but shows a trajectory across age-at-event much more similar to age-related developments of
declarative knowledge. An explanatory account based on cognitive maturation in adolescence
and early adulthood is contested. The study highlights that public event knowledge can be
understood as a specific type of declarative knowledge—one that is shaped more by societal
transmission processes than by personal learning history.
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 3
© 2023, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may
not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite
without authors’ permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI:
10.1037/pag0000786
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 4
Public Events Knowledge in an Age-Heterogeneous Sample: Reminiscence Bump or
Bummer?
Semantic memory and declarative knowledge are closely intertwined cognitive
concepts and their development with age is of interest in cognitive-developmental
psychology as well as the psychology of individual differences. Declarative knowledge—
which is over time accumulated and retrieved from semantic memory (Nyberg et al., 2003)—
shows increases until late adulthood (e.g., Horn, 1982; Rönnlund et al., 2005). Common to
the measurement of memory capacity and knowledge is an individual’s ability to retrieve
information from long-term memory (i.e., broad retrieval ability; Schneider & McGrew,
2018), a process that is in turn susceptible to age-related decline (e.g., Czaja et al., 2001).
What further connects theories on memory and knowledge are the principles of learning and
knowledge acquisition, which vary between individuals and over time. Primary sources of
learning are direct personal experiences as well as the transmission of knowledge in social
settings (Bandura, 1977; Cattell, 1971). Thus, school and institutional education represent
more formalized learning environments in which knowledge is passed on according to more
or less standardized curricula. However, even without the explicit intention to learn, people
gain knowledge outside of formalized settings by being exposed to and actively seeking
information through media, which are prominent sources of learning (Lange, 2018; Park &
Gil de Zúñiga, 2021). News that we incidentally pick up in the media is salient for a limited
period and varies in prevalence across regions, thus, culture as a communication process is
bound to place and time (Carey, 2009). Knowledge accumulated in this process is not always
deemed valuable enough to outlast generations (i.e., knowledge that is included in an
educational canon) but rather generation-dependent.
We refer to this spatially and temporally bounded information, such as about the
bankruptcy of a major stock company or the winners of the Olympic 400-meter race, as
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 5
public events knowledge (PEK). With the present study, we explore knowledge about public
events in an age-heterogeneous sample to investigate age-associated learning trajectories and
to better understand the very nature of PEK in the context of declarative knowledge and its
associations with personality, interests, and news consumption.
Developmental Perspectives on Autobiographical and Public Events Knowledge
The reminiscence bump—the enhanced memory of experiences made between the
ages of 10 to 30 years (Rubin et al., 1986)—describes a phenomenon predominantly
investigated for autobiographical memory (e.g., Janssen & Murre, 2008; Rubin & Schulkind,
1997). Outside of autobiographical events, some studies also reported a similar phenomenon
for the recall of select national and international public events that mark time- and place-
specific collective experiences (Janssen et al., 2008; Rubin et al., 1998; Rubin & Schulkind,
1997). For example, asking German participants about their most accessible memories of
important national and international events over the second half of the twentieth century,
older adults mentioned more events related to World War II, whereas younger adults
mentioned more events related to the reunification of East- and West Germany (Schuman et
al., 1998). In line with the reminiscence effect, participants recalled events from their
adolescence and early adulthood more often. This finding has been made regardless of the
individual’s age at the time of questioning or the amount of time that passed since the event
(Schuman & Rodgers, 2004). This phenomenon is thought to not be restricted to events that
are cited by the participants themselves (i.e., in the free recall of events using interview
techniques) but has been suggested to extend to factual knowledge about public events if
assessed in recognition tests (Janssen et al., 2008; Rubin et al., 1998; Schuman & Corning,
2000). In research on individual differences, recognition tests are an established method to
measure knowledge efficiently and objectively, as responses are collected on standardized
knowledge questions. In contrast, in self-report methods capitalizing on the recall of events,
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 6
such as in the (un)cued citing of events (e.g., Schuman et al., 1998), the resulting responses
are more heterogeneous and, thus, less comparable across individuals (Munawar et al., 2018).
Moreover, recall is prone to accessibility phenomena (Rathbone et al., 2008) as well as
reconstructive errors in memory retrieval (e.g., Belli et al., 1997; Newman & Lindsay, 2009).
As we are interested in measuring standardized declarative knowledge rather than
individualized autobiographical memories, we opted for a recognition test in this study.
The assumption of a reminiscence bump in public events knowledge (PEK) relies on
collective memories—which refer to both events that have been personally experienced and
those learned about long after they have occurred (Schuman & Rodgers, 2004). Theoretically,
individuals of a cohort will better remember an event if they experience it during a critical
period in their adolescence and early adulthood (Schuman et al., 1997). One rationale for this
observation is that identity formation plays an important role at this stage (Conway et al.,
2005) because memories formed during this age period are suggested to be integral to the
self-narrative (Fitzgerald, 1988; Rathbone et al., 2017). Experiences made during this time,
thus, are rated to be more personally significant in maintaining this self-narrative (Rathbone
et al., 2017). Specifically, the finding of a reminiscence effect for high-impact events such as
9/11 in the U.S. or the German reunification that dominate a nation’s collective memory
(Tekcan et al., 2017) could be driven by their partly autobiographical quality (Abel &
Berntsen, 2021).
Alternatively (but not mutually exclusive to identity formation), the cognitive abilities
or maturation account is based on the premises that cognitive functions, including memory,
reach their optimum around age 20-25 with a steady decline in fluid abilities (Gf) afterward
(e.g., Baltes et al., 1998; Li et al., 2004; Murre et al., 2013; Salthouse, 2004), and that the life
span trajectories of (autobiographical) memory and cognitive ability are similar (Janssen,
2020). Consequently, not only many remarkable (e.g., novel and emotionally arousing) but
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 7
also ordinary and otherwise personally unimportant events should be recollected from the
lifetime period framing the bump (Janssen, 2020; see also Janssen & Murre, 2008 for
reported null-effects of various event characteristics on the retrieval of autobiographical
events). The cognitive abilities account could be most easily supported by findings of a
reminiscence bump for collectively experienced public events. In contrast to personal events,
the reminiscence of past public events (that are not directly self-experienced) is characterized
by a more dissociated sentiment and might, thus, be dampened in emotional arousal and
personal importance (e.g., Tekcan et al., 2017). However, Rubin et al. (1998) pointed out that
the cognitive abilities account is limited in its explanatory scope, as the decline of fluid
cognitive abilities and general intelligence is generally slower than what can be found for the
decline in memory performance after the reminiscence bump. Accordingly, other
explanations such as identity formation should be considered alongside cognitive maturation.
Whether the reminiscence effect broadly extends to non-personal public events, such
as those mapped in a knowledge test, has not yet been sufficiently clarified. Evidence from
studies using recognition tests has not been robust for a variety of methodological reasons
that will be described in the following. The question about the existence of a reminiscence
bump for PEK was first raised by Rubin et al. (1998), who tested older adults’ (M = 70)
age
factual knowledge about 300 public events taken from the preceding 70 years regarding three
broad categories: American Baseball World Series, Academy Awards, and most important
current events. They indeed found that more correct answers were given for events located in
the period in which the participants were between 11 and 30 years old (as compared to 31 to
50 years old). However, the reported finding about the reminiscence bump cannot be taken as
sufficiently conclusive, because it was not consistent across categories and could not be
replicated for a younger adult age group (M = 20), for whom the reminiscence phase only
age
extended to the recent past and present. Furthermore, the results were based on a small
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 8
sample (N = 60, of which only 30 were past the bump age), raising the probability of
capitalizing on chance. Particularly, small samples do not only lead to existing effects not
being detected but also to the reverse outcome of effect size inflation through the increased
publication of false positive results (as demonstrated by Bakker et al., 2012).
Evidence was also reported by Janssen et al. (2008), who tested an age-heterogeneous
sample of 1,334 Dutch participants (aged 16 to 75 years) on 15 open-ended and 15 multiple-
choice questions about news events that happened between 1950 and 2006. The items were
sampled unsystematically from news on international and Dutch national events,
entertainment, disasters, crimes, sports, science, and politics. For both types of questions, the
authors reported a statistically significant higher rate of correct answers for the period in
which participants were between 10 and 25 years of age (as compared to the periods before
and after that). However, they reported these results for deviation scores (i.e., differences
between expected probabilities of a correct response and the observed responses, see
Appendix B in Janssen et al., 2008) that depart from a genuine item response scaling. This is
problematic in the extremes of the scale (for both extremely difficult/easy items and
extremely knowledgeable/non-knowledgeable persons on a joint scale) and leads to biased
estimates. Moreover, in large samples, even small deviation scores can reach statistical
significance without reflecting sizeable effects of practical relevance.
Schuman and Corning (2000) assessed 2,421 adult Russians’ factual knowledge of
public names and events of the preceding 60 years and found no reminiscence bump for eight
of the nine queried items. Similarly, Schuman et al. (1997) reported reminiscence bumps for
knowledge of only a small subset of past events and public figures.
This heterogeneity in the literature complicates answering the question of whether a
reminiscence effect exists for PEK. In particular, the differential results may be explained by
methodological differences. For one, these include the use of free recall and reproduction
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 9
(e.g., Janssen et al., 2008) versus recognition measures; previous studies suggest a smaller
effect for the latter questioning method). Second, the sample age distribution, the recency of
events or both can affect results (e.g., the reminiscence effect might overlap with the recency
effect—the heightened recall of recent events—in younger samples; Janssen et al., 2011).
Third, the scope and method of item sampling vary between studies, from a few
unsystematically selected events (e.g., Schuman and Corning, 2000) to large item sets (Rubin
et al., 1998).
Individual Differences in the Acquisition of Factual Knowledge
In intelligence research, declarative knowledge is considered a key aspect of
crystallized intelligence (Gc), which is defined as the product of acculturation and learning
(Cattell, 1987; Horn & Noll, 1997). Gc results from socialization processes in the prevalent
culture, it is acquired through collective as well as idiosyncratic experiences (Baltes et al.,
1999). Ackerman (1996) introduced a theory of intellectual development (intelligence-as-
process, personality, interests, and intelligence-as-knowledge; PPIK) in which he
distinguishes between different types of declarative knowledge: general knowledge,
avocational knowledge (e.g., hobbies) and occupational knowledge (i.e., knowledge specific
to a vocation). However, the assignment of items to knowledge types by their content does
not succeed unambiguously, because the dividing lines are fuzzy. Another form of knowledge
distinction is driven by the context in which this knowledge is acquired: Occupational
knowledge is usually acquired in specialized training programs and on the job, avocational
knowledge is gathered through intensive engagement with a topic of personal interest
(Schneider & McGrew, 2018), and general knowledge is often imparted in formal education.
This distinction remains imperfect because people’s educational biographies are idiosyncratic
and unequivocal assignments of indicators to one form of knowledge or the other is hardly
possible.
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 10
In comparison to the aforementioned types of knowledge, current events knowledge—
which is used interchangeably for PEK in the intelligence literature (e.g., Beier & Ackerman,
2001)—is predominantly acquired incidentally. We prefer the term public events knowledge
as it implicates a broad cross-cohort event knowledge of an extended period. Consistent with
accounts from memory research, public events are mostly consumed via mass media and
initially stored in episodic memory with their time and place-specific features. However,
repeated communication can lead to their transition to semantic memory, where they are
stored as declarative knowledge (Baddeley et al., 2015; Coane et al., 2021). Relative to
episodic memory, which is more age-sensitive and begins declining in middle adulthood,
semantic memory often shows significant increases up to the sixties, cross-sectionally as well
as longitudinally (Nyberg et al., 2003; Rönnlund et al., 2005). Accordingly, the lifetime
trajectory of knowledge shows small, continued growth into late adulthood (Baltes et al.,
1998; Horn, 1982; Horn & Cattell, 1967; Watrin et al., 2022), which has led to the
assessment of adult intellect as age- or experienced-based (Ackerman, 1996). PEK
presumably shares substantial variance with avocational and general knowledge, because its
acquisition is influenced by both, personal interests (Beier & Ackerman, 2003; Rolfhus &
Ackerman, 1999) and collective experiences.
Covariates of (Public Events) Knowledge
The associations between PEK and traditional ability but also non-ability measures
(personality, interest, and other behavioral variables) have been investigated in several
studies. For instance, Beier and Ackerman (2001) reported large correlations between PEK of
events from the 1930s to the 1990s across four subdomains (art/humanities,
science/nature/technology, politics/economy, and pop culture) and a general knowledge test
(r > .70). Similar results were reported by Hambrick et al. (2007, 2008) for public events
knowledge spanning a smaller time frame of the most recent two years or recent ten weeks.
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 11
In the tradition of Ackerman's (1996) PPIK theory, important non-ability drivers of
knowledge acquisition are personality and individual interests. More specifically, intellectual
investment traits such as openness to experience in conjunction with the level of personal
interest in related topics regulate information-seeking activities in interaction with fluid
intelligence. This idea dates back to Cattel (1987) who argued for a differentiation of Gc
structures once mandatory education was completed in late adolescence (for an empirical
investigation see Watrin et al., 2022). After this period of education in widely standardized
and harmonized learning environments, Cattell believed that people were encouraged to
choose the learning and occupational pathways that best matched their interests, abilities, and
personal strengths, which promoted idiosyncratic learning trajectories. Thus, personality and
individual interests, as well as the intensity of exposure to news and media—a primary
information source on current and past public events—have also been investigated as
correlates of PEK (Beier & Ackerman, 2001; Hambrick et al., 2007, 2008; Meeter et al.,
2005). For example, Meeter et al. (2005) found that the individual level of news consumption
had a positive effect on initial learning of recent news. Openness to experience is the
personality domain with the strongest relations to intellect and information-seeking behavior
(e.g., Ackerman & Heggestad, 1997; Wilhelm et al., 2003). Furthermore, the association
between openness/intellect and knowledge was found to slightly increase from middle
adulthood on, implying a beneficial impact of trait intellect on knowledge development
(Watrin et al., 2022).
Several studies have reported mean level differences in knowledge tests often
favoring men over women (e.g., Ackerman et al., 2001; Steinmayr et al., 2015). However,
this gender gap in declarative knowledge depends to a large degree on item sampling and the
choice of the knowledge domains tested (e.g., Engelberg, 2015). For example, Beier and
Ackerman (2003) observed higher knowledge scores for women in health-related domains. In
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 12
the same vein, Schroeders and colleagues (2016) were able to compile short tests from a
larger item pool using metaheuristic item sampling techniques that either favored women or
men. To account for this potential bias, we included gender as a covariate.
The Present Study
The present study investigates the temporal distribution of PEK within the framework
of interindividual concepts of knowledge. Our first question is whether a reminiscence effect
can be found for PEK in an age-heterogeneous sample. Based on prior findings (Janssen et
al., 2008; Rubin et al., 1998) on temporal distributions of PEK, we expect to find a
reminiscence bump between an age-at-event from 10 to 30 years. Our second question relates
to the relationship between PEK and traditional Gc, openness to experience, news
consumption, and gender. Building on findings by Beier and Ackerman (2001), Hambrick et
al. (2007), and Watrin et al. (2022), we expect high positive correlations between PEK and
Gc, and moderate positive correlations of PEK (and Gc) with openness and news
consumption.
In answering these questions, our study extends previous studies that investigated the
temporal distribution of PEK with recognition tests and addresses some of the aspects that
contributed to heterogeneity in past findings. These are the questioning method, the sample
age distribution, and the item sampling method. Following traditions of Gc measurement, we
deliberately chose a declarative knowledge test, the method of inquiry that produced the most
inconclusive results in previous studies. In doing so, we explored the extent to which
inconclusive results from prior studies may be attributed to lower age coverage, lower
item/domain coverage, or low statistical power. We used a large age-heterogeneous sample to
boost the power of our analyses and to capture effects for multiple cohorts. Furthermore, the
item development relied on a broad and systematic sampling process across multiple domains
and decades, which resulted in one of the most comprehensive PEK tests used in the
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 13
investigation of the reminiscence bump to date.
Method
Transparency and Openness
Anonymized data and supplementary materials, including the full list of PEK
items in German and English, and analysis code, are available via an OSF repository at
at the respective places in the paper. Since online data collection was conducted according to
the guidelines of the German Society for Online Research (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Online-
Forschung, 2021) and in compliance with the European General Data Protection Regulations
no additional ethics approval was required. We report how we determined our sample size,
any data exclusions, all manipulations, and all measures in this study.
Participants
Initially, 1,106 participants were recruited via an online panel in fall 2021. To
estimate the sample size required to detect a small effect (Hedges g ≈ .20) of the bump phase
(before, during, and after the bump) on mean PEK scores, we performed a power analysis
with the R package simr (Green & MacLeod, 2016) based on pilot data. For a desired power
of 90%, this resulted in a minimum sample size of N = 400. However, we targeted N = 1,000
as we have planned further analyses of item-level differences between East and West
Germans beyond the current study with machine learning algorithms, for which Schroeders et
al. (2021) show that the degree of overfitting is markedly reduced with sample sizes of 1,000
and above (see also Riley et al., 2019a, 2019b, for sample size estimation for multivariate
prediction models). Participants were sampled from the German population of 30 to 80-year-
olds, such that the groups were balanced in size across five age groups and gender.
Participants were automatically excluded during the survey when they a) stated to have
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 14
grown up or spent most of their life in a country other than Germany, b) failed to answer all
questions of the public events and the Gc test, or c) failed at least one of two attention checks
(to select a designated answer in an extra item) implemented in the survey. During the data
cleaning process, participants were excluded if they a) spent less than 15 minutes completing
the survey (n = 78), b) achieved a PEK score at or below guessing probability (M ≤ .25, n =
24), or c) did not consent to further analysis of their data after completing the survey (n = 16).
This resulted in an analysis sample of N = 1,012 of whom 507 (50%) were female and 343
(34%) grew up or spent most of their life in East Germany. The participants’ mean age was
55.5 years (SD = 13.8). Overall, 353 participants (34.9%) reported having a secondary school
degree, 307 (30.3%) a vocational training qualification, 346 (34.2%) a university degree or
higher, 4 (0.4%) reported having no degree, and 2 participants (0.2%) reported no educational
background. Two participants (0.2%) reported still being in vocational training, 6 (0.6%)
being students, 526 (52.0%) being either employed, self-employed, or civil servants, 51 being
unemployed/job-seeking (5.0%), 383 being retired/pensioned (37.8%), 42 (4.2%) pursuing
1 provides an overview of the demographic sample composition and mean scores in the
knowledge tests, openness, and news consumption.
Measures
Public Events Knowledge Test
The public events knowledge test consisted of 120 items describing national and
international public events that had occurred between the years 1960 and 2019. Participants
had to choose the correct response out of four response options. Items were to a large part
selected from a pool of 150 items piloted in a convenience sample of 106 participants (M =
age
30.42, SD = 14.82, ranging from 15 to 81 years; 59% female). Items were constructed so
age
that they could be reliably assigned to a specific date or year and represented knowledge of
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 15
collective experiences of different age cohorts (i.e., generations for whom events from certain
eras were particularly salient) in Germany. Items were pre-classified into six domains
following previous taxonomies (Beier & Ackerman, 2001; Hambrick et al., 2007). A detailed
relating to the time before the German reunification in 1990 were constructed separately for
West and East Germany.
General Knowledge Test
Crystallized cognitive ability was measured with the BEFKI GC-Short Scale (Berlin
test of fluid and crystallized intelligence; Schipolowski et al., 2013). It consists of 12 general
declarative knowledge items that are sampled from 3 broad knowledge areas with 4 items
each: natural sciences (medicine, geography, biology, physics), humanities (religion, art,
philosophy, literature), and social sciences (politics, finance, law, history). For example,
“What is the purpose of mitosis?” asks about biological knowledge. The test has been
extensively used and offers representative norms for the German adult population
(Schipolowski, Wilhelm, Schroeders, et al., 2013).
Openness
Participants rated their openness to experience on nine items of a short scale of the
Trait-Self Description Inventory (Olaru et al., 2015) using a five-point scale from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Based on the Big Five Framework, it measures the facets of
intellectual (e.g., “I have a lot of intellectual curiosity”), reflective (e.g., “I spend a lot of time
analyzing my internal feelings”), and scientific interest (e.g., “I often think about the wonders
of nature”) with three items each.
News consumption
The level of current news consumption was measured with six items asking about the
weekly time (in minutes) participants usually spend on getting information about current
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 16
events and developments via sources such as print media (daily and weekly newspapers and
journals/magazines), online newspapers, online journals or magazines, news programs on the
TV, radio, podcasts, or social networks. Based on this information, a sum score indicating the
average weekly news consumption in hours was calculated. During data cleaning, extreme
values (> M + 3*SD) were excluded. As the resulting scale still showed a highly right-skewed
distribution, we log-transformed the scale after adding a negligible constant (one minute) to
all values (to avoid logarithmization of 0).
Interests
Participants were asked to state their interest in the fields of politics, economy, fine
arts, theater, literature, film, sports, celebrities, fashion, pop music, classical music, true
crime, science, and technology on a scale from 1 (not at all interested) to 5 (very interested).
Analyses
Confirmatory factor analyses were conducted to assess the psychometric properties of
the PEK, Gc, and openness scales. Model fit for continuous indicators (openness) was
evaluated based on suggestions by Hu and Bentler (1999): A Comparative Fit Index (CFI) ≥
.95, a Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) ≤ .06, and a Standardized Root
Mean Square Residual (SRMR) ≤ .08 were interpreted as indicators of good model fit. For
dichotomous indicators (PEK and Gc), which were modeled with the Weighted Least Squares
Mean and Variance adjusted estimator (WLSMV)—a robust asymptotic distribution-free
estimator for categorical variables—Yu (2002) recommends adjusting these cutoff values to
CFI ≥ .96 and RMSEA ≤ .05 for sample sizes of N ≥ 250. An exploratory factor analysis was
conducted on the 14 interest items. The associations between the knowledge measures,
openness, news consumption, and gender were additionally analyzed with structural equation
models. Analyses were conducted in the R programming environment (v.4.2.0; R Core Team,
2022) and structural equation models were estimated with the lavaan package (v.0.6.11;
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 17
Rosseel, 2012).
The temporal distribution of PEK was first described by modeling mean PEK scores
as a function of the participant’s age-at-event (i.e., the biological age of the participant at the
time an event occurred). Importantly, we thereby adopt a pseudo-longitudinal view at the
item level based on the distribution of PEK by age-at-event, rather than at the person level (as
is classically done in longitudinal studies investigating intraindividual differences). Thus, for
the same event, we record a different age-at-event for participants with different biological
ages. Age-at-event was aggregated into five-year age bins to display frequencies of correct
responses. The reminiscence bump is usually only found in samples of above 40-year-olds
because for younger adults the effect is obscured by the recency effect (Kawasaki et al.,
2011). Thus, to identify a possible reminiscence bump in the data of younger participants, it
is recommended to use smaller age bins of 4-5 years and/or to computationally remove the
recency effect from the distribution via other means (Janssen et al., 2011). Bearing in mind
the methodical issues associated with the calculation of deviation scores as proposed by
Janssen et al. (2008), we opted for a more straightforward solution to control for the recency
effect, by excluding the last item decade from the PEK distribution in the analyses. This
simple approach can also be applied to the original proportion correct score, which facilitates
interpretation. However, we also report the analysis of the distribution of PEK by age-at-
event in deviation scores, as preregistered, and exploratory item-level analyses in the online
We also preregistered nonlinear mixed-effects models (Davidian & Giltinan, 2003) to
study nonlinear trends in PEK distributions over the age-at-event. However, we did not
conduct these analyses because the precondition was not met (i.e., the presence of a
reminiscence bump). Instead, to assess the effects of covariates, we added structural equation
models integrating PEK, Gc, openness to experience, news consumption, and gender.
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 18
Results
Confirmatory and Exploratory Factor Analyses
PEK items were removed from the scale if they were too difficult, that is, had mean
difficulties). Unidimensional measurement models were estimated for each of the six
this study, item selection was necessary: Items were removed if they had low factor loadings
(λ <. 10) or their exclusion considerably improved model fit as indexed by CFI (≥ .90). To
capture the multidimensionality underlying all PEK items, a model with six domain scores as
was established (Little et al., 2013).
For the Gc scale, a parsimonious one-factor solution showed good fit: ²(54, N =
1,012) = 72.66, p = .046, CFI = .982, RMSEA = .018, SRMR = .064; ω = .63. For the
openness scale, a higher-order model was specified, in which the intellectual, reflective, and
scientific facets loaded on general openness, ²(24, N = 1,012) = 147.91, p < .001, CFI =
.934, RMSEA = .071, SRMR = .050, ω = .85. Means, standard deviations, and zero-order
correlations of the PEK, Gc, openness, and interest scales, as well as age, and weekly news
Based on a prior parallel analysis four factors were extracted from the interest items,
using maximum likelihood estimation: interest in politics and economy, interest in arts and
literature, interest in pop culture and entertainment topics, and interest in science and
technology—together explaining 55% of the variance. As interest in sports loaded equally on
two factors (λ = .30), it was excluded from the model. The model showed adequate fit: ² (32,
N = 1,012) = 137.73, p < .001, Tucker Lewis Index = .941, RMSEA = .057, 90% CI[.048,
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 19
observed means, standard deviations, and factor reliabilities. Correlations of the interest
similar correlations between the interest scales and 102 PEK items). Interest in science and
technology and interest in politics and economy were not only correlated with PEK in the
corresponding field (r = .33 and .38, respectively) but also with PEK in other fields to similar
magnitudes, whereas for interest in arts and literature and interests in pop culture and
entertainment, the correlations with PEK were lower. In the structural equation models, the
interest factors were not included, since their addition worsened the model fit substantially.
Temporal Distributions of Public Events Knowledge
participant’s age at the time of the event, which was aggregated into age bins of five years. A
rough segmentation of the data showed that approximately 29% of the participants’ responses
referred to events that had occurred before the participants turned 10 years old.
Approximately 31% of the responses referred to events that had happened when the
participants were between 10 and 29 years old, and 40% of the responses referred to events
that had happened between ages-at-event 30 to 79. For example, while 70-year-olds in the
sample responded only to events that occurred earliest at the age-at-event 9, 30-year-olds also
responded to many events that occurred up to 31 years before their birth.
The most important finding was that mean PEK scores gradually increased until the
participants reached the age-at-event of approximately 10 years, but afterward, the average
scores generally remained at a comparable level, with only a small decline toward the eldest
participants’ latest years. Note that the measurement precision decreases at age-at-event ≥ 75
because very few people were included in the calculations for this age bin, as indicated by the
stratified by age group and item decade (see Figures S2A and S2B in OS1). A stratification
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 20
for the domain of science and technology, where mean scores gradually decreased from the
ages at events before birth to the most recent years. This might point toward a slow-paced
knowledge dissemination in earlier periods, on the one hand, and fast-paced technological
and scientific progress in recent times, on the other hand.
A reanalysis of the distribution after excluding events of the latest ten years (i.e., 2010
implying that the recency of events only had minimal impact on PEK scores. Line graphs of
mean trajectories stratified by participant age group and item decade (Figures 2A and 2B)
showed a similar pattern—some variance in PEK before age-at-event 5 to 10 and very similar
trajectories after the first decade of life—with the 60- and 70-year-olds scoring highest at
age-at-event -5 to 5. Stratification by the PEK domain revealed deviating trajectories between
crimes/accidents/disasters showed slightly higher increases than the other domains, whereas
knowledge in politics and economy peaked around age-at-event 35 and decreased markedly
after 45. While these result patterns point out variance in temporal distributions mostly by
knowledge domain, none of these trajectories showed a characteristic reminiscence bump,
rendering the preregistered nonlinear modeling inexpedient in the absence of a clearly
determinable nonlinear function with which to describe characteristic points of such a
trajectory.
A linear mixed-effects analysis was conducted to compare the mean PEK scores of
the expected reminiscence bump period at ages-at-event 10 to 29 years (cutoff at 29 due to
the structuring into 5-year age bins) with the periods before (age-at-event -31 to 9) and after
this (age-at-event 30 to 69). Such a mixed-effects analysis accounts for the multilevel
structure of the data (as age-at-event is nested within individuals) and the effect of the time in
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 21
which an event happened (before, in, or after the designated bump period) presents a fixed
(i.e., between-person) effect. The results showed a statistically significant difference between
mean scores of the designated bump period (M = .64) and the period before that (M = .61,
SE = .005), t(1,686) = -4.53, p < .001, which was, however, of practically negligible effect
ΔM
size, Hedge’s g = 0.14, 95%-CI(g) = [0.05; 0.23]. Furthermore, no substantive difference in
mean scores was found between the supposed bump period and the period after that (M = .64,
SE = .006), t(1,694) = 1.84, p = .157, Hedge’s g = -0.02, 95%-CI(g) = [-0.11; 0.08]. Thus,
ΔM
in contrast to our expectations and previous findings, no reminiscence bump between age-at-
event 10 to 30 was found in the trajectory of PEK. Results for the deviation score approach
are reported in OS2. Deviations from the expected scores generally varied little (M = 0.01,
SD = 0.09) and mean differences between the supposed bump and pre- and post-bump
periods reached statistical significance but were of negligible effect size. Additionally, to
demonstrate the erratic nature at the item level, we provided the temporal distributions for the
10 items with the highest variance in PEK mean scores by age-at-event in OS3. For these 10
items, different trajectories emerged, but there was no clear pattern for a reminiscence bump
on the age-at-event axis observable. Given a sufficiently large item pool, we think that
theoretically any distributional form could be compiled post hoc through systematic item
selection (e.g., a bimodal distribution). Therefore, one must be careful not to succumb to
some kind of hindsight bias in selecting an item set that corroborates a certain trend in the
bigger picture.
Structural Equation Models
A structural equation model with PEK regressed on participant’s Gc, openness, news
consumption, and gender had unsatisfying fit, ²(69, N = 1,012) = 446.43, p < .001, CFI =
.871, RMSEA = .074, SRMR =.052. We considered that this lack of fit might be due to a lack
of measurement invariance of model estimates between men and women. We subsequently
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 22
applied multigroup structural equation modeling with increasing parameter equality
constraints. Metric measurement invariance (i.e., equivalent factor loadings) and equivalent
regression weights across groups were established with adequate fit: ²(134, N = 1,012) =
375.73, p < .001, CFI = .944, RMSEA = .060, SRMR = .053 (for the complete measurement
= 0.93) and women (β = 0.85). Small to moderate positive predictive effects were also found
for openness and news consumption on Gc, whereas the same effects were statistically
insignificant for predicting PEK. Collectively, Gc, openness, and news consumption
explained 81% of the variance in men’s PEK and 68% of the variance in women’s PEK. The
negligible effects of news consumption and openness on PEK are explained by the
simultaneous inclusion of Gc in the model, which accounts for most of the variance in PEK.
That is, when PEK was not controlled for Gc, the effects of news consumption (β = 0.26,
men
β = 0.27) and openness (β = 0.18, β = 0.16) on PEK appeared in the positive
women men women
direction and showed statistical significance, all p < .001. The participants’ region of
socialization was not a statistically significant predictor of PEK, but considerably worsened
model fit (²[147, N = 1,012] = 439.43, p < .001, CFI = .896, RMSEA = .063, SRMR = .056
in the metric measurement invariant model), which is why it was not included in this model.
Discussion
Previous research has not given a conclusive answer to the question of whether
knowledge about public events is more easily learned during a “sensitive” phase in life,
namely adolescence and early adulthood. The present findings do not provide evidence for a
reminiscence effect in PEK. Instead, the average trajectory of PEK (before and after
correcting for a recency effect) indicated that mean knowledge was—by a very small
amount—lower for events that had happened before the participants’ birth than for events
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 23
that happened afterward. After the age-at-event of five, knowledge levels did not decline up
to the oldest ages, mimicking trajectories of Gc (see e.g., Baltes et al., 1999; Tucker-Drob,
2019; Watrin et al., 2022). This pattern was found regardless of item decade or participant
age group.
The current null findings concerning a reminiscence bump at the global and domain
levels substantiate the notion that the reminiscence bump is not pronounced for PEK as
measured with recognition tests (Koppel & Berntsen, 2016; Janssen et al., 2008). Prior
reports of a reminiscence bump in PEK by Janssen et al. (2008) might be inflated by the use
of deviation scores, which facilitate misinterpreting trivial effects as practically relevant (see
OS2). The trajectory in terms of proportions of correctly answered items provides a robust
and intuitively interpretable finding: Once people had the opportunity to have actively
experienced the events in question or come to know about them through other forms of
learning, knowledge levels stayed relatively robust across the age-at-event timeline.
As far as knowledge acquisition and retention is concerned, this transfers to an
advantage for generations that were already alive at the time of an event and decreasing
knowledge about these events across generations (see also Schuman et al., 1997). In
knowledge assessment, this advantage will persist for participants of higher age for
knowledge items related to earlier decades (Janssen et al., 2008). Such intergenerational
effects stand alongside secular gains in intelligence (Trahan et al., 2014), which also affect
performance in Gc tests (e.g., Lazaridis et al., 2022). The extent to which these effects might
offset each other is not clear. Importantly, this demonstrates that comparability of knowledge
performance across cohorts in cross-sectional designs is challenging (including issues of
measurement invariance). Most likely, the variance in knowledge performance associated
with aging is attributable to both chronological age and cohort effects (Tucker-Drob &
Briley, 2014), which are confounded in the present study due to the cross-sectional design.
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 24
For declarative factual knowledge acquisition, on the one hand, individual experiences that
accumulate with age are relevant (Ackerman, 2000; Beier & Ackerman, 2005). On the other
hand, cohort effects play an important role in questions related to historical events or social
trends (e.g., “What clothing item became fashionable in the early 1970s?”), as era-specific
societal influences prevail (Schroeders et al., 2021). To separate cohort and age effects in
life-course trajectories, more complex study designs are necessary, such as longitudinal
multicohort studies. This way, both the normative biological and cultural trajectories over
several epochs and the trajectories caused by what Cattell (1970) called ‘epogenic’ effects—
attributed to the specific historical events of an epoch—could be modeled.
We found differences in mean PEK trajectories by knowledge domain for the period
after the bump. PEK in crimes/accidents/disasters as well as arts and literature showed more
growth beyond adolescence and early adulthood than in the other domains (for similar results
in declarative knowledge in the humanities, see Watrin et al., 2022). By contrast, for the
domain of science and technology higher knowledge performance was achieved for historical
events occurring before the participants’ birth. An explanation might be that the
dissemination of knowledge about developments in science and technology often occurs
many years after the scientific or technological milestones were first reported, in part because
their social significance is often not evident at the time of their inception (e.g., artificial
insemination in medical science). Furthermore, in the digital age, the “half-life of
knowledge” has decreased. This difference in trajectories by domain might correspond with
the increasing influences of individual interests and personality on knowledge acquisition
with age (e.g., for pop cultural or artistic/literary content; Ackerman, 1996), or might indicate
how long certain knowledge is available in the media or is considered worthy of transmission
(e.g., for scientific/technological content; see also (Schroeders et al., 2021). However, cohort
effects must be considered, which are difficult to separate from such effects in the cross-
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 25
sectional design of the present study.
Public Events Knowledge as Experience-Based Knowledge
The direct, personal experience of events is at the intersection of PEK and
autobiographical knowledge (Abel & Berntsen, 2021). Brown (1990) provided evidence that
people tend to encode facts about public events along with information on the personal
contexts in which they first learned about the events. This has, for example, been
demonstrated for 9/11 (Denver et al., 2010) and the Paris attacks in November 2015
(Gandolphe & El Haj, 2017). Sporadic findings of a small reminiscence effect in PEK might
therefore be driven by the autobiographical content of these public events when experienced
firsthand. This would also explain findings of a reminiscence bump in studies that ask about
favorite music or popular songs (e.g., Rathbone et al., 2017; Zimprich, 2020), for which
personal significance and emotional arousal play a role. Identification with the music listened
to in adolescence and early adulthood affects the self-narrative markedly (Holmes &
Conway, 1999), which later facilitates recall of these experiences. Notably, the current results
do not contradict findings of a reminiscence bump for (cued) open-ended response formats
(i.e., reproduction and recall) but suggest different memory activation mechanisms (such as
an event’s accessibility or distinctiveness). Specifically, semantic knowledge of non-
autobiographical events as it was tested in the present study seems more detached from the
emotional experience, novelty, personal importance, or cultural life scripts (i.e., culturally
shared expectations regarding important and emotionally loaded life events; Rubin &
Berntsen, 2003), which elsewhere have been shown to influence the strength of
autobiographical memories (e.g., Berntsen & Rubin, 2004; Tekcan et al., 2017; Wolf &
Zimprich, 2016). This would explain why we did not observe a reminiscence bump and
suggests that the autobiographical characteristics of PEK are marginal. We are limited in
confirming this interpretation, however, because we did not investigate emotional arousal,
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 26
novelty, or personal importance in association with the numerous public events investigated
in the present study. Given the lack of a reminiscence bump in this study, however, such
analyses seem secondary at this point.
On the other hand, the cognitive abilities account proposes that all kinds of events
from adolescence and early adulthood, independent of the above-mentioned event
characteristics, should be encoded more intensely due to the increased efficiency of the
memory system and cognitive processing at that age (Janssen, 2020). Consequently, the lack
of a reminiscence bump for public events questions an explanatory account based on fluid
cognitive abilities and their age-associated trajectory. Notably, the absence of a reminiscence
bump for PEK might be potentially disappointing for some researchers—that is, a “bummer”,
as alluded to in the study’s title—in light of previous positive findings. However, the findings
do not dismiss the general existence of the phenomenon but reveal a more complex picture.
Considering the empirical support for a reminiscence bump, especially for autobiographic
memory, but also for specific knowledge domains, its emergence seems to be contingent on
the contribution of events/memories to identity formation, the personal significance, and the
emotional arousal of events—which, however, was not investigated in this study.
This study is the first to address the latent structure of PEK. It provides indications of
a multidimensional structure of PEK with high correlations between the subdimensions,
which could most likely be consolidated into a hierarchical structure, as seen in the structure
of Gc (Steger et al., 2019). The strong association between PEK and Gc in the present study
underscores that PEK can be understood as a form of declarative knowledge (see also Beier
& Ackerman, 2001) and serves as a validation of the PEK measure within a broader cognitive
framework. Additionally, we see the expected positive influences of openness to experience
and news consumption on Gc, as well as a small to moderate correlation between openness to
experience and news consumption, underpinning that information-seeking behavior and
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 27
habitual intellectual traits are effective contributors to knowledge acquisition. The same
extends to associations of PEK with personal interests. Together with typical intellectual
engagement and openness to experience, interests (especially in Realistic, Investigative, and
Artistic themes according to Holland, 1997) are considered to “determine the intensity and
direction of intellectual investment” (Ackerman, 2000, p. 71). This study partly supports prior
findings (Ackerman, 2000; Ackerman & Heggestad, 1997) in terms of investigative interests,
as we found small to moderate positive correlations between interests in science/technology
on knowledge in the same PEK field as well as the other PEK domains (these correlations are
presumably mediated, in part, by Gf, which explains substantive variance in science and math
achievements; see e.g., Schroeders et al., 2015). However, the same was found for interest in
politics and economy, whereas for artistic interests, there were only low correlations with all
PEK domains. Though a comparison with studies by Ackerman and colleagues may not be
entirely valid, given that, unlike the general knowledge they studied in these contexts, PEK is
predominantly acquired incidentally, that is, without externally directing influences (such as
dictated academic curricula or vocational training subjects). In this respect, the influence of
personal interest areas on PEK may need to be understood less as a systematic steering
component toward knowledge acquisition in specific areas and more as a general driver of
broad intellectual engagement and information seeking, similar to effects of intellectual open-
mindedness (see Watrin et al., 2022).
Limitations
Item selection is always expert selection rather than random selection (Loevinger,
1965), and the breadth of knowledge a person possesses cannot be exhaustively captured by a
single instrument. Accordingly, there is an inherent influence of item selection on baseline
rates of knowledge. As we saw in our exploratory item-level analyses the trajectories differ
greatly, demonstrating the issue of capitalizing on chance in arbitrary item selection. Thus, it
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 28
is important to use a broad, systematic sampling of items as we did in the current study and
not to cherry-pick items/events for which a desired trajectory appears. Considering
individuals, different biographies will produce different sets of experiences and knowledge.
Conventional tests of declarative knowledge commonly do not do justice to this fact, as only
prototypical knowledge is queried, which may arguably disadvantage people with divergent
biographies or cultural backgrounds (Watrin et al., 2023).
Furthermore, the present study focuses on the recognition of public events using a
multiple-choice response format rather than an open-ended one, which has been reported to
be more age-sensitive (Janssen et al., 2008; see also Goecke et al., 2022 for the structural
consistency of closed and open-ended standardized knowledge tests). We deem it important
to complement and further explain the current results by concurrently investigating closed
and open-ended response formats to further explore a potential reminiscence bump. This
would help in understanding and delineating distinct forms of knowledge elicited by different
test formats—namely, autobiographical vs. declarative knowledge.
Conclusion
This study’s findings challenge the notion of a universal reminiscence bump as
suggested by the cognitive abilities account. The absence of a reminiscence bump in PEK
implies a focal role of event features such as personal significance, emotional arousal, and
identity formation in the phenomenon’s occurrence. It seems likely that the interplay between
these event features drives the occurrence of a reminiscence bump. Additionally, this study
advances our understanding of the nature of PEK, highlighting its connection to incidental
learning, cognitive abilities, personality traits, and interests, and underscores the importance
of considering multiple methods to study age-related differences in memory and knowledge.
PUBLIC EVENTS KNOWLEDGE 29