DOI: 10.31235/os.io/zhvn5
“Bordering on Excess”: Perceptions of
Fan Obsession in Anime Fans, Furries,
and Star Wars Fans
Dr. Stephen Reysen, Texas A & M University-Commerce
Dr. Courtney N. Plante, Bishop’s University
Grace Packard, Georgia State University
Dr. Sharon E. Roberts, Renison University College, University of Waterloo
Dr. Kathleen C. Gerbasi, Niagara County Community College
Abstract characteristic of specific fandoms. We
discuss these findings in the context of
In the present research, we examine existing fan literature as well as their
what it means for fans to take their implications, both practical and for
interests “too far” in a multi-fandom, future research.
qualitative study. Specifically, we asked
self-identified anime fans, furries, and Keywords: Fanship, Fandom, Obsession,
Star Wars fans to describe what, to Excess, Identity
them, marked the point where a fan
could be said to be taking their interest Introduction
too far. From these responses we
extracted five common themes across The word fan is derived from the
fandoms: (1) when one’s fan interest term fanatic (Smith et al., 2007) and
negatively impacts their life, (2) when refers to a passionate and loyal supporter
one’s fan interest becomes the sole or of a particular interest (Reysen &
defining feature of their personality, (3) Branscombe, 2010). Contemporarily, we
when one’s fan-related opinions are tend to think of the term “fan” as one
pushed on others, (4) when a fan loses that rose to public awareness alongside
touch with reality, and (5) when there is nationally and internationally celebrated
a connection between one’s fan interest media spectacles (e.g., sports teams,
and their sexual desire. We also note that musicians, television shows, game
anime fans cited a unique, sixth theme, franchises). However, “fans” have
when fans excessively worship Japanese existed long before the widespread use
culture. The responses suggest that of term, with ardent supporters of an
excessive fan behavior may be interest usually being conceptualized
ubiquitous across fandoms, although with a negative connotation—a sort of
there may be idiosyncratic excesses pathology or abnormal obsession to be
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, No. 1, August 2022 1
avoided (Cavicchi, 2014). Modern fans, 2016), there has been comparatively
as a group, are still burdened with this little research looking at perception of
historical baggage, and frequently find fan behavior from fans themselves.
themselves stereotyped by non-fans as To address this limitation in the
mindless consumers, recklessly psychological literature, the present
enthusiastic, obsessed, immature, paper examines fans’ perceptions of
detached from reality, psychologically what constitutes extreme fan behavior.
dysfunctional, or simply as losers Given that there are idiosyncrasies and
(Jenkins, 1992). differing norms with different fan groups
To say that these negative (Plante et al., 2018), we assessed fan
stereotypes are completely unfounded perceptions in three distinct fandoms
would be to ignore prominent examples which differ with respect to their
of extreme and excess behavior from at mainstream acceptance. We first review
least some fans. For instance, fans have the existing literature on excessive fan
been known to write threatening letters behavior and then report the results of
to content creators (Dietz et al., 1991), our three-fandom study. We finish by
stalk celebrities (McCutcheon et al., contextualizing the results within the
2016), and engage in violence and existing literature, discuss the practical
rioting at sporting events (Wann & and theoretical implications, review the
James, 2019). These behaviors are far study’s limitations, and suggest some
more likely to be the exception rather potential future directions for this line of
than the rule, the oft-publicized excesses research.
of a small, but visible and vocal minority
of fans. As previously-niche fandoms Extreme Fan Behavior: Celebrity-
grow and make their way into Stalking
mainstream culture, the number of
“normal” or “typical” fans grows, and Among the most-studied examples of
more modest fan behaviors that were extreme fan behavior in the field of
once considered deviant simply for psychology is that of celebrity worship.
being unusual gradually come to be Researchers studying celebrity worship
normalized (Smith et al., 2007). have created measures, adapted from
Moreover, recent theorizing suggests measures of more routine fan
that perceptions of whether moderate or engagement among sport fans, aimed at
innocuous fan behavior is considered measuring the extent to which fans
extreme is affected by who is viewing derive entertainment from celebrities,
the phenomenon (e.g., outsiders or whether fans feel a sense of personal
insiders) (Chung et al., 2018). However, connection to celebrities, and, most
while there has been research looking at presently relevant, whether the fan’s
stereotypes about fan behavior from interest in celebrities is pathological in
outsiders and non-fans (Reysen & Shaw, nature (e.g., Maltby et al., 2002;
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 2
McCutcheon et al., 2002). Among the measures regarding fan stalking and
pathological elements of celebrity celebrity attitudes. Obnoxious fan
worship assessed are items about the activity was positively associated with
desire to learn about the celebrity, greater perceptions that stalking a
willingness to engage in illegal behavior celebrity is appropriate. In effect, the
on behalf of the celebrity, and desire to study revealed that obnoxious fan
own objects from the celebrity (e.g., behaviors are associated with extreme
napkin). Brooks (2018) notes, in a beliefs—in this case, extreme beliefs
review of research using the measure of about the acceptability or perceived
celebrity attitudes, that pathological fan normality of celebrity worship and
behavior is associated with variables potentially illegal behaviors. The
such as neuroticism, boredom proneness, aforementioned studies also illustrate the
fantasy proneness, dissociation, importance of getting a fan perspective
obsessive-compulsive behaviors, to provide insight into extreme fan
negative affect, and compulsive buying. behavior rather than relying solely on the
High scores on these scales tend to be perspectives and stereotypes of
fairly rare, however, and as Stever outsiders.
(2011) points out, a distinction must be Beyond celebrity worship,
made between average fans and more researchers have also assessed sport
extreme celebrity worshippers, who are fans’ compulsive consumption of sport-
fairly rare to find. Nevertheless, the related content and memorabilia. Aiken
measure illustrates that fan behavior falls et al. (2018), for example, measured
along a continuum, and that fans can fall frequency of consumption and thoughts
at the extreme ends of this continuum. about consumption, inability to stop
In a related line of research, consuming, and centrality of sports to
Spitzberg and Cupach (2008) one’s life. Greater compulsive
constructed a 60-item measure of fan- consumption was associated with both
celebrity pursuant behaviors (e.g., positive and negative affect,
visiting person’s website, waiting at the extraversion, team identification,
person’s hotel) that U.S. college students obsessive passion, and other behavioral
completed with respect to their favorite measures (e.g., neglecting obligations,
celebrity. The results revealed a two- using sport to cope with life). In fact,
factor structure to the scale, one this compulsive consumption was a
involving stalking-related activities (e.g., stronger predictor of other undesirable
sending unwanted gifts) and the other behavioral outcomes than other variables
involving more routine fandom activities typically assessed in fan studies (e.g.,
(e.g., seeking autographs). In a later passion and identification), illustrating
study, McCutcheon et al. (2016) that compulsivity, and not necessarily
assessed 18 of these behaviors, termed simply being passionate about something
“obnoxious fan activities,” along with or identifying as a fan, may be the
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 3
“active ingredient” in the mindset of In a related line of research, Smith et
extreme fans that ultimately drives rare al. (2007) interviewed self-described
instances of harmful fan behaviors. fanatics about their fan interests. The
researchers placed advertisements in
Fan-Perceptions of Typical and several local newspapers asking for
Extreme Behavior participants who were avid
watcher/participants, or intense
To this point, we have described collectors, of a particular interest. Nine
research that takes as its starting point participants were videotaped talking
specific undesirable fan behaviors (e.g., about their interest, and, when
stalking). Other researchers have taken a applicable, about their collection.
different approach by interviewing fans Extracted themes from the interviews
to get their perspective on what involved (1) consumption as pleasurable
constitutes more typical fan behavior. and highly personalized, (2) fans using
Thorne and Bruner (2006), for example, upward social comparison to justify
interviewed 88 members of the Star increasingly extreme behavior (e.g.,
Trek, science fiction, and gaming there is a person with a bigger
fandoms. The fans indicated themes of collection), and (3) feeling pity for those
(1) internal involvement (i.e., without an interest, rather than feeling
time/energy investment), (2) desire for stigmatized for their own interest.
external involvement (e.g., attending Whereas fans in this study
conventions), (3) wish to acquire conceptualized excessive fan
possessions, and (4) desire for social consumption in mostly positive or
interaction (e.g., evangelism). Dwyer et neutral terms, Chung et al. (2009), who
al. (2018) likewise interviewed 12 sport interviewed six fans of various brands
fans regarding “fervent and repeated (e.g., Nike, Louis Vuitton), found
behavior related to their favorite sport decidedly more negative themes: (1)
team” (p. 66), and extracted themes of negative emotions due to lack of space
(1) instigation (antagonistic interaction for one’s collection, (2) overspending,
with outgroups), (2) commitment, (3) and (3) harming one’s relationships with
vicarious impact (outward behavior others. Taken together, these studies
during games), and (4) superstition demonstrate that among fans—
(ritualistic behavior). The two studies especially more ardent fans—extreme
reveal that fandoms often differ with fan behavior can be conceptualized in a
respect to typical fan behavior, which is dualistic fashion, embodying both
consistent with prior research suggesting positive and negative elements.
that members of different fan groups Another way to conceptualize this
may also differ with respect to their dualism is a conflict between competing
motivations (Schroy et al., 2016). desires in fans: On the one hand,
wanting to be seen as a real, serious
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 4
member of the fan group by “proving” that asks fans, themselves, to list what
one’s interest is genuine, while on the constitutes undesirable fan behavior in
other hand wanting to avoid veering into light of the fact that many fans engage,
extremism and the stereotypes associated to some extent or another, in more
with it. Fans do their best to walk this moderate versions of those same
fine line, as seen through the boundaries behaviors.
they construct to try and exclude or
ostracize undesirable members of the Present Study
fandom (i.e., gatekeeping: Plante et al.,
2020) and the norms that form within The purpose of the present research
fan groups, which dictate what behaviors is to examine fans’ perceptions of
and attitudes are and are not acceptable extreme fan behavior within their own
(Stanfill, 2013). Stanfill, for example, fandom, specifically asking fans to
interviewed 13 Xena: Warrior Princess indicate, in an open-ended fashion,
fans about the stereotypes that exist examples of what constitutes extreme
surrounding excessive fan behavior. fan behavior to them. To obtain results
Despite being fairly passionate fans that generalize across a multitude of
themselves, the participants perceived fandoms, we recruited members of three
undesirable fan behavior as something different fan groups that differ in the
that other fans engaged in, fitting the extent to which they have reached the
“bad fan” stereotype. Participants in the level of mainstream appeal (e.g., Reysen
study emphasized that other fans place & Shaw, 2016). At one end of the
too much importance on the show, spend spectrum, Star Wars fans can claim to
too much money, know too much have fairly mainstream appeal as
useless information, are overly evidenced by the mainstream popularity
concerned with romances on the show, of the new trilogy of Star Wars films and
and sometimes lose touch with reality. In the ubiquity of Star Wars merchandise in
short, fans try to straddle the link mainstream culture. On the other end of
between actively engaging in desirable the spectrum, furries, fans of media
fan-related behavior while avoiding featuring anthropomorphized animal
doing so to excess and condemning characters, represent a heavily
those who do. Notably, however, this stigmatized group deemed fairly atypical
research, like much of the other research and non-prototypical among fan
on this subject, began with a list of cultures. Anime fans, fall somewhere
negative stereotypes about fans, between these two extremes, being
employing a top-down approach to acknowledged and recognized within
understanding negative fan behaviors. mainstream culture, while still
What is sorely missing from the research maintaining its status as a somewhat
is a bottom-up approach to studying the fringe fan subculture.
idea of extreme behavior in fans, one
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 5
Participants in the current study were describe, in an open-ended fashion,
self-identified Star Wars fans, anime when fans went “too far.”
fans, and furries. They were all asked to
describe, in an open-ended fashion, Materials
when they thought fans had gone “too
far” in their fan activities. As noted in We asked fans to describe when fans
the introduction, prior research has went too far with respect to their fan
focused on the illegal behaviors (e.g., interest (“In your own words, do you
stalking), has tended to apply a top- think it’s possible for an anime fan to
down approach to studying extreme fan take their interest in anime too far and, if
behavior, and has largely examined these so, when do you think that may be?”). In
themes exclusively in interviews with the furry and Star Wars samples we
self-described fanatics. The present replaced anime with the fandom being
research differs in that we asked fans sampled. We initially coded the
about their perceptions about fan responses for anime fans and then used
extremism rather than provide to them the same codes for furry and Star Wars
specific examples of extreme behavior. fans. Indeed, with the exception of one
Furthermore, we have included three category (i.e., Japan), the themes fit the
fandoms to examine which perceptions vast majority of responses across both
of extreme fan behavior are unique to a furry and Star Wars fandoms. Upon
specific fandom and which are present reading through the responses, we began
across fandoms. As this research is to distill a list of themes, which we
exploratory in nature, we have no a iteratively condensed until we arrived at
priori hypotheses. a set of five/six themes. We should note
that while many responses touched upon
Participants and Design multiple themes, there were a few that
did not fit into any of the themes (e.g.,
Participants were self-identified Star Wars fans indicating that going too
anime fans (N = 670, 53.6% male; M far included “Buying Funko Pops” or
age
= 24.87, SD = 8.07), furries (N = 174, “Reagan’s proposed missile defense
69.5% male; M = 30.14, SD = 9.50), shield in the 1980s”).
age
and Star Wars fans (N = 176, 56.8%
male; M = 27.47, SD = 8.51) recruited Results
age
from various fan-related websites and, in
the case of anime fans, a portion were Of the participants that responded to
also recruited at a regional fan the question, the overwhelming majority
convention in Dallas, TX. As part of of fans agreed that fans can, and do, go
larger studies regarding their respective too far in their interest at times (see
follow are drawn specifically from those
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 6
fans who agreed that fans can go too far instead of paying your bills, or
(anime n = 639, furry n = 161, Star Wars getting in trouble at work for
n = 167). For each theme we provide a messing around with your hobby
brief overview of the theme’s content as instead of doing your job) then
well as illustrative examples. They are you've taken your interests too far.”
presented here from most to least- – Anime fan
commonly expressed.
“If it impairs daily functioning
Theme 1: Life (shelter, food, employment or school
if applicable), if impacts safety of
The first theme—life—refers to someone, or if it interferes with other
those for whom their participation in fan important parts of a person's life as
activities impedes their ability to valued by them (e.g. family, friends,
function in day-to-day life (e.g., paying other hobbies).” – Furry
bills, harming relationships).
Respondents often mentioned “If someone’s interest in Star
specifically that when a fan interest Wars impacts their social or work
interferes with everyday responsibilities, life, their interest has gone too far.” –
this marks the threshold between healthy Star Wars fan
fan activities and harmful or obsessive
ones. Such behaviors can include Theme 2: Identity
spending more money than one has or
devoting all of one’s time to their A second theme extracted from the
interest. However, in general the responses reflects instances when a fan’s
responses tended to fall into an almost interest overtakes other facets of their
clinical definition of addiction wherein identity. Responses in this category
activities that harm oneself or others fit noted that fan interests became a
the definition of problematic. problem when they were all-consuming
or represented the only thing a fan was
“Yes - If it affects the quality of interested in. Another way to
life, health, (mental or physical) or conceptualize this theme is that fans see
safety of themselves or others in it as a problem when fans come to be
some way, or causes them solely defined by their interest. In a
impairment or distress somehow.” – related vein, some fans indicated that a
Anime fan symptom of this was to bring up one’s
fan interest nonstop around others,
“I think any time you get so into suggesting that it is the only thing the
something that it's negatively fan wants to engage with others about.
affecting your life or another's life
(e.g., you’re supporting your hobby
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 7
“Interest in anime (as for many bullying other fans and content creators
other things) I believe goes too far in their responses. Reminiscent of the
when it begins to dominate and shut research on celebrity stalking, Star Wars
out one’s other genuine interests.” – fans mentioned examples of actors (e.g.,
Anime fan Kelly Marie Tran, John Boyega, Ahmed
Best) who either withdrew from social
“While having a passion for media or who had experienced suicidal
anime is fine, once anime, ‘their ideation as a result racist backlash of
most favorite thing,’ becomes the being bullied by fans. Star Wars fans
defining feature of their character also mentioned gatekeeping and forms
and personality, it goes ‘too far.’ A of elitism as examples of fans pushing
person should be more rounded. I their opinions on other fans.
think that this applies to all hobbies.”
– Anime Fan “I believe that any person that
takes fandom too far to the point of
“When they literally cannot carry harassing/cause harm to other people
on a conversation without bringing need to evaluate themselves of how
up furry stuff. That’s when they have far they are willing to go before
gone too far.” – Furry crossing the line. We are all here to
enjoy and have some fun with other
“When a piece of media people of the same interest and have
consumes your life to the point discussions.” – Anime fan
where it becomes your entire
personality, it blinds you to other “Some fans of anime (not just
pieces of media as well as real-world anime actually, but fans of anything)
issues.” – Star Wars fan tend to try to shove their fandom
down other people’s throat. If
someone's not interested in the
Theme 3: Opinion slightest to something, you shouldn’t
try to force it on them, it is
The third-most common theme incredibly obnoxious.” – Anime fan
involves evangelizing or pushing one’s
opinions onto others (e.g., getting into “If they interact with regular
heated arguments about fan content, people in public with the ‘uwu-
exposing one’s fan interests in language,’ wearing ears and tails
inappropriate ways or in inappropriate without suit, making animal noises in
contexts). While this theme was lower public. Basically anything that would
on the list for anime fans and furries, it make a casual person VERY
was the most-mentioned theme among uncomfortable. There's no damage in
Star Wars fans, who often mentioned having fun for yourself, but it
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 8
shouldn’t be forced onto others.” – “I think anime fans who take
Furry their interests too far are the ones
who lose to touch with reality and
“When a person engages in fan think that the real world operates like
behavior which could have a an anime.” – Anime fan
negative impact on another person.
For example, a Star Wars fan may “I believe their is a point in
think a story arc in a new Star Wars which the escape the fandom offers
film/TV show etc. conflicts with can be taken too far, to the point of
previous SW canon. A constructive detachment from reality. While the
written critique or open discussion fandom offers great escapism, we are
laying out their reasoning is fine. all humans with real world
Spamming the social media accounts responsibilities. Its fun to identify
of the creator/writer/actors involved and roleplay as a cartoon animal, but
with profanity-ridden hyperbole or living in that headspace 24/7 can
bullying fans who don’t share their lead one to shirk real-world
opinion is definitely a step too far. A responsibilities and realities.” –
person’s right to enjoy something Furry
ceases when that right intrudes on
another individual.” – Star Wars fan “When they start forgetting that
Star Wars is simply fiction. It’s a
great story, with great movies and
Theme 4: Reality characters and books etc. But at the
end of the day, it isn’t real. Too far is
The fourth theme involves fans who when people begin to obsess over it
blur the lines between fantasy and and think that it’s real.” – Star Wars
reality, or who lose touch with reality fan
completely, people whom psychologists
might describe as being highly fantasy Theme 5: Sexual
prone, which has been associated with
dissociation (e.g., Waldo & Merritt, The fifth theme extracted involved
2000). This differs from the first theme concerns about fans’ unusual sexual
in that participants did not mention harm attraction, typically toward a fictional
to self or others in one’s life. character. In general, these responses in
some way linked sex with one’s fan
“When an anime fan is unable to interest, which may reflect the content of
distinguish between fantasy and stigmatizing stereotypes directed toward
reality, that is when they have taken fans from non-fans (e.g., Edwards et al.,
their interest too far.” – Anime fan 2019).
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 9
“When they have a waifu or buy characters is taking interest too far.”
a body pillow” – Anime fan – Anime fan
“It's too far when they think “It’s when someone believes that
hentai-ecchi stuff is normal and that Japanese culture is superior to every
they can sexually harass women or other culture and being to randomly
make people uncomfortable with put Japanese words in their sentences
their wardrobe or merch.” – Anime (speaking their native language) to
fan sound cool, cute, or some other
complimentary adjective.” – Anime
“There comes a point where it's fan
just too much. Zoophilia is a perfect
example, and so is basically using Discussion
the fandom to justify
actions/behaviorisms that would be The purpose of the present research
otherwise inappropriate. Examples was to provide a preliminary exploration
are mainly set in sexual deviancy, in of fans’ perception of extreme fan
my opinion.” – Furry behavior. Anime fans, furries, and Star
Wars fans responded relatively
“Getting off to alien characters consistently with respect to the themes
and only ever talking about this.” – of fan extremism that demarcate normal
Star Wars fan fanship from those fans who take their
interest “too far.” The themes included
Theme 6: Japan when (1) one’s fan interest negatively
impacts their day-to-day life, (2) the fan
The sixth theme—Japan—was only interest becomes the sole aspect of one’s
observed among anime fans and reflects personality, (3) one’s opinions are
an overzealous interest in Japan, the pushed onto others, (4) a fan loses touch
country from which anime originates. with reality, and (5) fans tie their fan
This is likely related to the term interest to their sexual desire.
weeaboo, which is commonly used by Furthermore, anime fans uniquely noted
anime fans to describe a person who that fans can also go too far when they
“worships pretty much anything that is worship the country of Japan as a result
Japanese or related to Japanese culture” of its being the country of anime’s
(Zeng, 2018, p. 248). origin.
To date, fan research has tended to
“I do believe this is possible in follow a top-down approach to studying
that setting Japanese culture as extreme fan behavior. For example,
portrayed by anime on a pedestal and researchers have focused on relatively
worshiping/glorifying fictional rare instances of celebrity stalking
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 10
(McCutcheon et al., 2016; Spitzberg & lead one to conclude that fan stalking is
Cupach, 2008) in which they impose among the most prominent of extreme
definitions of stalking and seek to and troublesome fan behaviors, none of
quantify its prevalence (e.g., Aiken et the fans in the present study mentioned
al., 2018), conduct interviews to support stalking (although one could consider
their theories on the subject of fan the cyber bullying mentioned by Star
extremism (e.g., Thorne & Bruner, Wars fans in particular as a form of
2006), test the veracity of negative cyber stalking—though this is rarely
stereotypes about fans (Stanfill, 2013), how researchers conceptualize celebrity
or ask fans to examine their own stalking). This suggests that, going
potentially extreme behavior (Chung et forward, researchers wanting to study
al., 2009; Smith et al., 2007). Absent extremism among fan cultures would do
from this research is work that allows well to investigate less headline
fans themselves to define what grabbing behaviors and, instead, focus
constitutes extreme behavior. Across more on the sorts of extreme behaviors
members of three fandoms we asked that are more commonly encountered in
fans for their own opinion of the fan communities.
boundary between normal fan behavior A second, related implication of the
and extreme fan behavior, rather than present research suggests that there is a
assuming a definition of fan behavior or great need to rethink the way researchers
asking them to talk about a prescribed measure extreme behaviors in fan
set of behaviors. The results revealed culture (e.g., celebrity attitudes scale:
that most fans do believe that some Malby et al., 2002). In particular, rather
members of their fandom can go to than asking fans to report on behaviors
extremes. And, while different fandoms that may be uncommon or may not be
may conjure up different examples of seen as extreme to fans, these scales
extreme behaviors, the results suggest should be redesigned to reflect the sorts
that, overall, fan perceptions of extreme of behaviors that fans themselves
fan behavior are fairly consistent across recognize as extreme (e.g., blurring the
fandoms, though there was evidence for lines between fantasy and reality,
at least some idiosyncrasies within gatekeeping and excessively
fandoms (e.g., Star Wars fans indicating evangelizing one’s interest at
more than anime fans and furries that inappropriate times and in inappropriate
pushing one’s opinions on others is a ways). Doing so could potentially yield
problem, or Japan-worship as a problem more results that resonate more with fans
unique to the anime fandom). themselves and more validly reflect the
These results hold a number of sorts of troublesome behaviors most
important implications for the fan likely to arise in fan communities—
literature. First, despite the large body of rather than those which are simply more
research on fan stalking, which might visible to non-fans.
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 11
A third important implication of the behavior that better reflects the attitudes
present research is the demonstration of fans themselves. Such a measure
that different fandoms can, and do, could then be used to examine if other
express different extreme behaviors psychological variables are associated
among their fans. This suggests that with endorsement of engaging in such
those looking to study extreme behaviors behavior. Another potential avenue for
in fan groups—especially those which research would be to conduct a
are fairly unstudied—would do well to longitudinal study to examine whether
first explore the sorts of extreme fans become more extreme over time
behaviors fans, themselves, perceive while engaging with the fandom.
rather than using a measure designed to To conclude, the present research
tap into extreme behaviors that are examined fan perceptions of extreme
common across fan cultures. To be sure, behavior within their own fandoms. The
the present study suggests that there may results showed a relatively consistent
be some fairly universal concerns across pattern of themes (negatively impact life,
fan cultures, concerns which are already sole identity, push opinions, divorce
addressed in other research to some from reality, sexualization) across three
extent (e.g., identity centrality in Aiken fandoms but varying in their degree of
et al., 2018, or overspending and prototypicality and experienced stigma.
harming relationships in Chung et al., Unlike most prior research, the results
2009 and Stanfill, 2013). Indeed, fans in reveal fans’ conceptualizations of
our responses often noted that the extreme fan behavior without prompting
examples they gave could be applied to or priming with stereotypical examples.
any fan interest. Nevertheless, Given that fandoms are increasingly
understanding the idiosyncratic becoming an important facet of many
behavioral quirks and unique trouble people’s lives (Chadborn et al., 2018),
sports within each fandom may help and given existing concerns about what
those wishing to make specific claims happens when people become
about extreme behavior within a specific excessively passionate about their
fandom; it may aid in recognizing which interests (e.g., detrimentally affecting
facets of fan extremism are novel to a well-being and relationships), there will
specific fan group and which are simply be a growing need for researchers to
a characteristic of fandoms in general. better understand fan culture and fan
The present study is limited in behavior—both its good side and its bad
focusing on fantasy-based fandoms. side. And, if we are to have any hope of
Future researchers may examine other getting a complete picture of both sides
fandoms to test whether the themes hold of the fan experience, it behooves us as
(e.g., sport fans). As noted above, a researchers to not only consider and test
potential use for the present data would the veracity of these troublesome
be to construct a measure of extreme fan behaviors through the concerns of
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 12
outsiders, but to listen to the fans and New Zealand Marketing
themselves, who are perhaps best Academy Conference.
acquainted with these problems. Chung, E., Farrelly, F., Beverland, M.
B., & Karpen, I. O. (2018). Loyalty
References or liability: Resolving the consumer
fanaticism paradox. Marketing
Aiken, K. D., Bee, C., & Walker, N. Theory, 18(1), 3-30.
Development and validation of a 05696
scale to measure compulsive sport Dietz, P. E., Matthews, D. B., VanDyne,
consumption. Journal of Business C., Martell, D. A., Parry, D. H.,
Research, 87, 69-79. Stewart, T., Warren, J., & Crowder,
8.02.019 inappropriate letters to Hollywood
Brooks, S. K. (2018). FANatics: celebrities. Journal of Forensic
Systematic literature review of Sciences, 36(1), 185-209.
worship, and suggested directions for Dwyer, B., LeCrom, C., & Greenhalgh,
future research. Current Psychology. G. P. (2018). Exploring and
Advance online publication. measuring spectator sport fanaticism.
9978-4 85.
“fan” shaping the history of 79411
enthusiastic audiences. Reception: Edwards, P., Chadborn, D. P., Plante, C.,
Texts, Readers, Audiences, History, Reysen, S., & Redden, M. H. (2019).
6(1), 52-72. Meet the bronies: The psychology of
0052 McFarland & Company.
Chadborn, D., Edwards, P., & Reysen, S. Jenkins, H. (1992). Textual poachers:
(2018). Reexamining differences Television fans and participatory
between fandom and local sense of culture. Routledge.
community. Psychology of Popular Maltby, J., Houran, J., Lange, R., Ashe,
Media Culture, 7(3), 241-249. D., & McCutcheon, L. E. (2002).
Chung, E., Beverland, M. B., Farrelly, unless they are celebrities: The
F., & Quester, P. (2009). The dark relationship between celebrity
side of consumer fanaticism. worship and religious orientation.
Proceedings of the 2009 Australia Personality and Individual
Differences, 32(7), 1157-1172.
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 13
8869(01)00059-9 (2010). Fanship and fandom:
McCutcheon, L. E., Aruguete, M., Comparisons between sport fans and
McCarley, N. G., & Jenkins, W. J. non-sport fans. Journal of Sport
(2016). Further validation of an Behavior, 33(2), 176-193.
indirect measure of celebrity Reysen, S., & Shaw, J. (2016). Sport fan
stalking. Journal of Studies in Social as the default fan: Why non-sport
Sciences, 14(1), 75-91. fans are stigmatized. The Phoenix
McCutcheon, L. E., Lange, R., & Papers, 2(2), 234-252.
Houran, J. (2002). Conceptualization Schroy, C., Plante, C. N., Reysen, S.,
and measurement of celebrity Roberts, S. E., & Gerbasi, K. C.
worship. British Journal of (2016). Different motivations as
Psychology, 93(1), 67-87. predictors of psychological
2454 groups in anime, furry, and fantasy
Plante, C. N., Chadborn, D., Groves, C., sport fandoms. The Phoenix Papers,
& Reysen, S. (2018). Letters from 2(2), 148-167.
Equestria: Prosocial media, helping, Smith, S., Fisher, D., & Cole, S. J.
and empathy in fans of My Little (2007). The lived meanings of
Pony. Communication and Culture fanaticism: Understanding the
Online, 9(1), 206-220. complex role of labels and categories
18.9.9.11 culture. Consumption Markets &
Plante, C. N., Reysen, S., Chadborn, D., Culture, 10(2), 77-94.
(2020). ‘Get out of my fandom 256125
newbie’: A cross-fandom study of Spitzberg, B. H., & Cupach, W. R.
elitism and gatekeeping in fans. (2008). Fanning the flames of
Journal of Fandom Studies, 8(2), fandom: Celebrity worship,
123-146. parasocial interaction, and stalking.
Plante, C. N., Reysen, S., Groves, C. L., Hoffman (Eds.), Stalking,
Roberts, S. E., & Gerbasi, K. (2017). threatening, and attacking public
The fantasy engagement scale: A figures: A psychological and
flexible measure of positive and behavioral analysis (pp. 287-321).
negative fantasy engagement. Basic Oxford University Press.
and Applied Social Psychology, Stanfill, M. (2013). “They're losers, but I
39(3), 127-152. know better”: Intra-fandom
17.1293538 the fan subject. Critical Studies in
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 14
134. 843X.109.3.555
12.755053 Sport fans: The psychology and
Stever, G. S. (2011). Celebrity worship: social impact of fandom. Routledge.
Critiquing a construct. Journal of Zeng, C. (2018). Living in a virtual
Applied Social Psychology, 41(6), reality: Anime and manga fandom.
1356-1370. In C. L. Wang (Ed.), Exploring the
1816.2011.00765.x consumer culture (pp. 244-253). IGI
Thorne, S., & Bruner, G. C. (2006). An Global.
exploratory investigation of the
characteristics of consumer Author Note
fanaticism. Qualitative Market
Research, 9(1), 51-72. This research was supported by the
640558 Research Council of Canada.
Waldo, T. G., & Merritt, R. D. (2000). Address correspondence to Stephen
Fantasy proneness, dissociation, and Reysen, Department of Psychology,
DSM-IV axis II symptomatology. Texas A&M University-Commerce,
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, Commerce, TX, 75429. E-mail:
109(3), 555-558. Stephen.Reysen@tamuc.edu
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 15
Percentage of Themes Present in Responses
Theme Anime Furry Star Wars
Agree 95.4% 92.5% 94.9%
Life 41.0% 40.8% 29.0%
Identity 21.2% 24.7% 15.9%
Opinion 8.1% 18.4% 52.3%
Reality 17.5% 12.1% 9.1%
Sexual 7.8% 13.2% 1.7%
Japan 4.3% -- --
The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 5, August 2022 16