No fingers, no SNARC?
Neither the finger counting starting hand, nor its stability robustly affect
the SNARC effect
Mateusz Hohol1$*, Kinga Wołoszyn2, Krzysztof Cipora3$**
1 Mathematical Cognition and Learning Lab, Copernicus Center for Interdisciplinary Studies,
Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
2 Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
3 Centre for Mathematical Cognition, Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK
$ equal contribution
* corresponding author: mateusz.hohol@uj.edu.pl
** corresponding author: k.cipora@lboro.ac.uk
ORCIDs:
MH: 0000-0003-0422-5488
KW: 0000-0003-2059-9914
KC: 0000-0003-0077-9336
This paper was published in Acta Psychologica and is available Open Access at
Highlights:
• Finger counting starting hand and the SNARC slopes were not related
• When individual prevalence of the SNARC was considered, stable left-starters were
more likely to reveal a reliable SNARC
• Finger counting starting hand stability was not related to the SNARC effect
• Our findings show some limits of the embodied cognition stance in explaining Spatial-
Numerical Associations
Abstract:
The Spatial-Numerical Association of Response Codes (SNARC) effect (i.e., faster left/right
side responses to small/large magnitude numbers, respectively) is considered to be strong
evidence for the link between numbers and space. Studies have shown considerable variation
in this effect. Among the factors determining individual differences in the SNARC effect is the
hand an individual uses to start the finger counting sequence. Left-starters show a stronger and
less variable SNARC effect than right-starters. This observation has been used as an argument
for the embodied nature of the SNARC effect. For this to be the case, one must assume that the
finger counting sequence (especially the starting hand) is stable over time. Subsequent studies
challenged the view that the SNARC differs depending on the finger counting starting hand.
At the same time, it has been pointed out that the temporal stability of the finger counting
starting hand should not be taken for granted. Thus, in this preregistered study, we aimed to
replicate the difference in the SNARC between left- and right-starters and explore the
relationship between the self-reported temporal stability of the finger counting starting hand
and the SNARC effect. In line with the embodied cognition, left-starters who declare more
temporarily stable finger counting habits should reveal a stronger SNARC effect. Results of
the preregistered analysis did not show the difference between left- and right-starters. However,
further exploratory analysis provided weak evidence that this might be the case. Lastly, we
found no evidence for the relationship between finger counting starting hand stability and the
SNARC effect. Overall, these results challenge the view on the embodied nature of the SNARC
effect.
Keywords:
finger counting, SNARC, embodied cognition, numerical cognition, parity judgement task,
cognitive processing
1. Introduction
Where do Spatial-Numerical Associations come from?
Numerous experimental studies have shown that at the cognitive level, several aspects of
numerical information are associated with some aspects of space. This broad range of
phenomena is referred to as Spatial-Numerical Associations (see Cipora, Haman, Domahs, &
Nuerk, 2020; Cipora, Schroeder, Soltanlou, & Nuerk, 2018; Toomarian & Hubbard, 2018 for
reviews and taxonomies). The definition provided above seems to be somehow vague and
unspecific, however, the large variety of phenomena of numbers being linked to space does not
allow more specific SNA definitions, and it may be that Wittgenstein’s notion of family
resemblance (a number of features overlapping across SNAs but very few specific to all of
them) might be useful in characterizing them (Cipora, He, & Nuerk, 2020). For instance,
numbers may be associated with spatial extensions (larger numbers—larger extensions:
extension SNAs) or with specific directions in space (directional SNAs).
Here we focus on the SNARC effect (Spatial-Numerical Association of Response Codes;
Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993), which is one of the most thoroughly studied directional
SNA (see Wood, Willmes, Nuerk, & Fischer, 2008 for a meta-analysis, and Cipora, Soltanlou,
Reips, & Nuerk, 2019 for a large-scale online replication). In speeded bimanual setups (e.g.,
parity judgment task), faster reactions to small/large numbers with left/right hand, respectively
are observed. The SNARC effect is typically considered as evidence that numbers are
cognitively represented along the left-to-right aligned mental number line (Dehaene, 2011;
Restle, 1970; but see Fias & van Dijck, 2016; Gevers et al., 2010; Proctor & Cho, 2006 for
other accounts). Despite its robustness and replicability at the group level, there are
considerable inter-individual differences in the SNARC effect (Cipora, Soltanlou, et al., 2019;
Cipora, van Dijck, et al., 2019). Several variables have been demonstrated to affect the SNARC
effect, such as the reading/writing direction, the efficiency of cognitive inhibition, and the level
of mathematical skills (see Cipora, He, et al., 2020; Wood et al., 2008 for reviews).
Among other factors, the SNARC effect is considered to be linked to the finger counting
direction. Fischer (2008) has shown that the SNARC effect was not significant (associated p-
value of .061) in participants starting finger counting with their right hand (right-starters). It
differed significantly from the SNARC effect observed in left-starters. The latter group also
revealed a significant SNARC effect. Moreover, the variance in the SNARC effect was greater
among right-starters. This observation was only partly replicated in a large-scale online study
(Cipora, Soltanlou, et al., 2019), which showed a difference between left- and right-starters in
the same direction. Still, it was associated with a negligibly small effect size (Cohen’s d =
0.12). However, Bayesian analysis has shown that the result was inconclusive and was leaning
towards supporting the null hypothesis. At the same time, unlike in Fischer (2008), a robust
SNARC effect was found in right-starters, and there was no significant difference in variances
between left- and right-starters. Further studies have also demonstrated a robust SNARC in
right-starters (Fabbri, 2013; Prete & Tommasi, 2020). Additionally, in several countries where
the majority of people start finger counting with their right hand (e.g., Belgium and Italy), the
SNARC effect has been observed in multiple studies (e.g., Cutini, Scarpa, Scatturin,
Dell’Acqua, & Zorzi, 2014; Gevers, Ratinckx, de Baene, & Fias, 2006; Mapelli, Rusconi, &
Umiltà, 2003). To sum up, there seems to be some evidence, however mixed, that finger
counting is associated with the SNARC effect (see also Riello & Rusconi, 2011). Having seen
these results, one might ask why the SNARC effect should be related to the finger counting
direction. The research on the embodiment of numerical cognition can illuminate this issue.
Finger counting and numerical cognition
For a long time, psychologists considered finger counting mainly an immature behavioral
strategy or an interim developmental step in dealing with numbers. They also believed that its
role diminishes with formal mathematical education (see Gelman & Gallistel, 1986; Jordan,
Kaplan, Ramineni, & Locuniak, 2008; Piaget, 1942). However, now it is well recognized that
finger counting, apart from playing an important role in the development of numerical
cognition (Moeller et al., 2012), is also practiced even by educated adults. Adults frequently
employ their fingers to support calendar and arithmetic calculations, present arguments and
plans, count syllables in a phrase, and communicate numbers to others (Bender & Beller, 2011;
Hohol, Wołoszyn, Nuerk, & Cipora, 2018; Lucidi & Thevenot, 2014; Pika, Nicoladis, &
Marentette, 2009). Various forms of finger counting are observed in the vast majority of
cultures, and there is evidence for its use in the past, dating back to the prehistoric era (Göbel,
Shaki, & Fischer, 2011; Overmann, 2014, 2021).
The high prevalence of finger counting goes hand in hand with the diversity of finger counting
patterns (Bender & Beller, 2012; Butterworth, 1999; Overmann, 2021). For the present study,
the crucial finger counting characteristic is the starting hand. It seems to depend on multiple
factors. Initially, it was postulated that reading and writing direction plays a prominent role
(more left-starters in left-to-right reading cultures, more right-starters in right-to-left reading
cultures; Lindemann, Alipour, & Fischer, 2011), but later studies have shown that this is not
an ultimate explanation: There is a large variation within left-to-right reading Western and
European cultures. While, in some countries, there is a majority of right-starters (e.g., Belgium,
France, Italy; Di Luca, Granà, Semenza, Seron, & Pesenti, 2006; Lindemann et al., 2011; Sato
& Lalain, 2008), in some the proportions are relatively equal (e.g., 57% right- and 43% of left-
starters in Poland; Hohol et al., 2018). Apart from reading direction, handedness seems to be
relevant too, with left-handers being much more likely to be left- than right-starters, and a more
equal share of left- and right-starters are among right-handers (Cipora, Gashaj, Gridley,
Soltanlou, & Nuerk, 2021; Hohol et al., 2018).
Results of finger counting-related studies are frequently considered to be instances of embodied
numerical cognition (e.g., Domahs, Moeller, Huber, Willmes, & Nuerk, 2010; Fischer, 2012;
Sixtus, Fischer, & Lindemann, 2017; Wołoszyn & Hohol, 2017). According to this approach,
in a nutshell, our bodily interactions play non-trivial causal roles in higher cognition (Barsalou,
2008, 2020; Ostarek & Bottini, 2021), including the processes involved in mathematical
activities (Fischer, Felisatti, Kulkova, Mende, & Miklashevsky, 2021; Hohol, 2020; Lakoff &
Núñez, 2000). Thus, the impact of finger counting reaches beyond a facilitative role, e.g.,
offloading working memory resources (Beller & Bender, 2011; Wiese, 2004). In line with the
embodied approach, the specific sequence of finger counting (Fischer, 2008; Fischer &
Brugger, 2011) is considered to shape SNAs. As Hohol et al. (2018) suggested, these
“embodied” theories and studies on the functional role of the finger counting direction rest on
an implicit assumption that finger counting routines are stable over time (i.e., are trait-like
characteristics).
Nevertheless, finger counting is prone to situated influences, and could be flexibly adjusted
according to task demands, e.g., when the preferred starting hand is busy (Hohol et al., 2018;
Lucidi & Thevenot, 2014; Wasner, Moeller, Fischer, & Nuerk, 2014). Furthermore, recent
studies have recognized that finger counting habits, specifically the starting hand, might not be
stable over time (with an estimate of about 75% of participants starting finger counting with
the same hand when tested twice, which is not that high given that the chance level is 50%;
Hohol et al., 2018).
To the best of our knowledge, none of the previous studies have directly tested the relationship
between the temporal stability of finger counting routines (with particular emphasis on the
starting hand) and other aspects of elementary number processing, such as the SNARC effect.
If finger counting routines are constitutive for the formation of directional SNAs (with the
SNARC effect at the fore), as Fischer (2008) claims, these routines should be temporally stable,
so that a given hand and finger occupying the given relative position (e.g., the first from the
left) always corresponds to the same number (see Hohol et al. 2018). This is because the
structure of abstract numerical concepts is assumed to be deeply grounded in relatively fixed
motoric schemas (Lakoff & Núñez, 2000). Thus, one might expect that on top of the direction
of finger counting routines, its stability should determine directional SNAs. So, the typical left-
to-right SNARC should be most pronounced in individuals characterized by stable left-starting
finger counting routines as the direction of the preferred finger counting routine (left-to-right)
would be congruent with the direction of the SNARC effect. In both cases, relatively small
numbers would be associated with the left hand / side and relatively large numbers – with the
right hand / side. Moreover, it can also be that variations in temporal stability of finger counting
routines might account for conflicting results on whether the SNARC effect and finger counting
starting hand are related.
The temporal stability of finger counting routines was recently investigated by Hohol and
colleagues (2018). Apart from the finding that finger counting routines were stable in about
75% of participants when tested again after two months, what is important for the current study,
participants were fairly accurate in judging the stability of their routines.
Objectives of the study and hypotheses
In this preregistered study, we aimed at investigating the relationship between the temporal
stability of the finger counting starting hand and the SNARC effect. We also revisited the link
between the finger counting starting hand and the SNARC effect (Fischer, 2008). To this end,
we recruited 104 Polish native speakers (left-to-right readers). We tested them using the classic
parity judgment task with single-digit Arabic numbers (Dehaene et al., 1993). Afterwards, we
asked participants to count on their fingers from 1 to 10 (with free hands), memorize the
sequence, and answer questions about their finger counting pattern and its temporal stability.
Based on findings from a study by Hohol et al. (2018), we decided that it would be sufficient
to obtain self-reports on the temporal stability of finger counting routines from our participants.
Firstly, we expected to replicate the SNARC effect in the Polish population (Cipora et al., 2016;
Cipora & Nuerk, 2013). Secondly, we expected to replicate Fischer’s (2008) finding that left-
starters show a stronger SNARC effect than right-starters. Finally, we hypothesized that
individuals who declare stability over time in terms of the finger counting starting hand should
reveal a stronger SNARC effect than individuals declaring moderately stable or no stable
preferences regarding this matter. In particular, left-starters who declare more temporarily
stable finger counting habits should reveal a stronger SNARC effect.
2. Method
Participants
A total of 104 individuals participated in the study; all were native Polish speakers. We
excluded 3 participants from the main analyses due to the error rate in the parity judgement
task outside the 3 SD from the sample mean. Thus, we finally analyzed the data from 101
individuals (56 females, 45 males) aged 18–35 years (M = 24.9, SD = 3.1). The group consisted
mostly of university graduates (n = 73). Other participants were high school (n = 25), vocational
school (n = 2), or junior high/middle school graduates (n = 1). Participants were recruited
through internal online communication channels of Jagiellonian University as well as social
media.
Materials and procedure
The design of the study was approved by the Ethics Committee for Research at the Institute of
Philosophy, Jagiellonian University in Krakow. We preregistered the study on AsPridected.org
and 20/07/2021.
Participants performed all the tasks on desktops or laptops (we blocked the possibility of
running the procedure on tablets and other portable devices). The experimental procedure was
Anwyl-Irvine, Massonnié, Flitton, Kirkham, & Evershed, 2020). Since Gorilla assures reliable
timing accuracy and precision in behavioral experiments regardless of the operating system
and/or Internet browser (Anwyl-Irvine, Dalmaijer, Hodges, & Evershed, 2021), we did not
force any restrictions in this matter. During the recruitment and at the beginning of the
procedure, participants were asked to perform tasks in a quiet room with a comfortable setting
and without long breaks (although after each block of parity judgment tasks, they were
encouraged to take a short break to rest their eyes). Participants were informed that they were
free to withdraw from the procedure at any point by closing the Internet browser.
After obtaining their informed consent, participants performed the parity judgment task. Next,
they responded to the items on the finger counting routines questionnaire. Finally, they
responded to the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory. The entire procedure lasted approximately
25 minutes.
Parity judgment task. To measure the SNARC effect, we used a computerized parity judgment
task (Dehaene et al., 1993) modeled on the version previously applied in Cipora et al.’s (2016)
study. Participants were asked to decide whether a number presented on the screen is even or
odd through pressing the P or Q keys on a standard computer keyboard. The instruction
emphasized both speed and accuracy. The task included two blocks with reversed response-to-
key mapping. The order of the blocks was counterbalanced across participants. Numbers 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 were used. Black stimuli (font size 30) were presented against the white
background. Each number was presented 30 times within each block (60 times within two
blocks). Each block was preceded by a practice session (16 trials) to familiarize participants
with the task. During the practice sessions, accuracy feedback was provided, and the required
response mapping was indicated in the bottom line of the screen. The order of the trials was
randomized with the restriction that each number could not appear more than twice in a row.
Each trial started with an eye fixation cross presented for 300 ms. Subsequently, the number
appeared. It was presented until the participants’ response or for a maximum duration of 2 s.
The next trial started after 500 ms.
Finger counting questionnaire. To investigate finger counting routines, we asked the questions
from a survey previously used in a paper-and-pencil mode in Hohol et al.’s (2018) study. The
questionnaire in Polish, as well as its English translation, can be accessed at
from 1 to 10 and memorize how they did it. Then, they were asked whether they counted only
with their left hand, right hand, or both hands. Subsequently, the participants were presented
with a schematic drawing of one or two hands (consistently with their response) and asked to
describe their finger counting sequence (ordering the names of the fingers by dragging them
with the mouse/touchpad into a properly ordered list). This allowed us to clarify their starting
hand. Next, the participants were asked to indicate whether they always followed the same
sequence as they described: usually do so, or do not have any stable tendency in terms of the
order of finger counting. Then, participants responded to the set of further questions regarding
their finger counting routines. All these questions and collected data are available at
relationship between the SNARC effect, starting hand and its temporal stability.
Handedness. Lastly, we used a computerized Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield,
1971). The questionnaire consists of 10 items in which participants declare their preferred hand
while performing daily activities.
Preregistration vs. reported study
In the study reported here, we made some deviations from the preregistered procedure. First,
we tested more participants than initially declared (n = 104 vs. n = 60). We planned this sample
size given the possibilities of participants’ recruitment at the time of the preregistration; it was
not guided by an a priori power analysis (see Lakens, 2022). While conducting the study, we
had better recruitment opportunities than expected. We have also considered more analyses
than initially preregistered. In the following parts, we clearly indicated which analyses were
preregistered, and which were not.
Analysis
Data processing and analyses were conducted in the R language using R studio (R Core Team,
2013). We used the following R packages: clinfun (Seshan & Whiting, 2022), cowplot (Wilke,
2020), dplyr (Wickham, François, Henry, & Müller, 2022), ggplot2 (Wickham, 2016), jmv
(Selker, Love, Dropmann, & Moreno, 2022), psych (Revelle, 2022). All the data and the R
Data preparation: parity judgement task
Data from the practice series was not analyzed. Firstly, we excluded participants whose error
rates in the parity judgment task exceeded the 3 SD relative to the sample mean (this step was
not specified in the preregistration, which only stated that we would exclude participants with
“excessive error rates”). Next, we excluded errors and anticipations, that is, trials in which RTs
were shorter than 200 ms. Subsequently, we applied a sequential filtering method (the same as
in Cipora et al., 2016; and Cipora & Nuerk, 2013) to exclude outlier RTs: we calculated RTs
and SDs for each participant separately and then removed RTs outside ±3 SD from a
participant’s mean. This procedure was repeated until there were no further changes in means
and SDs.
Calculating the SNARC effect
Preregistered. To calculate the SNARC effect, we applied the method proposed by Fias and
colleagues (1996; see also Cipora & Nuerk, 2013; Cipora et al., 2016). Firstly, we computed
dRT (RT right hand − RT left hand) for each number in the case of each participant. Positive
dRT values indicate left-hand advantage, whereas negative dRT values indicate right-hand
advantage. Next, we regressed dRT values on number magnitude. Unstandardized regression
slopes served as a measure of the SNARC effect: A more negative slope corresponds to a
stronger SNARC effect. To investigate whether there is a significant SNARC effect at the
whole sample level, we tested slopes against zero with the one-sample t test. Since there is a
direct prediction regarding the directionality of the SNARC effect, a one-sided t test for
negative values was used.
Non-preregistered. Since measuring the SNARC effect size based on the non-standardized
regression slope was criticized (Pinhas, Tzelgov, & Ganor-Stern, 2012), we also computed
standardized SNARC slopes (standardized regression slopes were Fisher-z transformed to
approximate normal distribution, see Cipora, van Dijck et al., 2019). Finally, we estimated the
reliability of both unstandardized and standardized SNARC slopes using the split-half method.
We applied Spearman-Brown adjustments to attain the reliability estimate for the whole set of
items (see Cipora, van Dijck et al., 2019 for a detailed description of the method).
SNARC effect, finger counting starting hand, and stability
Preregistered. To compare the SNARC effect in left- and right-starters, we used the
independent samples t test. To investigate the relationship between the SNARC effect and
temporal stability of finger counting, we performed the Jonckheere-Terpstra test for monotone
trend with 2000 permutations. There are three response options in the stability question, and
we expected a monotone decrease in the strength of the SNARC effect with decreasing declared
stability of finger counting routines. The preregistered analysis was a suboptimal analytical
choice as stability of left- and right-starting has a different meaning from the perspective of
embodied numerical cognition1. Our original analysis plan did not consider the analysis of
1 We wish to thank anonymous reviewers for bringing it to our attention.
finger counting stability to be conducted separately for left- and right-starters. However, we
report this analysis for transparency.
Non-preregistered. All analyses described above have also been conducted for the standardized
SNARC. The Bayesian equivalent of the independent samples t test was used to quantify
evidence for null hypotheses.
The more suited analysis for investigating the effects of the stability of finger counting
sequence is comparing left- and right-starters separately. In the case of left-starters, a one-sided
test was used as there was a clear prediction regarding the direction of the effect. That was not
the case for right-starters, so we used a two-sided test.
As there is no Bayesian equivalent of the Jonckheere-Terpstra test, to quantify the evidence for
the null hypothesis, we compared the extreme groups (I always follow the same sequence and
I have no stable tendency) with the Bayesian independent samples t test.
Individual prevalence of the SNARC effect (non-preregistered)
Next, we investigated the presence of the SNARC effect at the individual level. Even though
the regression method does not allow for making inferences about the presence of the effects
of interest at the individual level, it is possible with a bootstrapping approach, specifically the
H0 method proposed by Cipora, van Dijck et al. (2019). This method aims at checking how
(un)likely finding the SNARC effect as empirically observed in each participant would be if
there was no association between numerical magnitude and response side. Therefore,
separately for each participant and each number, we randomly sampled (with replacement) two
sets of 30 responses. One of these sets we considered as “left-handed responses” and the other
as “right-handed responses,” and we subsequently used them to calculate the SNARC slope
(both unstandardized and standardized). We repeated the bootstrapping procedure 5,000 times.
The slopes from these bootstrap-based regressions were considered as possible outcomes of
the analysis if there was no SNARC effect. Finally, we checked whether empirically observed
slopes were outside the mid 90% of the distribution of the bootstrap slopes (i.e., the 90% H0
confidence intervals). If that was the case, we classified the participant as revealing either a
reliable SNARC effect (observed slope < lower bound of the H0 confidence interval), reliable
reversed SNARC (observed slope > upper bound of the H0 confidence interval), or non-reliable
SNARC (observed slope within the H0 confidence interval; see also van Dijck, Fias, & Cipora,
2021; Hohol et al., 2020).
Individual prevalence of SNARC effect and finger counting routines (non-preregistered)
To compare the proportions of left-starters and right-starters among the participants revealing
reliable, reliable reverse, or no reliable SNARC, we used Fisher’s exact test. We applied the
same procedure to investigate the relationship between finger counting stability over time and
individual prevalence. In both cases, we used unstandardized and standardized SNARC slopes.
Handedness (non-preregistered)
To investigate handedness, we calculated the laterality quotient (LQ) which could range from
-100 to +100. We applied Oldfield’s (1971) recommendations, categorizing participants as
right-handers if LQ > 40, ambidextrous if 40 ≤ LQ > 0, and left-handers if LQ ≤ 0. The vast
majority of the group were right-handers (n = 93); only one person was ambidextrous, and
seven were left-handers. Given a small number of non-right-handers, relationships between
neither handedness and the SNARC effect nor handedness and finger counting routines were
not analyzed. Additionally, previous studies (Cipora, Soltanlou, et al., 2019 Supplementary
Material 2; Dehaene et al., 1993 Experiment 5; Huber et al., 2014) did not show relationships
between left- and right-handers in the SNARC effect.
3. Results
Preregistered analyses
Data preprocessing
Firstly, we excluded participants with accuracy lower than 3 SD from the sample mean. This
led to the exclusion of 3 participants. The overall accuracy of the remaining 101 participants
was 94%. We also excluded the anticipations (correct responses < 200 ms; less than .1% of the
trials). Subsequently, we performed sequential trimming for ±3 SD from the individual mean
(Cipora et al., 2016; Cipora & Nuerk, 2013; Cipora, Soltanlou, et al., 2019; Hohol et al., 2020).
This excluded 5.8% of the data. Thus, we included 88.5% of all trials in the further analysis.
Mean reaction time was 602,8 ms (SD = 203.3).
Unstandardized SNARC slopes
As expected, we found a significant SNARC effect at the whole sample level. Mean slope was
-4.71 (SD = 5.70), and it differed significantly from 0 (t = -8.29, p < .001; one-sided).
Unstandardized SNARC and starting hand
More participants declared starting finger counting with their left (67 persons) than with their
right hand (34 persons). Mean slope of left-starters was -5.17 (SD = 5.80), and mean slope of
right-starters was -3.78 (SD = 5.48). The t test showed no significant difference between left-
starters and right-starters (t = -1.16, p = .249; d = 0.24). The (non-preregistered) Bayesian t
test showed anecdotal support for the null hypothesis; BF = 2.51. See Fig 1., Panel A.
Moreover, the variance in SNARC slopes is almost the same in both groups (unlike in Fischer,
2008).
A Unstandardized SNARC slopes and finger counting star ting hand
SNARC category
reliable.reverse
−10 none
r reliable
a −20
left right
Finger counting starting hand
B Standardized SNARC slopes and finger counting star ting hand
1.0
0.5
SNARC category
0.0
reliable.reverse
none
−0.5
reliable
−1.0
left right
Finger counting starting hand
finger counting starting hand. Colors represent the results of the H0 bootstrapping.
Unstandardized SNARC and temporal stability of finger counting
Most participants declared moderate stability over time of the order of finger counting (44; “I
usually follow the same sequence”). A similar proportion of participants reported no preference
(28; “I have no stable tendency”) and strong stability (29; “I always follow the same
sequence”). The Jonckheere-Terpstra test (2000 permutations) did not show evidence for a
monotone trend for directional alternative hypothesis that more robust stability is linked to
stronger SNARC (T = 1798, p = .809 for directional alternative hypothesis). See Fig 2 Panel
JT
A. Comparing the extreme groups with the (non-preregistered) Bayesian t-test supported the
null hypothesis BF = 3.37.
left right
−10
−20
1 2 3 1 2 3
Finger counting stability
counting starting hand stability (1 = always, 2 = sometimes, 3 = not stable). Left and right
subpanels correspond to left- and right-starters accordingly. Colors represent the results of the
H0 bootstrapping.
]sm[
CRANS
dezidradnatsnU
A Unstandardized SNARC slopes and finger counting stability
SNARC category
reliable.reverse
none
reliable
left right
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
1 2 3 1 2 3
Finger counting stability
CRANS
dezidradnatS
B Standardized SNARC slopes and finger counting stability
SNARC category
reliable.reverse
none
reliable
Non-preregistered analyses
Reliability of the SNARC effect
Reliability (split-half; Spearman-Brown corrected) of the SNARC slopes was .40 and .33 for
unstandardized and standardized SNARC respectively.
Unstandardized SNARC and temporal stability of finger counting – separately for left-
and right-starters
The declared stability split by starting hand was “always” for 20 left- and 8 right-starters;
“sometimes” for 28 left- and 16 right-starters; “not stable” for 19 left- and 10 right-starters. In
both left- and right-starters there was no relationship between the stability of the finger counting
and the strength of the SNARC effect. In the case of left-starters, it was tested with one-sided
Jonckheere-Terpstra test, T = 760, p = .605. Bayesian t test supported the null hypothesis,
JT
BF = 3.18. In the case of right-starters, we two-sided Jonckheere-Terpstra test was used, T
01 JT
= 212, p = .404. Bayesian t test was largely inconclusive, BF = 2.11.
Standardized SNARC slopes
As expected, we found a significant SNARC effect at the whole sample level. Mean slope was
-.34 (SD = 0.39), and it differed significantly from 0 (t = -8.84, p < .001; one-sided).
Standardized SNARC slopes and starting hand
Mean slope of left-starters was -0.36 (SD = 0.36), and mean slope of right-starters was -0.30
(SD = 0.43). The t test showed no significant difference between left-starters and right-starters
(t = -0.76, p = .448; d = 0.16; BF = 3.51). The Bayesian analysis supported the null
99 01
hypothesis. See Fig 1., Panel B.
Standardized SNARC and temporal stability of finger counting
The Jonckheere-Terpstra test (2000 permutations) did not show evidence for a monotone trend
for directional alternative hypothesis that stronger stability is linked to stronger SNARC (T
JT
= 1719, p = .653 for directional alternative hypothesis). See Fig 2 Panel B. The comparison of
the extreme groups with the Bayesian t-test supported the null hypothesis BF = 3.40.
Standardized SNARC and temporal stability of finger counting – separately for left- and
right-starters
Neither in left- nor in right-starters, there was a relationship between the stability of the finger
counting and the strength of the standardized SNARC effect. In the case of the left-starters, it
was tested with a one-sided Jonckheere-Terpstra test, T = 719, p = .425. Bayesian t test
JT
supported the null hypothesis, BF = 3.21. In case of right-starters, a two-sided Jonckheere-
Terpstra test was used, T = 208, p = .444. Bayesian t test was largely inconclusive BF =
JT 01
2.04.
Individual prevalence of SNARC effect
For unstandardized SNARC, bootstrapping revealed that 42.5% of participants had a reliable
effect. 2% of participants displayed a reliable reverse effect. Most importantly, 55.4% of
participants did not have a reliable effect. On the other hand, for standardized SNARC, only
15% of participants had a reliable effect. 1% of participants displayed a reliable reverse effect.
Crucially, 86% of participants did not have a reliable effect.
Individual prevalence of SNARC effect and starting hand
As the cell sizes were smaller than 5 in the case of reliable positive unstandardized SNARC,
we used Fisher’s exact test to compare the proportions of participants revealing reliable,
reliable reverse, or no reliable SNARC. Fisher exact test (n = 101) p = .037. [Note that the χ2
was not significant; χ2 = 5.48, p = .065]. This indicates that significantly more left-starters
revealed reliable SNARC. In a subsequent analysis, we excluded three participants who
revealed reliable positive (reversed) SNARC. The observed effect got even more pronounced,
SNARC did not reveal a significant effect, Fisher exact test (n = 101) p = .486. See color coding
Individual prevalence of SNARC effect and declared temporal stability of finger counting
routines
There was no significant relationship between declared finger counting pattern stability over
time and individual prevalence of unstandardized SNARC effect. Fisher exact test (n = 101) p
= .111. For standardized SNARC p = .516.
Consistency of the finger counting stability measures
As our questionnaire contained more items concerning finger counting stability, we looked at
the congruence between these methods. First, we looked at the relation between declared
stability and actions that participants reported taking when they count with their fingers while
their preferred hand was occupied holding something (options: using the other hand, trying to
count with the occupied hand anyway, putting away the held object). The majority of
participants declared that they would use the other hand (N = 62). The analysis with the Fisher’s
exact test did not reveal a significant effect p = .186, suggesting that there was no relation
between responses to these two items. So, despite declared stability, most participants declared
that if their preferred hand was busy, they would most likely simply count with the non-
preferred hand.
Secondly, we examined the relation between declared stability and the degree of naturalness
and comfort while counting with their non-preferred hand (both reported on 5-point Likert-like
scales). This was tested by Jonckheere-Terpstra tests. In both cases, the effect was significant,
T = 2035.5, p = .007 for directional alternative hypothesis, and T = 1961.6, p = .024 for
JT JT
directional alternative hypothesis for unnatural and discomfort items respectively. This
indicates that participants who declared having stable routines declared higher discomfort and
felt it less natural if they had to count on fingers with a non-preferred hand as compared to
participants who declared that they do not have strong preferences.
4. Discussion
Overview
In this study, we first aimed to replicate the SNARC effect and then replicate the results
reported by Fischer (2008) that individuals who start finger counting with their right hand show
weaker (or no) SNARC, while the stronger effect is present in left-starters. Finally, we intended
to check whether the larger temporal stability of starting hand while finger counting is related
to the stronger SNARC effect. In the line of embodied cognition, left-starters who declare more
temporarily stable finger counting habits should reveal a stronger SNARC effect.
During the preregistered analyses, we found a robust SNARC effect at the whole sample level.
Still, we neither found significant differences between right- and left-starters in the SNARC
effect nor differences related to finger counting stability over time.
Results of the subsequent (non-preregistered) analyses were mainly in line with these
observations. However, the bootstrapping suggested that more left-starters than right-starters
show a reliable SNARC effect at an individual level. Further analyses provided some evidence
for consistency between various measures of finger counting stability over time.
Replicating the SNARC effect
We observed a robust SNARC effect at a group level comparable in size to the effects reported
in the previous studies with Polish participants (Cipora & Nuerk, 2013; Cipora et al., 2016). At
the same time, the reliability of the SNARC effect was relatively low. However, this estimate
was similar to those observed in the online setup (Cipora, Soltanlou et al., 2019). The
proportion of participants displaying the reliable SNARC effect at an individual level was
analogous to the one reported in previous studies (Cipora, van Dijck et al., 2019).
Expectedly, the conclusions from both unstandardized and standardized SNARC slopes are
very similar when it comes both to the presence of the SNARC and the (lack of) relationships
between SNARC and finger counting. While we observed a difference in proportions of
participants revealing a reliable SNARC effect, this observation is in line with conclusions
from other studies using these methods (see Cipora, van Dijck et al., 2019; Hohol et al., 2020).
Finger counting routines
The proportion of participants declaring stable or relatively stable finger counting routines was
approximately 73%. This ratio is slightly lower than the one observed in the previous study by
Hohol et al. (2018), which was 86%. At the same time, the proportion obtained in the current
study closely resembles the actual performance when participants counted with their fingers
twice, a few months apart (i.e., 75%; Hohol et al., 2018). As reported in this study, there is a
fair consistency between differing finger counting starting hand stability measures.
Moreover, the proportion of left- (66%) and right-starters (34%) differed from the results
reported by Hohol et al. (2018), who observed that the majority (57%) of participants were
right-starters. On the other hand, another online study showed more equal proportions with a
predominance of left-starters among Polish participants (Cipora, Soltanlou et al., 2019,
Supplementary material).
The SNARC effect and finger counting starting hand
We did not observe a discrepancy in the SNARC effect between left- and right-starters. We
also found no evidence for a difference in variances between these two groups, thus, we did
not replicate Fischer's (2008) results. On the contrary, there was a robust SNARC effect in both
groups, which is in line with the results of other studies (Cipora, Soltanlou et al., 2019, Fabbri,
2013; Prete & Tomassi, 2020). The Bayesian analysis also leaned towards no between-group
difference, however, the results remained inconclusive.
At the same time, we need to acknowledge that there might be some evidence for a more robust
SNARC effect among left-starters since at the level of descriptive statistics, the SNARC effect
was stronger in this group. Additionally, the non-preregistered, exploratory analysis using the
bootstrapping method revealed that the proportion of participants showing a reliable SNARC
effect at the individual level was larger among left-starters. This was only observed in the case
of the unstandardized SNARC. This might be due to a generally lower proportion of
participants revealing a reliable standardized SNARC in the case of H0 bootstrapping.
However, based on current results and the results of previous studies (Cipora, Soltanlou et al.,
2019; Fabbri, 2013; Prete and Tomassi, 2020), we can conclude that even if there is a difference
in the SNARC effect between left- and right-starters, it is not as robust as initially proposed by
Fischer (2008).
The SNARC effect and finger counting stability over time
None of the analyses revealed between-group differences in the SNARC effect depending on
the declared stability of starting hand while finger counting. Whether the participants declared
strong stability of their finger counting routines was not linked to the strength of their SNARC
effect, no matter whether they declared to be right- or left-starters. The results of the Bayesian
analysis also supported the lack of between-group differences. The null result held no matter
which method of quantifying the SNARC effect was used (unstandardized and standardized
slopes, and to a degree, the reliability of the effect at the individual level). This observation
directly contradicts our preregistered hypotheses that both finger counting direction and
stability of finger counting routines are linked to the strength of directional Spatial-Numerical
Associations.
Limitations of the study
While bringing several new insights, our investigation has some limitations that should be
addressed in subsequent studies. Firstly, the group sizes are unequal due to the quasi-
experimental design, which affects experimental power. We acknowledge that, despite the
overall consistency of the observed results, the evidential strength of reported Bayes factors is
limited, and this might require further validation in the following studies. However, our
experiment shows clearly that the effects of finger counting on the SNARC (if there are any)
are small, and relatively large samples would be required to provide more conclusive evidence.
The reliability of the SNARC effect was relatively low. Considering the previous results
(Cipora, Soltanlou et al., 2019), that was to be expected in the online study. However, we
acknowledge that this might also have affected the quality of our results.
In this study, we did not use a test-retest design for establishing the temporal stability of finger
counting. Even though previous results have shown the validity of self-declared stability
(Hohol et al., 2018), other studies have shown general problems with the adequacy of self-
reporting in establishing the finger counting direction (Lucidi & Thevenot, 2014; Morrissey &
Hallett, 2018). Thus, future research on the relationship between finger counting routines and
the SNARC effect should include a more controlled, preferably lab-based protocol.
Conclusion
A temporally stable correspondence between the fingers and numbers (indexed by finger
counting starting hand) seems crucial for building explanations of the SNAs as shaped by finger
counting habits, thus formulating the “embodied” interpretations of the SNARC effect. Despite
replicating the well-established SNARC effect, our preregistered study did not provide
evidence for its dependence on the finger counting direction. Simultaneously, it did not support
the claim that the SNARC effect depends on the temporal stability of finger counting routines,
particularly in terms of the starting hand. While the embodied approach undoubtedly has
heuristic potential for the study of mathematical cognition, our results challenge its power in
explaining the genesis of directional SNAs.