A language of thought for the mental representation of geometric shapes
1,2 3 4 1,2
Mathias Sablé-Meyer , Kevin Ellis , Josh Tenenbaum , and Stanislas Dehaene
Unicog, CEA, INSERM, Université Paris-Saclay, NeuroSpin center, 91191 Gif/Yvette, France
Collège de France, Université Paris-Sciences-Lettres (PSL), 75005 Paris, France
Cornell University, United States
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States
In various cultures and at all spatial scales, humans produce a rich complexity of
geometric shapes such as lines, circles or spirals. Here, we formalize and test the
hypothesis that all humans possess a compositional language of thought that can
produce line drawings as recursive combinations of a minimal set of geometric prim-
itives. We present a programming language, similar to Logo, that combines discrete
numbers and continuous integration to form higher-level structures based on repeti-
tion, concatenation and embedding, and we show that the simplest programs in this
language generate the fundamental geometric shapes observed in human cultures. On
the perceptual side, we propose that shape perception in humans involves searching
for the shortest program that correctly draws the image (program induction). A
consequence of this framework is that the mental diﬀiculty of remembering a shape
should depend on its minimum description length (MDL) in the proposed language.
In two experiments, we show that encoding and processing of geometric shapes is
well predicted by MDL. Furthermore, our hypotheses predict additive laws for the
psychological complexity of repeated, concatenated or embedded shapes, which we
confirm experimentally.
Keywords: Geometry; program induction; shape perception; Language of Thought;
Complexity in Cognition
Highlights honeycombs, or the spiral-like patterns of puffer fishes),
only humans seem capable of mentally conceiving for-
• Some geometrical shapes are universally attested
mal, symbolic geometric structures in a combinatorial
in humans, but not other animals
and productive manner.
• We formalize the hypothesis of a compositional
The formalization of geometry is traditionally dated to
language of thought for shapes
Euclid’s Elements, itself rooted in Egyptian and Baby-
• We argue for modeling human shape perception as
lonian precursors. Yet various lines of evidence suggest
program induction
that an intuitive sense of geometry is much more an-
cient, and that many, possibly all human cultures share
• We provide empirical evidence of our proposal and
a drive towards creating geometric designs (Van der
outline the space of alternatives
Waerden, 2012). Throughout the world, at geograph-
ically distant and presumably unrelated sites, humans
Introduction
have produced parallel lines, circles, squares, zig-zags
We could never know the geometric triangle
or spirals, in activities as diverse as drawing, pottery,
through the one we see traced on paper, if
body paintings, rock art, land art (e.g., Nazca lines),
our mind had not had the idea of it else-
stone-cutting (e.g., bifaces), or large-scale constructions
where.
(e.g., Stonehenge). Many Neolithic sites contain square,
—René Descartes
circular or rectangular buildings as well as large circles of
stones (cromlechs) whose axes are often systematically
The cognitive origins of geometric knowledge remain
oriented relative to geographical or astronomical land-
heavily debated. While several animal species possess
marks (Pimenta & Tirapicos, 2015). Before the advent
sophisticated neural circuits for spatial navigation (in-
of artificial flight, the shape of these large structures
cluding head direction, place, grid and border cells), or
could not be directly apprehended: from the ground,
produce rich but systematic patterns (e.g. spiderwebs,
they would be perceived as a distorted quadrilateral or
ellipse, at best. The fact that squares and circles ap-
peared at many different scales suggests that their hu-
Corresponding author Mathias Sablé-Meyer
man designers possessed an abstract mental concept of
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
geometric shape that guided their architectural, artistic and mirror symmetry (Bornstein et al., 1978). Indeed,
or practical creations. preschoolers’ drawings already show a tendency to rep-
resent abstract properties of objects rather than the ob-
Human and animal sensitivity to geometric pat-
ject itself. Although they look primitive, drawings of a
terns: a brief review
house as a triangle on top of a square, or a person as
Evidence for abstract concepts of geometry, including
capacity for abstracting away from the actual shape and
rectilinearity, parallelism, perpendicularity and sym-
attending to its principal axes, at the expense of realism.
metries, is widespread throughout prehistory. About
Numerous tests leverage this geometric competence to
70,000 years ago, homo Sapiens at Blombos cave carved
assess a child’s cognitive development by counting the
a piece of ocher with three interlocking sets of par-
number of correct or incorrect abstract properties, for in-
allel lines forming equilateral triangles, diamonds and
stance when asked to draw a person (Goodenough, 1926;
hexagons (Henshilwood et al., 2002). Much earlier, ap-
Harris, 1963; Long et al., 2019a; Prewett et al., 1988;
proximately 540,000 years ago, homo Erectus in Java
Reynolds & Hickman, 2004). There is some evidence,
carved a zig-zag pattern on a shell (J. C. A. Joordens
however limited, that this ability may be specifically
et al., 2015). Such a zig-zag may look simple, but it
human: when given pencils or a tablet computer, other
approximately respects geometric constraints of equal
non-human primates do not draw any abstract shapes
lengths, equal angles and parallelism, and is undoubt-
or recognizable figures, but mostly generate shapeless
edly attributed to the homo genus. Even earlier, since
scribbles (Saito et al., 2014a; Tanaka et al., 2003).
~1.8 million years, ancient humans have been carving
spheroids (sphere-like stones) and bifaces — stones pos-
We recently compared the perception of quadrilateral
sessing two orthogonal planes of symmetry (Le Tensorer,
geometric shapes in humans and in baboons, using the
2006). The vast number of bifaces, their near-perfect
very same task (Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021). We used
symmetry (which is not required for them to operate as
the intruder test (Dehaene et al., 2006), which involves
eﬀicient tools (Le Tensorer, 2006)), and the archeologi-
viewing an array of pictures and clicking on the one that
cal evidence that many were never used as tools, suggest
looks distinctly different from the others, and is well
that an aesthetic drive for symmetry was already present
within the grasp of human adults, children and baboons.
in ancient humans.
All humans, regardless of age, culture and education,
exhibited a striking effect of shape regularity: intrud-
Contemporary cognitive anthropology corroborates
ers amongst squares and rectangles were detected faster
those findings. Cognitive tests performed in relatively
and more accurately than amongst other, more irregular
isolated human groups such as the Mundurucu from the
quadrilaterals, and there was a systematic gradient of re-
Amazon, the Himba from Namibia, or aborigine groups
sponse time and error rates across shapes, from squares
from Northern Australia, show that in the absence of
and rectangles to parallelograms, trapezoids, and fully
formal western education in mathematics, adults and
irregular shapes. Strikingly, this geometric regularity ef-
even children already possess strong intuitions of nu-
fect was absent in baboons. Baboon behavior was quite
merical and geometric concepts (Amalric et al., 2017a;
consistent across individuals and could be captured by
Butterworth et al., 2008; Dehaene et al., 2006; Izard et
neural network models of the ventral visual pathway for
al., 2011b; Pica et al., 2004; Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021).
object recognition. Modeling the human perception of
Indeed, adults without formal western education share
quadrilaterals, however, required an additional assump-
with Western preschoolers a large repertoire of abstract
tion, namely the existence of discrete symbolic concepts
geometric concepts (Dehaene et al., 2006) and use them
of parallelism, right angle, equal length, or equal angle.
to capture the regularities in spatial sequences (Amalric
We therefore argued that two strategies can be used to
et al., 2017a) and quadrilateral shapes such as squares
perform the outlier task: a visual one, available to all
or parallelograms (Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021). They even
primates, and an abstract, symbolic one that may be
possess sophisticated intuitions of how parallel lines be-
unique to humans (Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021).
have under planar and spherical geometry, such as the
unicity of a parallel line passing through a given point
From these observations, one is left wondering what
on the plane (Izard et al., 2011a).
could be the origins and evolutionary advantage of the
Another piece of evidence arises from developmental human competence for abstract geometry. We propose
data. Preschoolers and even infants have been shown that it is a specific case, in the visual domain, of a gen-
to possess sophisticated intuitions of space (Hermer eral human ability to decompose complex percepts and
& Spelke, 1994; Landau et al., 1981; Newcombe et ideas into composable, reusable parts – an ability which
al., 2005), spatial sequences (Amalric et al., 2017a), led to a massive enhancement of human productions,
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
from architecture to tool building, and of the capacity imental psychophysical or neurophysiological literature
to understand the abstract features of the environment. on shape perception, while the individual transforma-
tions remained (for exceptions, see Brincat & Connor,
Summary of our approach and hypotheses
2004, 2006; Hung et al., 2012).
In the present paper, we formalize and put to an em-
In our previous work, we introduced a much more re-
pirical test the hypothesis that geometry is one of the
stricted, yet more precise, language of thought for geo-
manifestations of the specifically human ability to rep-
metric sequences. Our work focused on capturing the
resent and manipulate recursively embedded languages
psychological complexity of all the sequences of 8 loca-
(Dehaene et al., 2015; Fitch, 2014; Fodor, 1975; Fran-
tions that can be generated by drawing without repeti-
kland & Greene, 2020; Hauser et al., 2002; Piantadosi,
tion from the vertices of an octagon using either explicit
2011).
prediction of the next location or eye tracking of the
anticipation when looking at a sequence (Amalric et al.,
Fodor (1975) famously introduced the language of
2017a). The basic building blocks of our proposed lan-
thought hypothesis, according to which an inner com-
guage were the arithmetic primitive of discrete number,
binatorial language underlies high-level cognition in hu-
the geometric primitives of rotation and of symmetry
mans and allows the creation of a vast space of mental
around a given axis, and a single recursive operation of
representations by recursive recombination of preexist-
repetition (possibly with variations). These operations
ing ones. Hauser, Chomsky and Fitch (Hauser et al.,
could be embedded, thus allowing for repetitions of rep-
2002) hypothesized that recursion might be the single
etitions in a nested manner. For instance, the repeated
uniquely human ingredient that explains the emergence
application of a left-right symmetry operation, each time
of the human language faculty. Fitch (2014) and De-
with an increment in the starting point, could generate a
haene et al. (2015) later argued that recursion is not
zig-zag pattern. A square could be generated by a 4-fold
limited to linguistic communication, and that various
repetition of moving by 2 vertices around the octagon.
“languages of thought”, all based on a basic capacity
As a more complex example, a sequence of two squares
for recursive syntax and compositional semantics, could
could be generated by two nested “for loops”, i.e. a 2-
underlie many other uniquely human abilities such as
fold repetition (while changing the starting point) of the
music, mathematics or theory of mind. Here, we apply
4-fold repetition that draws a square.
this idea to the domain of geometric shape perception, a
possibility which was anticipated by (Hochberg & McAl-
Amalric et al. (2017a) measured empirically the
ister, 1953) who summarized their proposal as “the prob-
diﬀiculty that preschoolers and adults (including
ability of a given perceptual response to a stimulus is an
Mundurucu adults) had in predicting or memorizing
inverse function of the amount of information required
spatial sequences of locations on an octagon. Across
to define that pattern.”
11 geometric sequences, psychological complexity was
Our proposal builds upon the seminal work of Leeuwen- determined by the complexity of their internal represen-
berg and colleagues (Boselie & Leeuwenberg, 1986; tation in the proposed language. Working memory was
Leeuwenberg, 1971), who proposed a formal coding lan- not determined by sequence length (which, indeed, was
guage for 2- and 3-dimensional shapes, and showed fixed at 8 items), but by the capacity to compress the
that it could account for data on human shape per- sequence into a compact internal representation using
ception. Furthermore, Leeuwenberg’s language outputs the proposed language. The central concept here, as al-
sequences of numbers which can then be mapped to ready proposed by many others (Chater & Vitányi, 2003;
tones to form “tunes”, and the length of the smallest Feldman, 2000, 2003; Li & Vitányi, 1997; Mathy & Feld-
program for a given tune correlated with the average man, 2012; Romano et al., 2013), is that psychological
listening time of participants asked to repeatedly listen complexity in humans depends on minimum descrip-
to the tune until they anticipated they could predict it. tion length (MDL), i.e. the length of the shortest
Later, Leyton (1984, 2003b) argued that the shapes that mental representation which can encode the sequence,
humans generate arise from a set of primitives (points, rather the literal length of the sequence. In the case
lines, planes) together with the repeated mental appli- of our language for geometric sequences, MDL was also
cation of a series of group transformations that dupli- shown to tightly correlates with brain activity in both
cate, stretch, rotate, or skew them. While these elegant functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; Wang et
proposals have had a considerable influence in the de- al., 2019) and magneto-encephalography (Al Roumi et
sign of graphics software, it is fair to say that the core al., 2021). The very same language was also successfully
aspect of productive compositionality from basic oper- extended to account for the perception of simple audi-
ations remained partially disconnected from the exper- tory sequences made of two discrete sounds (Planton et
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
al., 2021). problem of program induction, i.e. the identification of
a program that produces a certain output. In line with
In the present work, we move beyond discrete sequences
much previous work (e.g. Chater & Vitányi, 2003; Feld-
made of points and straight lines, and tackle the men-
man, 2000, 2003; Feldman & Singh, 2006; Li & Vitányi,
tal representation of static geometric shapes such as a
1997; Mathy & Feldman, 2012; Romano et al., 2013), we
square, a circle or a spiral. As noted above, the square is
hypothesize that the perceived complexity of a shape is
easily captured by a language with discrete integers and
determined by its minimum description length (MDL)
repetition (“for loops”). However, continuously varying
in the proposed language.
shapes such as circles and spirals raise interesting issues
As a consequence of the relation between MDL and the
that arguably require more than integers. In computer
perceived complexity of a shape, we predict that several
languages such as Logo, such drawings are implemented
behavioral measures should be directly impacted by the
using a discrete repetition instruction with a very small
MDL of a shape. For instance, the time it takes to learn
increment, thus drawing a quasi-continuous curve which
a shape (i.e., to induce its program), as well as its sub-
is in fact made of straight lines. However, we find im-
jective complexity, should scale with the MDL. Other
plausible the idea that humans intuitively think of such
measures, such as the time to select a known shape
an infinitesimal and inherently discrete representation
amongst distractors, or the accuracy of that choice, may
when thinking of a circle. Furthermore, computation-
also scale with MDL to the extent that the influence
ally, the unbounded nature of such infinitesimal loops
of other competing strategies based on low-level visual
would allow short programs to generate visually com-
properties (e.g. average grey level, spatial frequency)
plex shapes. Instead, we argue that the crucial notion
can be mitigated. Indeed, choice time is a function of the
of “repetition with variation” introduced in our previous
multivariate relation between target and the distractors
work can be helpful again, but now in a continuous ver-
(Vigo & Doan, 2015), so in the following experiments, we
sion. We propose that, whenever a mental primitive is
make sure that at least one distractor is close enough to
available, for instance for drawing a straight line, mental
the target in low-level visual properties, thus inciting
control structures in humans are available to either keep
participants to adopt a higher-level strategy. Note that
its parameters constant, or to continuously vary them
our language targets geometric shapes specifically and
over time. Thus, the new version of our proposed lan-
makes no claims about other kind shapes, such as the
guages includes not only discrete repetition (“for loops”),
contours of natural objects, whose description requires
but also continuous repetition (i.e. integration). As a
other constructs (see Wilder et al., 2016).
result, the language can conceive of a curve with a fixed
amount of turning at any moment – a circle –, or a curve
Two comments are in order. First, the power of the pro-
where the amount of turning increases continuously – a
posed language rests entirely on its capacity to encode
spiral –, etc. Our proposal implies that both discrete
repetition with variation (e.g. a square and then an-
repetition and continuous path integration are primitive
other square). This concept is equivalent to invariance
concepts in the human language of geometry. Indeed, a
up to a transformation (e.g. invariance of the square
key hypothesis of the present work is that the human
up to a transformation of its starting point), which in
mind can encode discrete as well as continuous changes
mathematics, is the definition of symmetry: an object
and integrate them within a single language of thought.
is said to be symmetric if it (or part of it) remains un-
This part of our proposal is deeply related to the near-
changed after some transformation. The language we
universal existence of a system of aspect in human natu-
proposed recursively compresses any detectable repeti-
ral languages, betraying the existence of continuous ver-
tion with variation, and therefore any symmetry in the
sus discrete concepts of time and repetition (compare for
object or sequence. Second, our proposal is related to,
instance the imperfective, e.g. “the curve was turning”,
but distinct from, the psychological concept of chunking.
with the perfective, e.g. “the curve turned”) (Comrie,
While our language decomposes objects into coherent
1976).
subgroups, this proposal goes beyond mere chunking in
that (1) it applies recursively and (2) its final represen-
In summary, we propose that the human mental rep-
tation is not just a set of nested groupings (chunks of
resentation of geometric shape involves a language of
chunks) but a mental program which can generate the
thought that can produce virtually all the geometric line
initial shape or sequence, possibly with variations.
drawings observed in human cultures as combinations of
a minimal set of geometric primitives. Our core hypoth- Below, we describe the proposed language in detail, list
esis is that perceiving a shape, in humans, consists in its predictions, and test them in two experiments. First,
finding the shortest program that suﬀices to reproduce we show that our language predicts which shapes are
it. Our proposal thus connects shape perception to the judged simple. Second, we show that any such language
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
has to satisfy a set of additive relationships for repeated, the position of the pen by a certain amount in the cur-
concatenated or embedded shapes, and that those uni- rent direction without tracing; and Trace, which traces a
versal laws can be experimentally validated. curve by integrating over a set of parameters (duration,
speed, acceleration, and turning speed).
A generative language for geometric shapes
Second, the three control structures are Concatenate
In this section, we make our proposal concrete by intro- (also denoted by “;”) which executes one program and
ducing a specific language, somewhat similar to Logo’s then another; Repeat, which repeats a program a certain
turtle language, for generating a variety of geometric number of times (twice by default); and Subprogram
line drawings. The language we propose is based on two which saves the current state, executes a given program,
postulates. First, we assume that all humans possess a and resumes the previous state for the rest of the execu-
set of primitive operators or “mental routines” (Ullman, tion, thereby isolation the execution of the subprogram.
1984) that serve as building blocks for more complex
Third, since these instructions require either discrete or
programs. We included elementary primitives that have
continuous arguments, the language contains a number
been proven to be present in human children or adults
system, with integers (Int) and numerical (Num) types.
in the absence of formal education; several of them are
For computational simplicity, in order to avoid a huge
likely to be inherited from primate evolution. Our prim-
combinatorial explosion that would prevent the enumer-
itives comprise the concepts of
ation of all minimal programs, we did not include a full
• Small exact integers (Feigenson et al., 2004) which algebra, in spite of recent evidence that humans may
can be minimally generated by the successor func- possess one (Grace et al., 2020). Instead, the Int’s are
tion 𝑠(𝑛) = 𝑛 + 1 (Izard et al., 2008), built using Peano arithmetic starting from 1 (the lan-
guage has a one primitive and a successor primitive,
• Fractions, i.e. ratios of those integers (Jacob &
and the Num are either signed integers (positive or nega-
Nieder, 2009; Siegler et al., 2011)
tive), or signed fractions of two integers. This is enough
• Straight line (see e.g. Izard et al., 2011b), to generate rational numbers, but prevents nesting of
fractions.
• Heading direction (Muller et al., 1996) and how it
changes when we turn, The numbers generated by our language are unitless,
and they are interpreted differently depending on the
• Path integration (Dehaene et al., 2006; Gallis-
functions in which they are evaluated. For the Turn
tel, 1990; Leeuwenberg, 1971; McNaughton et al.,
function, an argument of 1 is interpreted as “one right
2006; O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978),
angle” (i.e. the unit for angle is “right angle”). Similarly,
• Right angle turn (Dehaene et al., 2006; Dillon et Move and Trace instructions use implicit units of length
al., 2019; Izard et al., 2011b) and speed, determined such that the default values (1)
on duration and turning speed imply turning by a full
Extensions of this list, for instance to large approximate
circle. These hypotheses, while plausible, are not crucial,
numbers, would be straightforward and are considered
since changing them would only minimally change the
in the discussion, but as we shall see, those primitives
predicted shape complexities (e.g. if the default turn
appear to suﬀice to account for a broad variety of geo-
was by 180°, a right-angle turn would still be available
metric shapes that humans universally consider simple.
at a minimal constant cost, as half of it).
Our second postulate is that, in humans only, a compo-
Calculation of minimum description length
sitional language of thought allows these primitive op-
erators to be combined into larger programs. We sup-
Our language does not guarantee that each shape can
pose that three composition instructions are available:
be generated by a single program. Quite the opposite:
concatenation; repetition; and call to a subprogram in
whenever a shape can be generated at all, an infinity
isolation.
of programs are available to generate it. Our third key
postulate is therefore that humans search for the short-
Program instructions
est program that draws a given shape. We refer to the
following instructions. First, as in the “logo” language its Minimum Description Length (MDL), and the corre-
(Abelson et al., 1974), drawing instructions dictate the sponding program(s) as the Minimal Program(s). No-
movements of a pen that can move and trace curves on tice that this is compatible with a Bayesian framework,
a plane. Those instructions are Turn, which changes or probabilistic program induction (Lake et al., 2015b):
the current heading of the pen; Move, which changes since the number of programs of length 𝑛 increases ex-
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
Program :=
| Program ; Program Concatenate : run one program and then another
control
| Repeat([Int=2]) { Program } Repeat a program a certain number of times
| Subprogram { Program } Execute a program, then restore the original state
| Trace([t=Int=1], Trace a curve by moving according to the parameters
[speed=Num=+1],
[acceleration=Num=+0],
drawing
[turningSpeed=Num=+0])
| Move([t=Num=+1]) Move a certain distance without tracing anything
| Turn(angle=Num) Rotate the current heading
Int :=
| one Number 1
| Next(Int) Successor function
arithmetic
Num :=
| +Int | -Int Return a signed number
| +Int/Int | -Int/Int Return the signed fraction of two integers
As indicated in the right column, control primitives act on programs, drawing primitives move the pen on the plane in various ways,
and arithmetic instructions generate integers and fractions that are passed as parameters. Green, instructions; pink, types; blue, named
parameters; gray, default values for optional arguments (denoted by brackets).
ponentially with 𝑛, the log likelihood of a given program As a slightly more complex example, the following pro-
under the hypothesis of a probabilistic grammar will be
proportional to its MDL.
Repeat(n(n(one))) {
The complexity of a program is defined as the number Subprogram { Trace(acceleration=one/n(n(one)),
of nodes in its syntax tree, or equivalently the number turningSpeed=+one)
of primitives in the program, with two exceptions. First, } ;
whenever a signed number is required, for instance when Turn(angle=n(n(n(one)))/n(n(one)))
turning by a certain angle, an additional node is needed }
(indicating + or -). This node was not counted, thus
preventing the cost of signed values from being system- This program of complexity 21 draws three identical
atically higher than that of unsigned values (e.g. one, inward spirals using the Trace instruction. Note that
vs. +one). Second, concatenations did not increase the number 3 is coded as next(next(one)) (again, this
MDL. This feature arose as a by-product of our imple- assumption is adopted for simplicity; adding primitives
mentation, which used continuations to express concate- for numbers 2 and 3 would only minimally change the
nation (all programs takes a last argument which must predicted MDL). The Subprogram instruction ensures
be a program, possibly empty, and executes it when it that, after drawing a single spiral, the position is reset
is done, which effectively implements concatenations). to the origin. The Turn instruction, which takes 4/3 as
We checked that the results did not change dramati- its argument, ensures that the three spirals are oriented
∘ 4 ∘
cally when adding counting concatenations, as the re- at 120 = 90 from each other.
sults should not hinge on this implementation detail.
Simulation results
Examples
We first examined the shortest programs in the proposed
The minimal program to draw a square is
language, and whether they always generate shapes that
Repeat { Repeat { Trace ; Turn(angle=+one)} } are simple and frequently attested in human cultural
history. To this end, we wrote a program that system-
(where the infix operator “;” denotes concatenation). atically enumerates all possible programs in order of
This program works because, in the absence of any argu- increasing MDL, and draws the corresponding shapes
ment, Repeat defaults to 2 repetitions. Since a turn of (we eliminated, automatically as well as manually, the
one means a right-angle turn, this program concatenates shapes that could be generated by a simpler program).
MDL of this program is 5 (repeat + repeat + trace + shapes after cleaning of duplicates, sorted by MDL. The
turn + one). simplest, lowest complexity shapes are extremely simple:
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
Shapes sorted by Minimum Description Length
are culturally observed. Nevertheless, the shapes with
MDL
low MDL remain introspectively simple (this intuition
is tested formally in experiment 1 further below). This
observation is in stark contrast with most other such
languages, such as Logo, where the combinatorial explo-
sion creates short programs with complex, unintuitive
graphic outputs.
Program induction using DreamCoder
A crucial aspect of our proposal is that humans encode a
shape mentally by inferring a simple program that could
generate it. Thus, the perception of a simple shape is
an act of “program induction”. Yet it is implausible
that humans scan through thousands of programs be-
fore recognizing a square. Otherwise, the time required
6 to recognize a shape would grow exponentially with the
length of its shortest program. Thus, it is important to
show that such an inference is, at least approximately,
computationally feasible in our specific case. While pro-
gram induction remains a diﬀicult challenge for com-
puter science, we leveraged a state-of-the-art program
induction technique, the DreamCoder algorithm (Ellis
et al., 2021). This algorithm is given programming prob-
9 lems via examples of the desired behavior, and searches
for the simplest program that performs the task. Here, a
task reduces to a shape, and DreamCoder has to find the
shortest program that generates it. DreamCoder inter-
nally represents the language as a probabilistic grammar
and enumerates programs according to their likelihood
using the probabilistic weights of the grammar.
Two features of DreamCoder speed up the search. First,
the weights are task-dependent and are suggested by a
neural network for a given task. For instance, Dream-
Coder may learn that shapes with straight lines call the
Trace instruction without any TurningSpeed argument.
Sample shapes generated by the enumeration of all programs in the
proposed language. Programs were listed by increasing MDL. Iden- The neural network can be trained without any envi-
tical or perceptually indistinguishable shapes that could be generated
ronmental input or supervision, simply by sampling a
by a simpler program were eliminated. Starting at MDL=4, only
a limited sample of 7 shapes is shown, as the number of shapes random program, generating the corresponding shape
increases exponentially with MDL.
(called “dreaming”) in a top-down manner, then using
this internally generated shape-program data pair in
supervised learning in order to adjust the bottom-up
they consist of a line segment (MDL=1), then a circle
weights from the shape to its program representation
(MDL=2) and a spiral (MDL=3). The low-complexity
(see also Lake et al., 2017). Second, DreamCoder builds
shapes with MDL = 4 or 5 are also excellent candidates
new abstractions for pieces of programs that are often
for cultural universals: repeating circles, dashed lines,
used for a given set of tasks: for example, if the shapes
spirals with various numbers of loops, and other simple
contain many right angles, it may create a new abstrac-
mathematical shapes such as the square, the half-circle,
tion Turn(angle=1), thereby increasing the likelihood
or two tangent circles. At this stage, the concatenation
of programs that use it. In a Bayesian sense, this cor-
instruction also generates less intuitive, but still cultur-
responds to updating the priors over the space of pro-
ally attested shapes such as a “sigma” (segment + circle)
grams. This abstraction mechanism is useful to capture
or a “crosier” (segment + spiral). As MDL increases,
regularities in a corpus of shapes: subprograms used to
the huge combinatorial explosion of programs results
draw the simplest ones can be reused to draw more com-
in an enormous variety of shapes, only some of which
plex ones. Interestingly, these two mechanisms interact.
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
As the grammar becomes biased towards using certain towards shapes that resemble the training set (bottom
ased towards recognizing them; for example, the neu- for observed shapes, and therefore yield visually similar
ral network might increase the probability of the “turn” shapes.
primitive when it sees angles, or that of “repeat” when
The DreamCoder approach opens up a number of per-
it notices repeating patterns.
spectives on how human cognition could eﬀiciently ad-
dress the problem of program induction. First, it nat-
A. Training set
urally accounts for cultural drifts: while shapes such
“Greek” “Celtic”
as circles and squares are universally shared, cultures
are also characterized by the frequent use of specific
patterns (e.g. linear Greek friezes versus curvilinear
Celtic spirals). This arises even though the geometric
primitives are universal, because each culture adopts,
initially by chance, some preferred combination of prim-
itives, which are then internalized as frequent subpro-
grams or program fragments and progressively cement
a specific style of geometric patterns – a proposition that
generalizes the “child as a hacker” hypothesis (Rule et
B. Samples (dreams)
al., 2020). Second, DreamCoder may explain how sim-
“Greek” “Celtic”
ple geometric shapes may be eﬀiciently recognized and
used by young children in the absence of much or any
training (poverty of the stimulus argument). This is be-
cause the top-down system (from programs to shapes)
can be used to train the bottom-up system (from shapes
to programs) via the use of “dreams”, i.e. internally gen-
erated training data. In an improved version of Dream-
Coder, the bottom-up neural network could be repur-
posed to directly retrieve the most plausible program
for a given shape, thus providing a possible mechanism
by which humans can quickly identify simple shapes. Fi-
Testing the DreamCoder algorithm for program induction. A, shapes
nally, another promising aspect of this proposal, which
used in a training phase. We verified that, in response to all 32
shapes shown, the algorithm was able to identify a short, presum- remains to be fully explored, is the possibility of creating
ably minimal program that could generate it. The algorithm was
reusable abstractions or program templates. While the
trained either with the square shapes at left (“Greek” style) or with
the circular shapes at right (“Celtic” style). B, examples of addi- square, for instance, is not a primitive of the original lan-
tional shapes spontaneously generated by sampling from the gram-
guage, a square-drawing program schema may become
mar learned during the training set, and therefore biased towards a
certain geometric style. abstracted over time, thus allowing the participant to
easily understand concepts such as “a square of circles”
We found that, together, those two mechanisms made or “a square twice larger than the previous one”, etc.
program induction feasible for our language, at least for At present, however, for simplicity, such named subpro-
separate corpora, one with mostly rectilinear shapes (re- of the DreamCoder program-induction software.
ferred to as “Greek”), and one with mostly curvilinear
shapes (referred to as “Celtic”). After learning, Dream-
Experiment 1: predicting geometric complexity
Coder finds fitting programs for each of these tasks:
for more exhaustive evaluation of DreamCoder includ- Does the proposed language have any psychological re-
ing train/test splits and ablation of its various compo- ality? In experiment 1, we test the simplest prediction
nents, including with drawing primitives, refer to (Ellis of our proposal: the perceived complexity of a shape
et al., 2021). Interestingly, the abstractions it created should be determined by its minimal program length. If
depending on the domain were different. This could humans represent shapes as mental programs, then for
be visualized by sampling “dreams” from the resulting tasks involving shape perception and manipulation, the
grammars. Simple shapes (circles, lines, squares) appear MDL of the shape should predict the diﬀiculty of the
in both cases as they are still simple in a grammar with task. Additionally, as MDL increases, the time it takes
additional abstractions, but the grammars exhibit a bias to perform program induction on the shape increases as
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
well, and therefore it should take longer to encode the
shape in working memory and to compare it with other
shapes.
2s
This prediction should hold only provided that other
Blank screen
simple perceptual strategies do not suﬀice to perform
those tasks. In previous work, we found that the per-
ception of quadrilaterals could be based on two systems:
Phase 1 : Encoding Phase 2: choice
a list of symbolic rules akin to those arising from the
current language (e.g. right angle, equal sides), and
B C
only available to humans; and a classical invariant shape RT (ms) RT residuals (ms)
recognition system, well captured by a convolutional
Choice: Choice:
neural network model of the ventral visual pathway, 300
R² = 0.73 R² = 0.54
p = 0.0004 p = 0.0067
and available to both human and non-human primates
(Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021). Thus, to properly test the
existence of the first system, it is important to cancel
Encoding:
-300
out the potential contributions of the second. R² = 0.46
Encoding:
p = 0.0158
R² = 0.68
p = 0.0009
Here, we asked participants to memorize a sample ge-
2 4 6 8 10 12 2 4 6 8 10 12
ometric shape and perform a delayed match-to-sample
Minimum Description Length Minimum Description Length
task where, after a 2-second delay, that shape had to
be selected from an array of 6 possible choices, some of
trial, participants pressed a key for as long as they needed to mem-
measured the choice time, but also the encoding time by
orize a shape (encoding phase), then, after a 2-second delay, had
letting participants view the sample shape for as long as to select the corresponding shape among a 2x3 grid (choice phase).
Note that there was a size change between phase 1 and phase 2.
they wished, holding down the space bar until they were
B, correlation between MDL and behavior. Average encoding time
ready to decide; as soon as they released the space bar, (purple) and choice time (orange) are plotted as a function of MDL.
Error bars represent one standard error across participants. C, same
the sample shape disappeared, then after a fixed delay,
results after regressing out the effect of total luminance.
the choices appeared. We hypothesized that both encod-
ing time and choice time would be predicted by MDL.
ration of the press the encoding time, as it is an indirect
Methods
measure of the time that participants needed to encode
the target shape. More specifically, we predict that this
Participants. Participants were 125 adults tested on-
duration spans over several cognitive steps, some inde-
line (53 females, 69 males, 3 preferred not to answer; age
pendent from the shape (e.g. motor actions) and at least
range 20 to 78, mean and median 44 years old), recruited
one that should scale with the MDL, as participants are
and tested online via messages on social media. The task
performing program induction to build a mental repre-
was approved by our university’ committee for ethical
sentation of the shape they remember.
research (CER-Paris-Saclay-2019-063) and participants
gave informed consent.
The choice screen comprised six different shapes that
Procedure and Stimuli. On each trial, we showed
were displayed on an isoluminant blue/yellow checker-
participants a sample shape for a variable duration, then
an empty screen for 2 seconds, and finally a 2x3 choice
click on a shape, which ended the trial. We measured
screen with 6 shapes. Participants were asked to click
both accuracy and response time, which we refer to as
on the shape that was shown originally. Participants
choice time. We predicted that those variables should
controlled how long they looked at the reference shape:
also impacted by MDL because, after ruling out visu-
when they were ready to start a trial, they clicked at
ally implausible distractors (e.g. based an exceedingly
the center of the screen (thus centering their mouse),
different gray level), participants would have to either
then pressed the space bar on their keyboard. The sam-
generate the target shape from their remembered mental
ple shape was shown for as long as the space bar was
representation and compare the output to the remaining
depressed. Upon releasing the space bar, the shape dis-
candidates, or to encode the remaining candidates and
appeared and they were left with a blank screen. In-
compare with their memory representation of the target,
structions insisted on the self-paced nature of the task:
and both strategies should scale with MDL.
“Keep the spacebar depressed for as long as you deem
necessary to remember the shape well”. We call the du- The experiment comprised 6 initial training trials, then
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
68 trials with 68 unique testing shapes, each appearing Both measures were significantly correlated with the
shapes sample from the list of shapes with MDL=5 in also performed between-subjects ANOVAs on the lin-
our language. During training, the distractors were al- ear effect of MDL (numerical factor) across participants.
ways the same six shapes and participants had each of The main effect of MDL was again highly significant
them as a target once. Piloting indicated that the choice (encoding time: F(1,115)=148.5, p<.001; choice time:
of distractors was crucial for the performance to vary F(1,115)=480.7, p<.001).
from one shape to the other: if the distractors were too
Since MDL showed a small but significant partial cor-
dissimilar from the sample shape, participants learned
relation with gray level (R²=.07, p=.027), we repli-
to press and release the spacebar as fast as they could,
cated this analysis by first removing the main effect of
knowing that a purely perceptual strategy suﬀiced for
gray level on response times, then performing a sim-
virtually perfect accuracy and therefore bypassing the
ple linear regression on the residuals. The effect of
need to have an accurate mental representation of the
shape. To mitigate this strategy, we selected distractors
R²=.46, p=.016; choice time: R²=.54, p=.006; between-
closely matched to each shape. We computed, for each
subjects ANOVAs, encoding time: F(1,115)=118.2,
p<.001; choice time: F(1,115)=248.1, p<.001).
metrics: (i) the average gray level (average pixel value of
an image), and (ii) the difference in the vector codes of
Both of these effects were replicated on error rates, de-
the shapes within the last layer of a convolutional neural
spite accuracy being very high. Plots of MDL against
network of object recognition, CORnet (Kubilius et al.,
either error rates or the residuals of error rates on gray
2019). CORnet is a convolutional neural network that
figures amongst the top-scoring models of the ventral
icantly correlated with the dependent variable, indicat-
stream according to BrainScore, “a composite of mul-
ing that participants made more mistakes as MDL in-
tiple neural and behavioral benchmarks that score any
creased (raw R²=.51, p=.009; after taking the residuals
ANN on how similar it is to the brain’s mechanisms for
on gray level, R²=.48, p=.012).
core object recognition” (Schrimpf et al., 2018, 2020).
We also estimated the quality of our model for shape
Then, on each trial, we presented on the choice screen,
complexity by contrasting it with many random com-
at random locations: (1) the correct target shape; (2)
peting models where the shapes’ MDLs were shuffled.
two of the four closest shapes according to CORnet;
(3) two of the four closest shapes according to average
derive p-values that our model is as predictive as it
gray level, different from those selected in (2); and (4)
is by chance, by counting the number of “better” ran-
a last shape uniformly sampled among the remaining
dom models generated when shuffling: for both encod-
test shapes. The selection algorithm ensured that all 6
ing time and choice time, no shuffled model was better,
choice shapes differed. The choice of shapes and their
ensuring that p<.0001, and for error rates 7 out of 10000
placement were fully randomized for each participant,
models were better, therefore p=.0007.
independently within training and within testing.
To compare the effects of MDL and gray level, we
Results
also performed a multiple-regression analysis with both
Overall error rate was very low (1.82%), so we concen- variables (normalized) as predictors, across the 68 test
trated our analysis on response times. We removed all shapes. For encoding time, both predictors were signif-
participants who failed on 5 or more trials, as well as par- icant (both p<.0001; R²=.59; betas = 157.7 (Standard
ticipants whose overall average encoding time or choice Error [SE]=37.4) for MDL and 272.0 (SE=37.4) for gray
time was higher than the group mean plus three stan- level). For choice times, both predictors were also signif-
dard deviations (9 participants removed in total; 116 re- icant (MDL: p=.0003; gray p<.0001; R²=.53; betas =
maining). We also removed, for each shape, trials where 108.7 (SE=28.8) for MDL and 182.75 (SE=28.8) for gray
the encoding time exceeded the average encoding time of level). For error rates, only MDL was significant (MDL:
that shape plus three standard deviations (and similarly p=.003; gray p=.84, R²=.13; betas: =.014 (SE=.004)
for choice time). This procedure removed 3.8% of the for MDL and -.001 (SE=.004) for gray).
total number of trials.
We also controlled for additional visual features (see Fig-
To test for the predicted effect of MDL on behavior, ure 7). For each shape, we manually counted the num-
we performed simple linear regressions on the encod- ber of extremities (variable Nex), intersections where
ing times and choice times as a function of the MDL. two lines meet (singularities, variable Ni2), intersections
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
Histogram of the # of simulations ending A
at given slope out of 10000 samples
Error Rate Error Rate residuals
0.06
Encoding Time
0.04
R²=.51
p=.009 R²=.48
p=.012
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.00
p<.0001
0.00
-0.02
-100 -50 0 50
2 4 6 8 10 12 2 4 6 8 10 12
Program Cost Program Cost
Choice Time
Betas in a binomial GLM
To predict Error Rate
(error rate /unit)
200 p<.01
1.5
p<.0001 p<.01
0.8
p=.51
-50 0 50 p=.27
p=.93
0 0.1 0.2
Error Rate
-0.5
p=.01 -0.7
-0.8
p<.01
-1 p=.03
-1.3
p<.01
p=.0007
A, correlation between MDL and behavior. Left: Average Error Rates
-0.012 -0.008 -0.004 0.000 0.004
are plotted as a function of MDL. Error bars represent one standard
simulated slope error across participants. Right: same results after regressing out
tures. We ran a binomial GLM with all the features, normalized for
comparison, as well as the MDL, and display the fitted coeﬀicients
and their significance, for the error rate. Grayed out predictors
Bootstrap over the shapes’ MDL. For each dependent variable in sep-
were not significant in the regression, and bright orange indicates
arate panels, we show the distribution of the slope of 10000 simple
our regressor of interest, the MDL. Predictors are ranked according
linear regression computed after shuffling the shapes’ MDLs. The
to their magnitude when predicting the choice time.
dashed line, on the right, indicates the slope of our (unshuffled)
theory. From this we can derive p-values by computing the frac-
tion of random theories that are better than our theory: this yields
p=.0007 for error rates, and ensures p<.0001 for both encoding time
and choice time as no random permutation fared better.
fully fitted at the level of individual participants). Fig-
ure 7 shows the breakdown of each shape’s property,
as well as a comparison of the predictors associated to
where three lines meet (Ni3), intersections where four or
each normalized term in the full model. For both en-
more lines meet (Ni4+), disconnected parts (Ndis), and
coding time and choice time, the predictor associated
finally the presence of a closed shape or not (closure). To
to the MDL significantly predicted the dependent vari-
confirm that the effect of MDL did not result from a spu-
rious correlation with these features, we first ran a model
more conservative control, we computed the residuals
comparison between a mixed-effect model with all fea-
from the first model for each participant, then averaged
tures, grey level, and the average spatial frequency, with
those residuals over participants and MDL levels, and
participants as random intercepts, and the same model
examined the correlation of those residuals with MDL.
plus the MDL. The second model was significantly bet-
This linear model was not significant for the encoding
ter than the first one for both dependent measures (Like-
time (r²=.04, p=.51), but it was for choice time (r²=.58,
lihood Ratio Test, encoding time 𝜒 = 106.4, 𝑝 < .001;
p=.003). Inspection of the residuals show that the “seg-
choice time 𝜒 = 169.8, 𝑝 < .001). The same result held
ment” shape, which is the only shape with MDL=1,
for error rates using binomial linear models (error rate:
had a very high residual for the encoding time, while
𝜒 = 107.43, 𝑝 < .001; for this model no random effects
the other seemed to follow the MDL pattern. After re-
were included, as the estimates could not be meaning-
moving this outlier item, both encoding time and choice
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
A B
Betas in a Mixed-Effect GLM predicting participants’
Choice Time (ms/unit)
p<.01
169.8
p<.01
p<.01
107.9
102.2
p<.01
p<.01
45.6
p=.69
0 28
-26 3.4
p=.02
-76.7
-89.7
-100 p<.01
p<.01
Response Time (ms/unit)
p<.01
218.8
p<.01
164.9
p<.01
p<.01
114.1 p<.01
86.2
79.2
p=.07
p=.55
7.6 -27.7 27.5
p=.04
-100.3
-100
p<.01
Residuals on all other predictors (ms), with and without MDL=1
Choice Encoding Choice Encoding
R²=.58 R²=.05 R²=.63 R²=.5
p<.01 p=.51 p<.01 p=.02
Program cost Program cost
2 4 6 8 10 12 2 4 6 8 10 12
Detailed analysis of Exp. 1 A, breakdown of the properties. For each shape, describes the manually annotated or computed visual features. B,
Predictive power of the visual features. We ran a mixed-effect GLM with all visual features, normalized for comparison, as well as the MDL,
and display the fitted coeﬀicients and their significance, for both choice time and response time. Grayed out predictors were not significant
in the regression, and bright orange indicates our regressor of interest, the MDL. Predictors are ranked according to their magnitude when
predicting the choice time. C. The simple linear model MDL and either choice or response time, on the residuals of a mixed-effect model
with all visual features, after averaging per MDL value. On the right, we display the same regression after removing the only trial where
MDL=1.
time residuals were now significantly predicted (encod- p=.12).
ing time: r²=.5, p=.015; choice time: r²=.63, p=.003).
For completeness, a similar strategy was pursued with
Discussion of experiment 1
error rates, first taking the residuals on a binomial re-
gression on all other predictors, and then fitting a sim- As predicted, in a delayed match-to-sample task with
ple linear regression with MDL on those residuals. The geometric shapes, participants were influenced by the
resulting trend was similar but not significant (r²=.23, shape’s Minimum Description Length (MDL) in our pro-
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
posed language. This result held at individual levels and suﬀices to generate a circle of squares, or a square of
for all measures of encoding time, choice time and error circles – and thus, this addition should just have an
rate, with comparable effect sizes. The effect of MDL additive effect on MDL.
did not trivially arise from spurious correlation with
These observations lead to the following quantitative
other image properties such as number of parts, intersec-
prediction: in any language for geometric shapes which
tions, closure, etc. While behavior was also influenced
includes primitives of repetition, concatenation and em-
by the perceptual property of average gray level, the
bedding, the cost of complex shapes should be the sum
effect of MDL remained even when controlling for this
of the lengths of (1) the program(s) that are being re-
low-level effect and all other variables. Yet MDL alone
peated, concatenated or embedded, plus (2) a fixed cost
did not fully predict behavior: in a regression with many
for the instruction itself and, if necessary, its operands.
predictors, several exhibited some explanatory power in
our task. This finding supports our prior suggestion
placed side by side: we predict its complexity to be the
that there are two type of strategies available to perform
sum of the complexity of each shape plus some constant
such perceptual tasks with geometrical figures (Sablé-
for the concatenation instruction. Likewise, the cost for
Meyer et al., 2021): one that encodes shapes at a visual
a repetition of a shape should only depend on the cost
level, based on perceptual properties such as gray level,
of that shape, plus a constant to express the repetition,
intersections, etc; and one that represents them at an
and a cost for the parameter ”number of repetitions”. Fi-
abstract, symbolic level, which is well captured by our
proposed language.
embedded in another (e.g. a square of circles) should be
the cost of each shape plus a constant for the “embed”
While this result is promising, there are many reasons to
instruction.
believe that our specific language proposal is not com-
plete, and that it would be possible to find shapes for
In summary, the following relations should hold, where
which the fit would be poor. For instance, the com-
𝐶𝑥 stands for “complexity” (at least for 𝑥 ≠ 𝑦, see be-
plex outlines of natural objects (e.g. the contour of a
low):
recognizable animal) are completely outside of reach of
our proposal, and other theories based on medial axis 1. 𝐶𝑥 (𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡(𝑥, 𝑛)) = 𝛽 + 𝛽 ∗ 𝐶𝑥(𝑥) + 𝛽 ∗ 𝐶𝑥(𝑛)
0 1 2
or shape skeletons would fare much better (Feldman
2. 𝐶𝑥 (𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(𝑥, 𝑦)) = 𝛽 + 𝛽 ∗ 𝐶𝑥(𝑥) + 𝛽 ∗ 𝐶𝑥(𝑦)
0 1 2
& Singh, 2006). Even within geometric shapes, and
as we further examine in the general discussion, there 3. 𝐶𝑥 (𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑(𝑥, 𝑦)) = 𝛽 + 𝛽 ∗ 𝐶𝑥(𝑥) + 𝛽 ∗ 𝐶𝑥(𝑦)
0 1 2
are shapes that the language cannot easily describe (e.g.
Note that the multipliers 𝛽 and 𝛽 should be close to
ovals), or properties it cannot easily encode (e.g. while 1 2
1 if the length of the program is the only factor that
an equilateral triangle has a low MDL, there is no way
comes into play, but might exceed 1 if additional factors
to describe “any triangle”). Thus, while experiment 1
intervene (e.g. interference between the two shapes in
tested the specifics of our language, experiment 2 was
working memory). 𝛽 , on the other hand, represent the
designed to test regularities that any such reasonable 0
constant cost associated with the operation at hand and
language should verify.
should be strictly positive.
In experiment 2, we therefore replicated the delayed
Experiment 2: Fundamental laws of repetition,
match-to-sample with new stimuli. We selected five base
concatenation and embedding
shapes spanning a broad range of predicted complexities,
To sidestep the constraints that come with choosing a and used them to build new stimuli through repetition,
specific language, we designed an experiment that tests, concatenation and embedding, with the goal of testing
independently, the three most fundamental aspects of whether their complexity could be predicted from the
our proposition, namely the existence of operations of complexity of their base shapes. Thus, we designed a
repetition, concatenation and (nested) embedding (that total of 60 images that served as samples in the task :
available in any modern programming language, have tions of those base shapes, generated by showing side by
the highest impact on the compressibility of shapes and side four copies of the base shape; (3) twenty-five con-
help decorrelate the length of a program and the amount catenations corresponding to all 5x5 pairs of base shapes
of “ink” of a shape. They allow a program to be ex- placed side by side; and (4) twenty-five embeddings of
tremely short and yet the shape to be complex, as long a base shape inside another, generated by drawing the
as it is highly regular. For instance, from the programs outline of one shape using 8 or 9 copies of the other.
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
In a separate group of participants, we also measured the (2) two concatenation distractors where either the left or
subjective complexity of the same shapes. We presented right shapes were replaced by a different base shape, (3)
participants with those 60 shapes in random order and one distractor from the embedding condition, using the
asked them to evaluate each shape’s complexity on a same two shapes as the left and right shapes, assigned
scale from 0-100. randomly to embedded and embedding, (4) one distrac-
tor from the repetition condition, using randomly either
Method
the left or the right shape. Similarly, for the embedding
condition, the distractors were (1) a distractor from the
Participants. Participants were recruited via Twitter.
embedding condition, with the same outer shape but the
One hundred and seventy adults participated in the
inner shape replaced by its local deviant; (2) two em-
main delayed match-to-sample task (71 male and 99
bedding distractors where either the outer or the inner
females), with a breakdown of 16 participants in the
shape was replaced by a different base shape, (3) one
18-25 age group, 77 in the 25-40, 68 in the 50-60 and
distractor from the concatenation condition, but using
9 in the 60+. Participants were not compensated for
the same two shapes as the inner and outer shapes, (4)
participating in this study. An additional 27 adults par-
one distractor from the repetition condition, using either
ticipated in the subjective ratings (15 females and 12
the inner or the outer shape. Our logic was that this set
males). Both tasks were approved by CER-Paris-Saclay-
of distractors covered a broad range of programs in the
2019-063, and participants gave informed consent.
proposed language, each with a small local change or
Procedure and Stimuli for the delayed match-to-
“bug” – thus forcing subjects to search for the shape
sample task. The procedure for this experiment was
identical to that of our first experiment, and only the
8B shows, for each condition, an example of a target
stimuli changed. The stimuli were generated from five
and five possible distractors.
base shapes that were piloted to vary in encoding and
choice time (square, circle, S, sigma, and square root,
In addition to those 60 trials, 10 initial training trials
allowed participants to get used to the task flow and
shapes had similar amounts of ink, or gray level: the
to the diﬀiculty level of the memory task. Training tri-
square, sigma and square root all had four segments of
als were generated similarly, but using three different
identical length, arranged differently; the circle matched
base shapes and the same exact procedure. The experi-
the square in length; and the S shape comprised two
ment proceeded seamlessly from training to testing tri-
semi-circles and was therefore matched with the circle.
als, without any notice.
Those base shapes were then used to generate the 60
Procedure and stimuli for subjective complex-
target stimuli for the four experimental conditions: sin-
ity ratings. Upon clicking on a link from the twitter
gle shape (5 stimuli), repetition (a string of 4 identical
message, participants landed on an experiment designed
shapes; 5 stimuli), concatenation (2 shapes side by side;
with jsPsych (De Leeuw, 2015). The experiment started
5x5=25 stimuli), and embedding (an inner shape was
with a consent form as well as a small demographic ques-
presented at the usual size, but in 8 or 9 copies that
tionnaire for age group and sex. Then they were pre-
formed the outlined of a second, outer shape; 5x5=25
sented with instructions for the task: using sliders from
stimuli).
0-100, they had to give a complexity rating to each of
the 60 sample shapes. To familiarize them with the type
Each of those 60 stimuli served as samples for the
of shapes, the instructions included 24 shapes that did
delayed match-to-sample task. During the choice pe-
not appear afterward. We highlighted in the instruc-
riod, the sample stimulus was intermixed with 5 distrac-
tions that they should focus on trying to be consistent
tors, which were generated in order to prevent short-cut
across shapes. Participants were then presented with all
strategies and maximize the need for a full identification
60 shapes in a shuffled order. Participants could freely
of the target shape. For each base shape, we designed a
look at the shapes in any order and change their rating
local deviant by removing one fourth of the shape (see
until they were satisfied. The task took a median time
st rd
of 6:34 minutes to answer (1 quartile, 4:48; 3 quartile,
tions, the distractors were (1) a distractor from the same
9:36.).
condition, but using the local deviant instead of the tar-
get, (2) a distractor from the same condition, but using
Results
a different shape, (3) three distractors drawn from each
of the other three conditions, and sharing at least one None of the subjective rating data were rejected. For
shape with the target. For the concatenation condition, the delayed match-to-sample task, the error rate was
the distractors were (1) a concatenation distractor where low (3.39%), and we removed data following the same
one of the two shapes was replaced by its local deviant; strategies as in experiment 1 (7 participants and 3.16%
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
A Base
Shape
Local
Deviant
B1. Single shape B2. Repetition
B3. Concatenation B3. Embedding
Stimuli used in experiment 2. A, the 5 base shapes which were presented alone and in combinations, and the corresponding deviant shapes.
B, Examples of screens presented during the choice phase in the four conditions of the experiment (randomly intermixed): single shape,
repetition of a base shape, concatenation of two base shapes, and embedding of a base shape into another. In each case, the sample image
which was presented during the encoding phase is highlighted, and the other cells of the 2x3 grid illustrate the diversity of distractors. A
distinct group of subjects also gave subjective ratings of complexity for each stimulus.
trials rejected). Because the accuracy was very high ing the last two shapes as more complex than the first
across most conditions, we restricted our analyses to 2, with an overall ordering close to the one predicted
encoding time, choice time and subjective complexity. by MDL. A one-tailed student test on the distribution
of the 60 stimuli, as a function of the base shape(s) used sion with MDL confirmed that MDL significantly cor-
to generate them. related with all three measures (encoding time p<.001,
average r² across subjects 𝑟 =.30; choice time p<.001,
𝑎𝑣𝑔
First, we verified that, in the single-shape condition,
2 2
𝑟 =.40; subjective p=.004, 𝑟 =.55).
all three dependent measures varied across the 5 base 𝑎𝑣𝑔 𝑎𝑣𝑔
shapes we selected (ANOVAs where participants with
missing data were removed, all p<.01). For encoding We then examined whether, when those shapes entered
and choice times, the increase was roughly as follows: into more complex stimuli, the complexity still varied
square and circle were roughly on par, and then the re- in a similar way, predictable from equations [1-3]. In
sponse times increased for the S, sigma and square-root the repetition condition with 4 identical shapes, a sig-
shapes, in this order. Note that this order is close to, but nificant, monotonic profile of response was observed for
not strictly identical to the MDL ordering, which was all three dependent measures (ANOVAs where partici-
circle, square, S shape, square root and sigma. The sub- pants with relevant missing data were removed, encod-
jective ratings followed a noisier profile, but still rank- ing time F(4,576)=53.88; response time F(4,576)=36.87;
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
Repetition Concatenation Embedding
Encoding
Time
Number of
(ms)
Repetitions Left Outer
4 shape shape
self
self
R² = 0.9 ; p < 0.0001 R² = 0.85 ; p < 0.0001 R² = 0.64 ; p < 0.0001
Repeated shape Right shape Inner shape
Choice
Time
(ms)
R² = 0.89 ; p < 0.0001 R² = 0.89 ; p < 0.0001 R² = 0.86 ; p < 0.0001
Subjective
ratings of
complexity
R² = 0.62 ; p = 0.0028 R² = 0.64 ; p < 0.0001
R² = 0.53 ; p = 0.001
Results of experiment 2. The three behavioral measures (encoding time, choice time, and subjective complexity) are shown for the 60 different
stimuli, grouped into repetition (left), concatenation (middle), and embedding (right). The conditions are sorted as a function of base shape
complexity. Note that the single-shape condition is shown in the repetition panel (number of repetitions = 1), and that the data from the
concatenation of two identical shapes appears twice (as number of repetitions = 2 in the left panels, and as dots connected by a gray line in
the middle panels). Similarly, the data for “self-embedded” shapes (e.g. a square of squares) appear with a gray line in the right panels). In
each panel, we show the coeﬀicient of determination and statistical significance of the associated model (equations [1-3] in the main text).
Error bars indicate standard errors across subjects.
subjective rating F(4,104)= 6.63; all p<.001). Simi- were nearly parallel to each other, as predicted by our
larly, we analyzed just the stimuli of the concatena- equations for MDL. To test this idea, we entered all
tion condition where two identical shapes were placed 3 conditions into a mixed-effect linear model with two
side by side, thus corresponding to a repetition of 2. main factors and their interaction, i.e. the repeated
Again, for all dependent measures, a significant, nearly shape (5 levels), and the number of repetitions (numer-
monotonic increase was seen across the 5 base shapes ical factor spanning 1, 2 or 4 repetitions). As shown
F(4,576)=32.20; choice time F(4,576)=41.01, ; subjec- agreement with equation [1]. There was no significant in-
tive F(4,104)=15.29; all p<.001). Importantly, the teraction with the number of repetitions for both subjec-
curves for single shape, 2 repetitions and 4 repetitions tive rating and choice time, in agreement with equation
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
[1], but a significant interaction was found for encoding concatenation, we plot separately the “self-embedding”
time. To measure the relative importance of the interac- trials, in which the same shape was used at the inner and
tion term, we estimated the amount of the final model’s outer levels (e.g. a square of squares, a circle of circles,
ble 1) by comparing the marginal r² (Nakagawa et al., data points again yielded lower values than the others
2017) of both the full model and the model without the (i.e. lower subjective complexity, faster encoding and
interaction. For the repetition condition, this indicated choice times). When we excluded those self-embedding
that even when the interaction term is significant, it ac- trials from the mixed-effect model, the proportion of ex-
counted for less than 10% of the explained variance in all plained variance associated to the interaction term were
three dependent measures, and was therefore dominated reduced, indicating that the model’s explained variance
by the main effect of shape and number. was dominated by the main effects, especially in the
absence of self-embedded shapes. Although those obser-
For the concatenation and embedding conditions, as
vations were not predicted, they are minor compared to
the main effects, and can easily be accommodated: it
jective complexity also increased with each of the two
appears that the mental representation of a “square of
shapes involved (left/right or inner/outer). Equations
squares” involves a saving, because both the embedded
[2] and [3] predicted that these effects should be similar
and the embedding shapes are identical, and thus pre-
to the single shape condition and should not interact.
sumably parts of the mental program are reused twice.
but now with the shapes as two 5-level factors. Start- We further tested the predictions of equations [1-3] using
ing with the Concatenation condition, for all 3 depen- General Linear Models (GLMs). Those equations imply
dent variables, we found significant effects of both the that we should be able to accurately reconstruct the
shape on the left and the one on the right, as predicted. complexity of composite shapes from that of the five
Importantly, the interaction term was also significant. base shapes. To test this, we fitted generalized linear
However, there was a very simple explanation: the 5x5 models on each of our dependent variables after averag-
cal. In this case, our theory predicts that these stimuli eled the repetition conditions (base shape, two shapes,
should be compressible using the repetition instruction, and four shapes) by predicting, for each dependent mea-
and therefore easier to perceive than other concatena- sure, its value for a given trial as a linear function of its
tion stimuli. This is exactly what we found: as seen value in the single shape condition and the number of
ity, those data points are connected by a gray line), three dependent variables, and all predictors were sig-
the repeated stimuli stood out as faster and subjectively nificantly different from 0 (all p<.05; subjective rating,
less complex than the corresponding concatenation stim- R²=.62; encoding time, R²=.90; choice time, R²=.89).
uli. Correspondingly, the fraction of explained variance The fitted coeﬀicients for the shape term were all close
due to the interaction term in the full model was high to one (non-significantly different from 1 for both subjec-
(ranging from 28% to 53%) across all three measures. tive complexity and choice time, and only slightly larger
However, when we removed the conditions where both than 1 for encoding time), suggesting that base shape
portion of explained variance collapsed to 5% or less for the repeated shape.
all dependent measures, even when the term remained
Similarly, we modeled the concatenation condition by
significant, in accordance with equation [2].
predicting the complexity of a trial with a linear combi-
Finally, we ran the same analysis on the embedding con- nation of the complexity of the left shape, the complex-
dition, using both embedded and embedding shape as ity of the right shape, and a dummy variable (termed
the 2 factors, plus their interactions. Again, both main IsSelf) for whether the left and right shapes were iden-
effects were significant on all 3 dependent measures, as tical (as these trials are instances of repeat and should
predicted by equation [3]. However, as in the concate- have a lower perceptual complexity). This model was
nation condition, the interaction term had a significant significant for each of our three dependent variables, and
effect on encoding time and choice time, which our ad- all predictors were significantly different from 0 (see Ta-
ditive equations did not predict – albeit these interac- ble 2; all p<.05; subjective, R²=.64; encoding, R²=.85;
tion terms’ proportion of explained variance were low, choice, R²=.89). The coeﬀicients for both left and right
ranging from 3% to 10%. Inspired by our analysis of shapes were not significantly different from 1 at the
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
and Embedding) and to our three dependent variables (Subjective Rating, Encoding time and Choice time). In each
case our model had two main effects and their interaction, plus a single random effect of the participant. P-values
were computed using the Kenward-Roger approximation for degrees of freedom. For Repetition, the main effects
were the repeated shape (5 levels), and the number of repetitions (numerical factor in 1, 2 or 4, respectively for the
shape alone, for the concatenation of two identical shapes, and for the repetition condition). For Concatenation,
the main factors were the shape on the left and the shape on the right. For embedding, the main effects were the
outer/embedding shape, and the inner/embedded shape. For Concatenation and Embedding, we ran the model a
second time after removing the stimuli in which the same base shape was used twice (e.g. two squares, or a square
of squares).
Repetition Shape Number Interaction
Subjective Rating F =2.95 p=.020 F =11.56 p<.001 F =0.88 n.s.
4,369 1,369 4,369
Encoding Time F =4.66 p<.001 F =185.21 p<.001 F =14.86 p<.001
4,2215.25 1,2215.10 4,2215.17
Choice Time F =28.31 p<.001 F =35.75 p<.001 F =0.76 n.s.
4,2215.41 1,2215.23 4,2215.31
Concatenation Left shape Right shape Interaction
Including Subjective Rating F =22.16 p<.001 F =16.71 p<.001 F =3.83 p<.001
4,624 4,624 16,624
self-concatenated Encoding Time F =52.88 p<.001 F =45.02 p<.001 F =27.67 p<.001
4,3796.63 4,3796.54 16,3796.56
shapes Choice Time F =76.72 p<.001 F =58.94 p<.001 F =25.77 p<.001
4,3797.13 4,3796.97 16,3797.01
Excluding Subjective Rating F =25.85 p<.001 F =20.80 p<.001 F =0.45 n.s.
4,494 4,494 11,494
self-concatenated Encoding Time F =57.78 p<.001 F =50.76 p<.001 F =1.85 p=.041
4,3004.67 4,3004.59 11,3004.66
shapes Choice Time F =78.42 p<.001 F =63.97 p<.001 F =2.16 p=.014
4,3005.32 4,3005.18 11,3005.31
Embedding Outer shape Inner shape Interaction
Including Subjective Rating F =66.58 p<.001 F =28.54 p<.001 F =0.90 n.s.
4,624 4,624 16,624
self-embedded Encoding Time F =119.23 p<.001 F =61.62 p<.001 F =3.64 p<.001
4,3786.68 4,3786.67 16,3786.70
shapes Choice Time F =115.12 p<.001 F =118.95 p<.001 F =6.74 p<.001
4,3787.10 4,3787.08 16,3787.12
Excluding Subjective Rating F =55.57 p<.001 F =24.90 p<.001 F =0.42 n.s.
4,494 4,494 11,494
self-embedded Encoding Time F =103.49 p<.001 F =55.88 p<.001 F =1.20 n.s.
4,2996.89 4,2996.79 11,2996.82
shapes Choice Time F =111.20 p<.001 F =110.49 p<.001 F =3.74 p<.001
4,2997.45 4,2997.29 11,2997.33
the slopes tended to be higher than 1, although this of the complexity of constituents. This property was
reached significance only in the case of encoding time observed in three different metrics that we collected as
for the outer shape. We also observed a trend towards a proxies for the complexity of the mental representation
larger influence of the outer shape compared to the inner of shapes: subjective complexity ratings, encoding times
shape, consistent with the outer shape’s greater visual and choice times in a delayed match-to-sample task.
impact, but again this effect was only significant in a
single dependent measure (subjective ratings). Those
More specifically, and following the equations, the fol-
minor trends notwithstanding, the main finding is that
lowing three results were verified: [1] the complexity
the data supported equation [3]: even when we made the
of the mental representation of n identical shapes is the
visual pattern much more complex by embedding one
complexity of the mental representation of the shape, to-
shape inside another, thus creating for instance a circle
gether with a cost that increases with n; [2] the complex-
of squares, the final complexity was still only a linear
ity of the mental representation of two different shapes
function of the complexity of the individual shapes.
side by side is the sum of their respective complexities;
and [3] the complexity of the mental representation of
Discussion of experiment 2.
a shape drawn in outline using several small copies of
Participants’ behavior matched the additive properties a different shape (which we called embedding) is pre-
predicted by equations 1 through 3: the complexity of dicted by the sum of their respective complexities. The
complex patterns could be decomposed into the sum latter finding is the most interesting, as intuition alone
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
shape type (repeat, concatenate, and embedding), each dependent variable (subjective rating, encoding time or choice
time), and for each variable in the model (in columns), the value of the regression slope, associated standard error,
and whether the effect is significantly different from 0 (*, p<.05; **, p<.01; ***, p<.001).
Repeat Shape Number of repetitions
Subjective 0.88 ± 0.23** 1.98 ± 0.89*
Encoding 1.37 ± 0.15*** 87.69 ± 16.45***
Choice Time 1.05 ± 0.11*** 47.31 ± 19.1*
Concatenate Left shape Right shape IsSelf
Subjective 0.72 ± 0.2** 0.67 ± 0.2** -8.33 ± 2.37**
Encoding 0.92 ± 0.17*** 0.89 ± 0.17*** -433.15 ± 55.29***
Choice Time 0.96 ± 0.12*** 0.81 ± 0.12*** -521.96 ± 63.28***
Embedding Outer shape Inner shape IsSelf
Subjective 1.84 ± 0.43*** 0.95 ± 0.43* -5.26 ± 5.27
Encoding 1.94 ± 0.45*** 1.83 ± 0.45*** -222.82 ± 148.07
Choice Time 1.29 ± 0.16*** 1.23 ± 0.16*** -169.22 ± 85.43
might have predicted a product operation – after all, each with their respective coeﬀicients, indicating that
the overall pattern comprises as many copies of the in- identical shapes induce a saving. Second, unexpectedly,
ner shape as needed to draw the outer shape. However, the same phenomenon occurred in the embedding condi-
the prediction from the language of thought perspective tion when a shape was outlined using a smaller version
is clear enough: drawing a square of circles is not much of itself (“self-embed” trials, e.g. a square of squares).
more complex than drawing a square itself – it merely re- Once again, the data points to the lower complexity
quires stopping the square program at regular intervals of those trials, compared to those using two different
to call a subprogram for drawing a circle, and in first shapes. Such a saving is not captured by our equations.
approximation, such embedding only has a linear effect It suggests that in the mental representation of e.g. “a
on total complexity. Of course, this is only true in first square of squares”, the two squares may be represented
approximation – our square of circles, for instance, com- by a single mental program or at least by some degree
prised additional circles not only at the vertices of the of sharing of working memory resources. This interest-
square, but also in the middle of its sides, thus requiring ing finding supports the idea that human mental repre-
a slightly more complex square-drawing program. Such sentations allow for named subprograms, recursive calls,
subtleties, which require further investigation, may ex- or higher-order functions over functions, which are not
plain why the slope measuring the impact of the outer fully captured by the present language.
shape on the complexity of the overall pattern tended
Overall, Experiment 2 goes beyond experiment 1 in
showing that, over and above the specific complexity
predicted by the particular geometrical language we pro-
Two other salient effects emerged, one which could be
posed, there are several properties of additivity that
predicted from equations [1-3] and another which could
must be satisfied by any such language, and that these
not. First, when concatenating two identical shapes, the
properties are true of the human working memory for
resulting shape can be either described as a repetition
geometric shapes.
or as a concatenation – but our language of thought
predicts that programs involving repetition are shorter,
General Discussion
and therefore that the complexity of a pair of shapes
should be lower than predicted by concatenation alone. Previous research has emphasized that all humans in-
Our data supports this prediction: concatenations of herit, from evolution, core knowledge of space and num-
two identical shapes have a lower complexity than pre- ber that they share with many other animal species (De-
dicted by the sum of the complexities of the two shapes, haene et al., 2006; Feigenson et al., 2004). Here, we
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
propose that, in humans, those core systems can also and then training a neural network to perform the back-
be recombined using a language of thought in order to ward inference from shape to program. The notion of
form complex mental programs. As a result, humans “inner training” is an interesting metaphor for how hu-
are able to form complex, compositional thoughts such mans may explore, in a purely mental manner, the do-
as “three parallel lines”, “repeat a pattern four times”, main of geometry and discover interesting properties on
or “arrange some circles in the shape of a square”. their own, without external inputs. This is possible if
we assume, as René Descartes did in the introductory
In the present work, we argued that such combinatorial
citation, that our mind already has the ideas, at least in
mental representations underlie human perception and
the form of a large space of potential mental programs.
working memory for geometric shapes, and we put this
To further accelerate its search, the DreamCoder algo-
hypothesis to several tests. First, we proposed a con-
rithm looks for subprograms that are reused across sev-
crete language inspired by observations on prehistoric
eral shapes. This mechanism is useful to go from simple
and ethnographic geometric patterns (featuring abstract
shapes to more and more complex ones, as each new
patterns, right angles, parallel lines, circles and spirals)
success offers the possibility of discovering new abstrac-
as well as elements from the core-knowledge literature
tions. This mechanism changes the topography of the
(number sense). We tested this language in Experiment
search space by bringing certain shapes (those that lever-
1 and showed that it could predict the behavior of par-
age the discovered abstractions) closer to the effectively
ticipants in a shape memory task, above and beyond
searchable threshold for program induction: while all
lower-lever perception mechanisms. In Experiment 2,
shapes remain accessible, some of them become much
we further showed that theoretically motivated additive
simpler as they can be expressed more succinctly using
equations for the complexity of composite shapes charac-
the discovered abstractions. This mechanism could ex-
terize humans’ subjective ratings and objective behavior
plain cultural drifts in the style of geometrical patterns,
in a delayed match-to-sample task, thereby constraining
whereby a given human culture focuses on certain shapes
the properties that must be satisfied by any proposition
and their variants, thus producing, over time, a variety
for a language of thought for geometric shape.
of similar-looking patterns.
The proposed theory of shape perception assumes that
The core of our proposal builds upon Leyton’s (Leyton,
humans can eﬀiciently infer a mental program from a
1984, 2003b) seminal proposal of a generative theory
visual percept, a problem known in computer science
of shapes. Leyton’s theory stipulates that all shapes
as “program induction”. The idea that humans infer
are constructed in a bottom-up fashion by a sequence
mental programs was previously shown to successfully
of operations, called “control groups”, starting from a
account for human concept learning (Lake et al., 2015b;
single point. For example, the mental representation
Rule et al., 2020), including hand-drawn sketches (Ellis
of a cube would be the extrusion across the z-axis of a
et al., 2018). However, program induction is a computa-
square, which itself would come from turning a segment
tionally challenging problem. Enumerating all possible
4 times around a central point. The segment itself would
programs until a match is discovered is not a plausible
be built by translating the starting point along an axis.
strategy, as the search time would scale exponentially
The unpublished experiments briefly mentioned by Ley-
with the size of the program. We show how recent work
ton (1984) seem to have probed those hypotheses only
from the program-induction literature helps tackle this
indirectly, for example by asking participants to per-
problem by using DreamCoder (Ellis et al., 2021) to find
form intuitive judgements about the stability of certain
the best representation for several shapes. DreamCoder
shapes. While less general and confined to two dimen-
uses a bottom-up neural network to speed up the search
sions, our proposal is supported by direct empirical tests
for the relevant program. In DreamCoder, the network
of the mental complexity of shapes.
is trained to map each visual shape onto biases that
accelerate the search for the relevant program. Future Earlier work by Leeuwenberg (Leeuwenberg, 1971) also
versions could incorporate direct mappings from shapes introduced a language for shapes, particularly focused
to programs, thus leading to the immediate recognition on the idea of nested repetitions with variations and
of shapes close enough to the training set. What is re- the concept of continuous integration as a complement
markable about this idea is that the system does not of discrete repetition capable of tracing curves. How-
need any external training data (although successfully ever, Leeuwenberg’s language only satisfied one direc-
solved problems will be used when training, much like tion of the intended correspondence between mental
replays, in addition to “dreams”): it can generate its and linguistic complexity: the language was such that
own supervised learning dataset by sampling programs, low-complexity mental representation corresponded to
executing them to produce the corresponding shapes, a short program, but the converse was not true as some
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
short programs generated shapes that were not easily from preschoolers and human adults without formal ed-
parsed by humans. Nevertheless, the behavioral results ucation, however, always required both the object recog-
he reported are in line with ours: he found the length nition model and the symbolic geometry model. Thus,
of the shortest program is a good predictor of subjec- two strategies seem to be available for geometric shape
tive ratings of complexity, as well as objective perfor- perception: a purely visual strategy, available to both
mance in shape copying and other similar tasks (Boselie baboons and humans, and a symbolic geometry strategy,
& Leeuwenberg, 1986; Leeuwenberg, 1969, 1971; see also putatively available only to humans. It is important to
Restle, 1970, 1973). take this dual-route model into consideration when test-
ing the present idea: if the stimuli can be too easily
More recently, several articles highlighted the impor-
discriminated by object recognition alone, then humans
tance of the notion of repetition with variation in the
may not make the effort to encode them symbolically, in
human perception of geometric and auditory sequences
the proposed language of thought, and MDL may cease
(Amalric et al., 2017a; Piantadosi et al., 2016; Planton
to determine performance (as we observed in pilot data).
et al., 2021; Roumi et al., 2021; Simon, 1972). The lan-
Limits of our language
guage first proposed by Amalric et al. (2017a) included
two distinct notions of repetitions with variations, ei-
The language we proposed is severely limited in scope: it
ther changing the starting point with each repetition,
only applies to the perception and drawing of geometric
or changing a parameter with each repetition. Our geo-
shapes. While it could plausibly draw a human stick-
metric language generalizes this idea to the case of con-
tinuous curve tracing. Our tracing primitive can be con-
dren’s drawings, tracing the contours of a human body
sidered a particular case of infinitesimal repetition with
or any other realistic shape is outside the reach of our
variation: at each time step, parameters are updated
proposal. This aspect separates the present work from
for the computation of the next time step. Importantly,
related research on contour perception (Feldman, 2001;
we did not allow for arbitrary infinitesimal repetition
Feldman & Singh, 2005; Wilder et al., 2016), which of-
like what is present in the Logo language (Abelson et
fers theories of smooth continuous contours for natural
al., 1974), where at each time step arbitrary compu-
objects or artificial blobs. It also sets our work apart
tations can occur. While such computations were re-
from a longstanding literature on the determinants of
quired in the original logo in order to draw curves by
shape perception, such as skeletal representation or me-
infinitesimally changing the heading at each time step,
dial axis extraction (Ayzenberg et al., 2019; Ayzenberg
it also opened the possibility of short programs having
& Lourenco, 2019; Blum, 1973; Firestone & Scholl, 2014;
extremely complex outputs. By limiting ourselves to
Lowet et al., 2018). In the future, it would be interesting
simple, linear variations of speed or turning angle over
to examine whether the two approaches can be unified,
time, our language fits with the universal presence of a
as they share some converging ideas, such as the use
limited set of shapes (mostly lines, circles and spirals)
of probabilistically generative models for finding a can-
in human geometric patterns.
didate skeleton of a shape (Feldman & Singh, 2006) or
finding subgroups within a complex shape (Froyen et al.,
Another, more speculative aspect of our proposal is that
2015), but also some challenging experimental results,
a recursively compositional language of thought for ge-
such as the automatic extraction of medial axes even for
ometry is unique to humans. As also proposed by others,
triangles or rectangles (Firestone & Scholl, 2014). In a
only humans would possess a recursive compositional ca-
sense, the two approaches are complementary: there are
pacity (Dehaene et al., 2015; Fitch, 2014; Hauser et al.,
many visual domains for which our language is not well
2002; Penn et al., 2008). Thus, an important goal for the
suited, e.g. predicting the complexity of the contour
future is to explicitly test the perception of the present
outline of an animal, where a skeleton-based approach
shapes in non-human primates. Our recent work (Sablé-
is superior; but our proposal is intended to explain an-
Meyer et al., 2021) shows that, even for shapes as simple
other domain, abstract geometric shape, and identify
as quadrilaterals, human behavior differs strikingly from
the core tools required to account for their perception
baboons and is characterized by a symbolic geometrical
and production in humans.
regularity effect: in humans only, regular quadrilater-
als such as squares, rectangles or parallelograms (which Simple arguments show that the proposed language can
can be compressed in the present language) are easier to generate most of the geometric shapes that humans find
perceive than less regular ones. Baboon behavior was simple and that are frequently attested in human cul-
not random either, it but could be captured by existing tures as well as in the history of geometry. Any regular
neural network models of the ventral visual pathway polygon, for instance, such as an equilateral triangle,
for object recognition. Accounting for behavioral data can be generated by a program similar to the square,
SABLÉ-MEYER, ELLIS, TENENBAUM, DEHAENE
but using fractions of a right-angle turn; the pseudocode when the phenomenon requires alignments of parts of
would read: Repeat p times { Trace ; Turn(angle=4/p ) the stimuli, as those may be generated with shorter pro-
}. Stars with various numbers of branches can be simi- grams than the counterparts that don’t induce closure
larly generated. Less regular polygons, such as a rectan- (e.g. a Kanisza triangle versus a “misaligned” alterna-
gle approximating the proportions of the famous golden tive, which is costlier to express). However, as noted in
section, can be generated using fractions (e.g. 5/3 or (Kanizsa, 1976), “[Geometric regularity] is not a neces-
8/5). Symmetrical patterns and friezes such as or sary condition for the formation of subjective surfaces
arise naturally from recursive combinations of rep- and contours. Amorphous shapes are possible and ir-
etitions and alternations. Finally, using concatenation regular figures can generate contours.” Such examples,
erate, for instance, a pentagram (star inside a circle), a scope of the current proposition, but have been given
circle of circles, etc. Bayesian accounts, see for example (Feldman, 2001; Gol-
dreich & Peterson, 2012).
Nevertheless, some simple figures remain diﬀicult to gen-
erate with a short program. A trapezoid, for instance,
Finally, in the present framework, each program must
comprises two parallel sides interrupted by two arbitrary
contain all the instructions to generate a given shape in
segments. Drawing a trapezoid in our language requires
every detail. An unfortunate consequence is that a large
a turn by an arbitrary angle ￿, followed by a second
part of this program is repeated when a subject learns a
turn by 2- ￿ to restore parallelism. However, our lan-
new but related shape. For instance, the triskelion ( )
guage does not have variables that could store the value
includes a detailed subprogram for a spiral, although the
￿, and hence does not find this shape simpler than an
same program may have been used to describe other
arbitrary quadrilateral with turns ￿ and ￿. In general,
shapes. The DreamCoder algorithm sidesteps this by
our approach is unable to encode a partial regularity in-
inventing abstractions over several iterations, but this
feature is not part of the language itself. It may be
variables could address this limitation, but exploration
useful to add to our language a capacity for named sub-
of this idea suggested that straightforwardly adding vari-
programs, such that the spiral program would be en-
ables has a high cost: while they allow one to express
coded just once and evoked by a single call to its pro-
otherwise hard to describe simple shapes, they also make
cedure name (“spiral”), thus further increasing the hu-
very complex shapes easy to describe, an undesirable
man memory compression rate. The idea that humans
feature that is hard to keep in check.
construct complex geometrical concepts by progressively
developing a vocabulary of nested, increasingly complex
There are also shapes for which our language proposes
ones, is an appealing view of mathematical development
implausible programs. For instance, the minimal pro-
that should be the focus of future work.
gram that draws a “+” shape repeats four segments
starting from the center, instead of drawing the shape us-
Future directions
ing two intersecting segments. As for continuous shapes,
our program cannot account for some simple shapes such
We see several promising research directions to go be-
as the ellipse or parabola. These shapes might be better
yond the present work. A first one, drawing inspiration
represented as visual transformations of the outputs of
from Kosslyn, Shepard and Leyton’s work, would allow
another program (e.g. compressing a circle to get an
for further mental manipulation of the outputs of the
ellipse). Such a dual-mode system, combining the gen-
present language, thus performing operations such as
erative and transformative capacities of mental imagery,
deformations, rotations, or even extrusions as a post-
has been proposed by others (e.g. Kosslyn, 1980; Ley-
processing step. This would open up to the modeling
ton, 2003b; Shepard & Cooper, 1982). The addition of
of 3-D shape, for instance using rotation around a fixed
a buffer in which mental operations such as rotations or
axis. A second would be develop a library of increas-
shearing could be applied would be an important addi-
ingly complex and reusable named subprograms, such
tion to the present work.
as “square”, “spiral”, etc. Finally, a third possibility
Although our model was not designed with Gestalt con- would be to integrate ideas from a different program-
figurations in mind, it might capture some, if not all, ming paradigm. The language we used is imperative
of the perceptual and memory savings associated with in nature: its programs describe, in every detail, the
Gestalt stimuli. For instance, shorter programs would sequence of operations needed to draw a shape. How-
be allocated to displays in which shapes are aligned, ever, not all programming languages work that way.
repeated, or otherwise obey “good continuation” rules. Logic programming languages such as Prolog describe
Some configurations based on closure may be captured the logic of the computation and its constraints rather
LOT FOR GEOMETRIC SHAPES
than the details of its execution flow. Such constraint- Brincat, S. L., & Connor, C. E. (2006). Dy-
based programming may be closer to how humans think, namic Shape Synthesis in Posterior Infer-
particularly in the mathematical domain. The canonical otemporal Cortex. Neuron, 49(1), 17–24.
(equidistance from a center point) rather than a genera-
Butterworth, B., Reeve, R., Reynolds, F., & Lloyd, D.
tive program (turn by a fixed curvature, as in the present
(2008). Numerical thought with and without words:
language). Integrating both declarative and imperative
Evidence from indigenous Australian children. Proc
elements may provide a better account of specific shapes,
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 105(35), 13179–13184.
such as trapezoids or generic triangles, which only pos-
sess some properties (e.g. two parallel sides, or three Chater, N., & Vitányi, P. (2003). Simplicity: A unifying
sides) while leaving the other details unspecified. Some principle in cognitive science? Trends in Cognitive
geometrical shapes could thus be defined in terms of Sciences, 7 (1), 19–22.
properties that they satisfy, others in more detailed im-
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect: An Introduction to the Study
perative instructions, and both could be reused in con-
of Verbal Aspect and Related Problems. Cambridge
trol structures such as embed or repeat. Meanwhile, we
University Press.
surmise that the present proposal merely brings us one
step closer to understanding how abstract mathematical
De Leeuw, J. R. (2015). jsPsych: A JavaScript li-
and geometrical objects are mentally encoded.
brary for creating behavioral experiments in a Web
browser. Behavior Research Methods, 47 (1), 1–12.