Ambiguous Self-Induced Disinformation (ASID) Attacks:
Weaponizing a Cognitive Deficiency
1,2 3 4,5 4,5,6 2 4,5
M. Canham , S. Sütterlin , T. F. Ask , B. J. Knox , L. Glenister. , and R. G. Lugo .
1 Chief Executive Officer, Beyond Layer Seven, United States
E-mail: mcanham@belay7.com
2 School of Modeling Simulation and Training,
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
E-mail: mcanham@ist.ucf.edu
3 Faculty of Computer Science, Albstadt-Sigmaringen University, Germany
E-mail: suetterlin@hs-albsig.de
4 Department of Information Security and Communication Technology,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Gjøvik, Norway
E-mail: torvalda@stud.ntnu.no; benjamin.j.knox@ntnu.no; ricardo.g.lugo@ntnu.no,
5 Faculty of Health, Welfare and Organisation, Østfold University College, Norway
6 Norwegian Armed Forces Cyber Defence, Norway
Abstract: Humans quickly and effortlessly impose narrative context onto ambiguous stimuli, as
demonstrated through psychological projective testing and ambiguous figures. We suggest that
this feature of human cognition may be weaponized as part of an information operation. Such
Ambiguous Self-Induced Disinformation (ASID) attacks would employ the following elements:
the introduction of a culturally consistent narrative, the presence of ambiguous stimuli, the
motivation for hypervigilance, and a social network. ASID attacks represent a reduced-risk, low-
investment on the part of the adversary with a potentially significant reward, making this a likely
tactic of choice for information operators within the context of gray-zone conflicts.
Keywords: Disinformation, Cognitive Malware, Gray-Zone Conflict, Ambiguous Self-Induced
Disinformation Attacks
Introduction
The Twilight Zone episode Monsters Are Due on Maple Street opens with scenes from a typical
American town set in the 1950’s. A brief but strange orb appears in the sky, it flashes, and strange
sounds emanate, then it disappears. The townspeople wonder and speculate about what they have
witnessed. Shortly afterward, strange events occur; electronics stop working, cars begin starting
themselves, house lights flash on and off. Rod Serling, the narrator, warns the audience that the
monsters are coming to Maple Street. After losing electrical service, the neighborhood gathers to
make plans for moving forward. One of the children, a science fiction fan, explains that these
events are like those of every alien landing story that he has read about. He continues that the
fictional space aliens sent reconnaissance scouts who “looked like humans but weren’t” ahead of
the main invasion. More anomalies occur, the townspeople become anxious and begin accusing
each other of being space aliens in disguise. Every odd behavior that anyone exhibits becomes
scrutinized for indications that someone is not human. Scrutinization leads to accusations, then
escalates into physical attacks, and finally murder. The camera zooms out, two aliens come into
view as they are watching the mayhem below. One alien says to the other:
Understand the procedure now?
Just stop a few of their machines… throw them into darkness for just a few hours… and
then sit back and watch the pattern (emerge).
And the pattern is always the same?
With few variations.
All we need to do is sit back and watch… And let them destroy themselves.
Rod Serling’s voice returns as the screen fades, “The tools of conquest do not necessarily come
with bombs… there are weapons that are simply thoughts, attitudes, and prejudices… Prejudices
can kill, suspicion can destroy.”
The events in this Twilight Zone episode provide an introduction and context for this
article. The occurrence of an ambiguous event (the flashing orb in the sky) without explanation is
amplified when observers are unable to impose context onto the sight due to a lack of requisite
knowledge. The provision of a coherent narrative about aliens landing and sending advance parties
who appear to be human is coupled with opaque language such as the of use the word ‘landing’
rather than ‘invasion’. Intended or not, the word ‘landing’ is itself ambiguous: a landing might be
peaceful or could be the beginning of an attack, the implication is up to the interpretation of the
observer. As more anomalous events occur, the townspeople increasingly interpret these as hostile
indicators, even though there is no explicit indication that this is the case. Finally, we (the
audience) learn that aliens are in fact behind the anomalous events, but that they have no intention
of landing and committing hostilities, rather their intention is to inject ambiguous information into
the system and let their targets destroy themselves.
In the quest for information superiority and psychological dominance to weaken a rival
country, entity or alliance, factors that affect the flow and type of information play a significant
role in the manner in which decisions are made. Adversarial power in information warfare often
relies upon deception, agitation, ambiguity and propagation of narratives to influence people into
making decisions adverse to their own interest, and that favor the deceiver or manipulator
conducting the information or influence operation (Bagge, 2019). Building on the fictional
introductory narrative, this article introduces a potential real-world event where injecting
ambiguous information into the information stream, coupled with a culturally consistent narrative,
and hypervigilance can weaponize a normal feature of human cognition. The resultant disrupting
effects are self-induced, concealing the asymmetrical [military] means. This attack categorically
falls into the gray zone of conflict where approaches have renewed relevance due to technological
advances and human cognitive vulnerabilities.
The article proceeds by presenting a theoretical and historical grounding for Ambiguous
Self-Induced Disinformation (ASID) attacks. The key elements of ASID attacks are explained
before the authors present examples and forecast potential arenas where ASID attack could be
deployed.
Imposing Order on a Chaotic World
Human cognition quickly and effortlessly projects context onto ambiguous stimuli. We cognitively
impose context so naturally that we need to make conscious and deliberate effort to ignore our
own projections to truly perceive information as ambiguous. This cognitive imposition can be
perceived as either the capital letter ‘B’ or the number ‘13’ depending on the contextual
information that is provided by the surrounding characters. In fact, the middle characters are
identical and ambiguous. They are not in any way altered by the contextual characters, rather we
impose the context on them through our background knowledge of the English alphabet and
knowledge of numerals. An observer lacking this knowledge will see the same characters in both
contexts because they lack the prerequisite knowledge required to impose this context. This occurs
through a process referred to as knowledge-driven processing, also referred to as top-down
processing. When we interpret the information in our environment, our subjective experience is
that we are interpreting it without bias and simply taking in what is there through a data-driven
process (Cavanagh, 1991; Goolkasian, 1987; Theeuwes, 2010; Kornmeier, & Bach, 2012; Ishizu,
2013; Intaite et al, 2019). This data-driven processing, also referred to as bottom-up processing is
how we perceive incoming information when we have no context for what we are perceiving. It is
more common for us to process the stimuli we encounter through the lens of our prior knowledge,
hence approach it from a top-down or knowledge-driven perspective, even when we subjectively
feel as though we are interpreting it without bias (Cavanagh, 1991; Goolkasian, 1987; Theeuwes,
2010; Kornmeier, & Bach, 2012; Ishizu, 2013; Intaite et al, 2019).
The presentation of ambiguous information that is also accompanied by a culturally consistent or
plausible narrative (the latter serving as prior knowledge), can then lead to a form of self-induced
this information it is difficult to ‘unsee’ the B or 13, and this example involves low-level perception
and known ground truth. What happens when the truth is less concrete and the context more
ambiguous?
For over 100 years, psychologists have relied upon projective testing to gain insights into
the inner workings of the human mind. These tests are effective because patients project their own
interpretation onto the ambiguous stimuli in the test. An example of projective testing can be found
in the Thematic Apperception Test (Murray, 1943). This test employs illustrations of characters
engaged in ambiguous situations to which a patient or test subject is then asked what has led to the
depicted event, what is happening in the moment of depiction, what the characters are
experiencing, and what the outcome is. These tests demonstrate humans’ ability to apply fabricated
context to ambiguous stimuli, and this effect has been demonstrated through seeing figures in
ambiguous images (Cavanagh, 1991; Goolkasian, 1987; Kornmeier, & Bach, 2012; Ishizu, 2013;
Intaite et al, 2019), or recognizing trends in stock market fluctuations (Cootner, 1964; Fama, 1970;
Malkiel, 2003).
This leads us to ask the question, what if this feature of human cognition, the capacity to project
context onto ambiguous stimuli, could be weaponized as part of an information operation through
the presentation of a culturally consistent narrative paired with ambiguous information?
Ambiguous Self-Induced Disinformation (ASID) Attacks
Cyber operators and threat intelligence analysts are bombarded with information from sensors in
machines, on networks, and from cyberspace in general. Sifting through too much information
poses as much of a challenge as suffering from insufficient information. A major obstacle to
successfully detecting attacks is that much of the information to sift through is ambiguous; it might
indicate an attack, or it might be innocuous, such as a user visiting an unauthorized website from
their work computer. Previous research suggests that these ambiguous signals could be
weaponized to suppress network defender responses to attacks (Sawyer et al, 2016). These
prevalence denial attacks (PDA), also known as grey signal attacks, leverage the “artificial
inflation of signal probability flooding a network with grey signals, purposely built to be flagged
by algorithmic defense systems but easily identified as non-threats by human operators” (Sawyer
et al, 2016, p 162). This signal flood raises the noise to signal ratio and thereby compromises
operator accuracy by suppressing vigilance capability.
We propose that such effects can be enhanced with the introduction of a culturally consistent
narrative that induces knowledge-driven cognitive processing within the target leading to self-
induced disinformation influence. Such Ambiguous Self-Induced Disinformation (ASID) attacks
might be used by threat actors as a ‘meta-attack’ apart from, or in parallel with, other information
operations. ASID attacks manipulate the target’s understanding of ambiguous stimuli by providing
a context through which to interpret those stimuli. The principles underlying ASID Attacks have
been implicitly understood for some time but has not been explicitly recognized as the potent form
of weaponized psychology. We believe these attacks have been, and will be, highly effective
because humans are highly capable at imposing order on a chaotic environment. For example,
imagine that an advanced adversary (APT-X) announces that they will begin attacking a specific
target on a certain day, at a certain time. Armed with this information, network defenders will
likely begin focusing more acutely on network traffic around the time of the announced attack.
This enhanced focus will lead them to increase their interpretation of ambiguous network activity
as potentially malicious, even if no malicious activity is occurring. This would enable a malicious
actor to consume defender bandwidth and resources at almost no cost to the attacker. This is one
example of ASID attack employment, but this tactic is not limited to a cyber defense context.
Mass Psychogenic Illness (MPI) – An Introduction
Nearly every known culture throughout history has experienced a mass psychogenic illness (MPI)
event. These MPI events follow similar patterns with slight variations. An ambiguous event or
environmental stimuli (sight, sound, smell) is encountered, followed shortly after by a reaction in
an individual that triggers similar reactions in other individuals within a social network. An early
example of MPI episodes can be in the St. Vitus Dance of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
These episodes involved contagious dancing that would sometimes last for weeks. Processions of
dancers would often end at chapels dedicated to the saint (hence the name) with victims lying on
the ground from exhaustion and frothing at the mouth (Baloh & Bartholomew, 2020). MPI
episodes such as this are typically divided into two categories: sensory and motor. The St. Vitus
Dance epidemic was an example of a motor MPI. In the twentieth and twenty-first centuries,
sensory MPI events seem to be more common and are often brought about during high stress
periods and in response to ambiguous stimuli such as sights, sounds, and smells (Baloh &
Bartholomew, 2020). For example, in 1989, shortly after Russian authorities deployed an irritant
to disperse a crowd, approximately 400 Georgian schoolgirls began experiencing abdominal pain,
skin irritation, and burning eyes in response to hearing rumors that they had also been exposed to
the gas. Approximately one year later, several thousand residents of Kosovo experienced
hyperventilation, burning sensations, headaches, dizziness, dry mouth, and nausea shortly after
rumors circulated of Albanian dispersing neurotoxins to poison the local populace; however, no
attacks were ever documented or proven to have occurred (Baloh & Bartholomew, 2020).
Humans tend to apply a positive test strategy (a confirmation bias) when evaluating
whether a phenomenon or attribute is applicable to oneself (Cialdini, 2016). In applying this
strategy, people search their memory for positive instances, examples of something occurring or
existing, rather than negative instances or the lack of something occurring or existing. If asked,
“have you experienced any of these symptoms” people will think about points in their past when
they experienced these, not when they did not experience such symptoms. This means that the
person asking the question may (purposely or not) direct the person being asked through a
psychological chute. Such psychological chuting causes people to focus on instances of a
phenomenon’s occurrence and can alter their perception of likelihood and relevance of that
phenomenon (Cialdini, 2016, Chapter 2). This suggests that the introduction of a narrative that
accompanies a phenomenon is likely to cause some proportion of a given population to identify
with that narrative and thus psychological chuting may very well induce or facilitate MPI episodes.
Throughout history, MPI episodes have included the following characteristics: 1. an
ambiguous situation, event, or environmental stimuli, 2. a culturally consistent narrative, 3.
stressful environment, 4. response from the affected group, 5. diffusion of condition across the
social network.
1. Ambiguous Situation, Event, Stimuli: Across the globe, well over 7,000 cases of persons hearing a chronic
humming sound which induces anxiety, irritation, and sometimes painful reactions in those who suffer from
the malady (Baloh & Bartholomew, 2020). Accused sources of the humming noise have included power
lines, wind turbines, telecommunications towers, industry fans, radio waves, birds, insects, and other natural
and artificial sources. Reported symptoms include: a vague vibrating sensation, headache, nose pressure,
nosebleeds, ear pain, ear popping, chest tightness, insomnia, short-term memory loss, general unwellness,
nausea, stabbing pains, and occasionally violent illness (Baloh & Bartholomew, 2020). A Canadian study
of sufferers of humming induced maladies found that complaints for symptoms occurred at the same
prevalence of similar symptoms in the general population. The researchers concluded that sufferers were
misattributing common symptoms to the noises rather than being affected by them (Baloh & Bartholomew,
2020). When testing the hypothesis that expectation could alter the interpretation of low frequency noise,
researchers informed subjects that such noises could either cause symptoms like those reported by the noise
sufferers, or could cause pleasant sensations and have therapeutic effects, depending on the condition that
they were randomly assigned to. The researchers found that the expectations of the research subjects
influenced their interpretation of the sound (Crichton et al, 2014; Crichton et al, 2015; Baloh &
Bartholomew, 2020). These studies suggest that ambiguous stimuli (sound in this case) may be interpreted
differently depending on the observer’s expectations and cultural context. The intensity of perceived
physical symptoms can be enhanced or reduced by providing a coherent narrative modifying expectations.
By providing a combination of ambiguous but not noxious thermal stimuli, positive, negative or
emotionally neutral narratives elicited corresponding degrees of physical pain, eliciting a labelling effect
that has been termed ‘predictive coding’ (Bräscher, Sütterlin, Scheuren, Van den Bergh & Witthöft, 2020a).
In the context of perceived environmental intolerance, Bräscher and colleagues (2020b) elicited somatic
symptoms after sham-exposure to what healthy participants believed to be electromagnetic fields caused
by a (sham) Wi-Fi device. The same effect of so-called somatosensory illusions was elicited as predicted
by the predictive processing theory of somatic symptom generation following narratively induced
attribution patterns and symptom expectations (Wolters et al., 2021). One explanation as to why some
individuals generate symptoms, whereas others do not, despite being exposed to the same ambiguous
stimuli and explanatory narratives, seems to be at least in parts be explained by individual traits related to
the cognitive processing of potentially threatening stimuli (Scheuren, Sütterlin, & Anton, 2014).
2. Culturally Consistent Narrative: The 1938 War of the Worlds radio broadcast became infamous for the
public reaction that it provoked. The broadcast told the story of a Martian invasion of Earth, portrayed as
though it was being reported in real time through a news broadcast. This radio show played on cultural
narratives that were popular at the time; that Mars might be inhabited, and that war was imminent in Europe
and the Pacific. Large numbers of audience members who tuned into the program after the disclosure
announcement, were unaware that this was in fact a radio play and not actual news flashes. People panicked
and began responding to the invasion as if it were real. Some even attacked water towers, which mimicked
the three-legged Martian vehicles. The narrative of visitation from other worlds is consistent with
scientifically oriented western cultures, but in other cultures that are more magically oriented, demonic
possession is more common, as it was in pre-scientific Europe and North America. Collective narratives
provide opportunities for knowledge-driven processing. They allow for interpretation (perceiving
meaningful patterns instead of chaos) of the status quo, allow for projections into the future (what-ifs) and
thus provide the basis for perceived control, resulting in stress alleviation (storytelling and narrative
transportation). The stress alleviating effects of individual narratives are well established (Petko et al.,
2015), and we argue that on a societal level, collective narratives can unfold a comparable effect of
providing meaning to group members after the injection of ambiguous information into a social or socio-
technical system. The collective sensemaking following such a grey signal injection provides analogue to
knowledge-based perceptual closure following the eradication of ambiguity. The collective narrative further
maintains social bonds and group-level cooperation, which in turn contributes to reduced anxiety (see Bietti,
Tilston, & Bangerter, 2019). Collective narratives have an inherent self-stabilizing effect since adherence
to it provides social proof to other individuals. The perceived state of the collective can also have
measurable and potent biological effects on the individual. Perception of events related to the victory or
defeat of a social group one considers oneself a member of (e.g., as a spectating supporter of a football team
or political party) increases and decreases testosterone levels, respectively (Bernhardt et al., 1998; Stanton
et al., 2009), more than most own behaviors. This exemplifies how mere perceptions related to the current
state of the collective may biologically manifest in the individual in powerful ways that could have
downstream influences on sensations such as pain (Hau et al., 2004), emotional regulation and cognitions
(Celec et al., 2015; Martin et al., 2009), and behaviors (e.g., Dreher et al., 2016).
3. Stressful Environment: The majority, if not all, MPI events occur during times of stress for the affected
group members. The 1990 MPI outbreak in Kosovo occurred at a time when rising ethnic tensions would
eventually lead to the outbreak of civil war and Balkanization of the former Yugoslavia. The 1989 MPI
episode in Georgia occurred amidst heightened tensions between Russia and Georgia during the Soviet
Union disillusion. Even the earlier St. Vitus Dance MPI epidemics occurred on the foot heels of the Black
Death devastation of Europe (Baloh & Bartholomew, 2020). The stressful tension of an era appears to
provide the fertile ground from which an MPI might flourish. Both short-term and especially long-term
stress can have several negative effects on cognitive information processing (Porcelli & Delgado, 2017;
Provenzano et al., 2019). This is mainly a consequence of the effect that acute and chronic stressors have
on prefrontal cortical function (Maeng & Shors, 2013; Snyder et al., 2015) which is partly resulting from
stress-induced hormonal interactions between the hypothalamus and prefrontal cortices that promote
executive dysfunction (Uribe-Mariño et al., 2016). Concomitantly, the salience and persistence of prior or
current stressors could increase the perceived likelihood that future stressors will occur due to a readiness
to interpret stimuli in a manner congruent with one’s psychological state (Andersen, 1990; Andersen &
Schwartz, 1992). On a neurocognitive level, negative affect decreases the efficiency of executive processing
in favor of increased efficiency in mood-congruent salience-processing of stimuli, meaning that the
individual focus on stimuli or aspect of stimuli that corresponds with their existing negative mood
(Provenzano et al., 2019). A stress-induced reduction in executive function that favors mood-congruent
information processing, combined with negative expectations and a positive testing strategy may shape
sensory experiences in ways that facilitate individual-level psychogenic illness through predictive coding.
It has been shown that expectations shape the encoding of perceptual stimuli at very early stages in
perceptual processing (e.g. Aitken et al., 2020; Panichello & Turk-Browne, 2021) suggesting a mechanistic
basis for how an interplay between biasing top-down mood-congruent processes and exposure to ambiguous
stimuli can produce MPI events. Once an individual witnesses or starts to experience somatic symptoms,
interpersonal stress-related processes such as co-rumination may promote vigilance for symptom onset in
other individuals or even aid in the spreading, exacerbating, and maintenance of symptoms (Carlucci et al.,
2018; Hankin et al., 2010; Schwartz-Mette & Rose, 2012). Co-rumination processes may additionally
facilitate the continued hypothalamic-prefrontal cortex interactions that promote executive dysfunction and
mood-congruent processing as well as a sustained failure to adapt to the MPI-associated stressors
(Gianferante et al., 2014; Uribe-Mariño et al., 2016). Together, the above neurocognitive and sociocognitive
factors demonstrate how stressful environments can interact with human cognition to produce MPI events.
4. Response from the Affected Group: A common element also present in most MPI episodes is the appearance
of an Index Case, the first case which sets the expectations of those who follow. In the mid-1960’s several
African countries experienced MPI outbreaks of ‘Laughing Mania’. These outbreaks primarily afflicted
young schoolgirls presenting uncontrollable laughing as well as episodes of screaming, twitching, trance
states and weeping. The pattern of contagion was for one or more of the afflicted to begin laughing
uncontrollably and for this to spread to others. Other villages became afflicted with the disorder after news
of the illness spread. A common theme across different MPI outbreaks of the initial case trend setting the
symptomology of the subsequent cases. As mentioned in the Canadian study of sound sufferers, knowledge
of the expression of symptoms may lead subsequent afflictees to attend more closely to otherwise normal
sensations and thus attribute these to the ‘illness’. Curiously, this disorder did not seem to spread to adult
populations, but remained primarily contained within school children, particularly schoolgirls, suggesting
a social network component to the spread of MPI outbreaks.
5. Diffusion Across the Network: In the early 1930’s several towns in rural Virginia reported a series of gas
attacks committed by elusive culprits who conspicuously always evaded capture or even left physical
evidence of their presence. The index case was a family outside Roanoke County, Virginia, who reported
on December 23, 1933, that someone had attempted to inject poisonous gas into their family’s residence.
Police investigations failed to find a suspect nor identify any physical evidence to support the claim. After
the story appeared in local newspapers, reports of similar incidents proliferated throughout the Virginia
countryside. The reports of these incidents skyrocketed after reporting but seem to have been localized to
areas where the news was reported. In MPI episodes involving school children, it is common for children
to become afflicted but not the adults. Similar trends were observed with the Laughing Mania outbreaks in
Africa. Suggesting once again that a social network component may contribute to the spread of MPI
outbreaks.
Weaponizing the mechanics that drive MPI events can be categorized as a gray-zone tactic.
Characterized by ambiguity, opacity of the actors involved, uncertainty concerning the relevant
policy and legal frameworks to address this attack vector is representative of the nature and form
of this contemporary conflict space and reflects the challenges facing the security community
attempting to understand, deter and respond to it (Votel, 2015). The significance and novelty of
ASID attacks is the injection of ambiguous information as the primary, or peripheral, attack vector.
The effects potentially transcend the information and psychological warfare domains to induce
self-inflicted physical harm in targets.
Elements of an ASID Attack
Examining the components of MPI outbreaks provides clues to the elements required to conduct a
success ASID attack. MPIs involve some ambiguous stimuli, either environmental or tied to an
event. This ambiguous stimulus begs for resolution (Cialdini, 2016). The next component, a
stressful environment or circumstance encourage hypervigilance and thus individuals begin
attending closely to the ambiguous stimuli. Individuals within the social network then notice
responses from affected individuals in the form of physical sensations. These sensations are often
commonly experienced within a healthy population but are ignored or dismissed under ‘normal’
circumstances. Finally, the psychogenic condition becomes diffused across the social network.
Drawing from MPI events as a guide, we suggest the following elements are necessary to
successfully launch an ASID attack.
Introduction of a Culturally Consistent Narrative: Injecting a plausible narrative into the
communication stream of the target population constitutes the required trigger to cause that
population to engage in a positive test strategy to hyper-focus on ambiguous stimuli and interpret
these through the lens of the weaponized narrative.
The Presence of Ambiguous Stimuli: The presence of ambiguous stimuli provides the
circumstances that the attack(s) exploit to mire the target in the information noise of innocuous
and irrelevant information. The search for positive instances will encourage the target to discover
false positives that will consume time and resources.
Motivation for Hypervigilance: The target needs to have a reason to care about examining the
ambiguous stimuli, without this motivation, there is no reason to direct focus toward the
ambiguous information stream. This hypervigilance of the ambiguous stimuli can lead targets to
sensemaking of their experiences which are formed through cognitive modelling and experience
formations. Such weaponized attacks rely on cognitive processes that have been shown to be both
implicit and self-perpetuating. Memory implanting has been vastly researched and shown that
individuals can crate experiences or memories though suggestion (see Roediger & McDermott,
1995; Frenda et al., 2011). The previously described factors alongside the accessibility of
ambiguous information, as well as actual reports of symptoms found in the media would contribute
to individuals incorrectly interpreting their experiences and creating false memories. These
experiences are then shared, both verbally and non-verbally with others causing a social contagion
that would ‘infect’ others. Studies have shown that individuals can create experience and memories
that leads to group experiences and collective memories, where individuals that experienced
negative valence created more collective negative experiences, and this effect is stronger in smaller
groups (Choi et al, 2017).
Optional Social Network: ASID attacks may infect an individual or an entire social network, but
when targeted against a social network the additional biases of social proof and confirmation bias
are introduced and reinforced respectively. Most leading social media platforms employ
algorithms that propagate content that increase engagement among its users including content that
induce strong negative emotions. These algorithms are not subject to any governmental or judicial
regulations that inhibit their efficiency, thus offering a cost-effective and built-in ‘infrastructure’
for ASID attack propagation that requires minimal effort or understanding on the side of the
adversary.
Potential Attack Examples
The following scenarios illustrate how such an ASID attack might be deployed by an adversary to
degrade or disrupt an organization’s ability to function. Firstly though, the much-publicized
Havana Syndrome cannot be ignored as an example of an - ongoing - event where the existence of
mysterious and ambiguous information is shaping opinion and behavior (see; Baloh and
Bartholomew, 2020; BBC, 2021). In the context of ASID attacks it is inconsequential if the Havana
Syndrome is a MPI caused by the sound of mating insects, malicious microwaves, or a remote
incapacitation weapon using new physical principles. ASID attacks require no smoking gun. If the
conditions are set (i.e. the culturally consistent narrative, the presence of ambiguous stimuli,
motivation for hypervigilance, and if necessary, the accelerator function of social networks) then
the ambiguity and fear it spreads act as multiplier in the target group. Victims will complete the
‘play’ themselves, as the real-power mechanics driving MPI events are weaponized as a
component of an information warfare campaign targeting human cognition.
The Telegraphed Attack: An advanced adversary who has established credibility through prior
attacks and reputation may be capable of disrupting the operations of a target, or cause to consume
a significant number of resources, by merely threatening or telegraphing an attack. If their primary
goal is the degradation of operational capability or distraction, then an ASID attack might be an
effective option. In this scenario, an APT might announce that they plan to launch an attack within
a prescribed timeframe. If they are successful, information security staff from that organization
will likely be more vigilant than their typical baseline during around the period of the announced
attack. If this is a large, distributed organization, then this attack might be enhanced by
impersonating organizational members on social media. These impersonated individuals could
post disinformation regarding false Indicators of Compromise (IoCs). To maximize effectiveness,
these IoCs should describe ambiguous network traffic. We believe this tactic could be highly
effective because the injection of cognitive malware through social media channels would unlikely
be anticipated and discovered in time to prevent the damage already accomplished by inducing
hypervigilance within some operators.
Social Media Attack: Social media has provided a pathway for ASID attacks to propagate with
little effort. Hot button topics are constantly enflamed on social media which are exacerbated by
misinformation and disinformation. An adversary could create culturally consistent content
(stimuli) that is meant to mislead a hypervigilant population. The disinformation is amplified
through social shares which spread the content to an exponentially expanding network of Social
Media users. This type of attack could be used to change opinion of voters in contentious battle
ground state during an election period. A plausible scenario might involve a threat actor bringing
attention to an ambiguous statement by a candidate about a hot button topic which causes a
whirlwind of shares across the Social Media platform. By recruiting and inducing collective false
memory within the targeted population, this ASID attack might cause a significant waste of time
and resources to counter the effect and could lead to loss of confidence in election results.
Hoax Security Warning: It is common for security departments to send security warning emails to
employees to caution against malicious email campaigns they have observed or other recent scams.
A malicious threat actor might leverage these warnings to launch an ASID attack against the
members of an organization by impersonating the security department in an email advising against
a malware campaign being perpetrated against the organization. This email could contain
descriptions of anomalous computer operations that in fact are normal but would appear as
potentially malicious. Internet hoaxes such as these have already been observed in the wild with
claims that users should look for the presence of the ‘SULFNBK.exe’ within their Windows C:
drive directory. If identified, that the presence of this file indicated that their machine had been
compromised, and that users should delete it from their system. In fact, this file was part of the
normal operation of the machine and deleting it could potentially cause a system malfunction
(AOL.com, 2015). A recent study on college student responses to phishing emails found that rather
than reporting malicious emails to the university security department, some students posted screen
shots of emails to subreddit forums (Canham et al, in preparation). This presents another potential
ASID attack vector, in which malicious actors could pose as students posting a legitimate email as
a scam.
False Bio-Attack: A variation of the above scenario would be to impersonate someone from an
organization with the claim that a biological pathogen was released within a facility and that
several employees have become ill as a result. The symptoms should describe commonly
experienced symptoms such as headaches, dizziness, fatigue, hyperventilation, dry mouth, and
nausea. To increase effectiveness by inducing hypervigilance, the hoax would then suggest that
anyone experiencing these symptoms should immediately quarantine themselves and contact their
doctor as the symptoms often rapidly increase in severity. This quarantine recommendation would
serve two purposes. First, it would degrade operational capability, and second, it would provide
an observable signal to other employees which might lead to additional ‘cases’ as has been
observed in historical MPI events. The inducement of hypervigilance will statistically guarantee
(in a large enough organization) that some individuals will experience these symptoms and
associate them with the hoax attack. A variation of this hoax might describe exposure to
electromagnetic radiation as the cause with similar symptoms and recommended course of action.
Conclusion
The long and well-documented history of Mass Psychogenic Illness (MPI) outbreaks suggests the
potential effectiveness of the injecting ambiguous information, with a coherent narrative into the
information stream, as a means for causing disruption. This form of attack exploits normal
cognitive functions to cause widespread disruption. Information warriors should be aware of the
possibility of the employment of such tactics in gray-zone conflict scenarios as these attacks would
reside below the threshold of overt military actions. For the actors and agencies who use time and
energy to investigate, understand, resolve, explain and potentially respond to ASID attacks, they
must recognize the strategic validity of this approach and its capability to change how the victim,
and they themselves, think and behave. Efforts should be made to better understand the key factors
necessary to successfully launch such attacks and how to mitigate or disrupt their effects.