Title: Evidence-Based Therapist-Supported Digital Mental Health Intervention for Patients
Experiencing Medical Multimorbidity: A Retrospective Cohort Intent-to-Treat Study
Running Title: Digital Mental Health Intervention for Patients with Multimorbidity
Authors: Benjamin W. Nelson, Ph.D.a, b, Nicholas C. Peiper, Ph.D., M.P.H.a, c, Kirstin
Aschbacher, Ph.D.a, d, Valerie L. Forman-Hoffman, Ph.D., M.P.Ha
Affiliations:
a Meru Health Inc.
b University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
c University of Louisville, Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Louisville, KY,
USA.
d Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Weill Institute for Neurosciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Corresponding Author:
Benjamin W. Nelson, Ph.D.
Clinical Research Scientist
Meru Health
19 South B Street, Ste 3
San Mateo, CA, 94401
benjamin.nelson@meruhealth.com
Abstract
Objective: Multimorbidity or the co-occurrence of multiple health conditions is increasing
globally and associated with significant psychological complications. It is unclear whether digital
mental health (DMH) interventions for patients experiencing medical multimorbidity (MMB) are
effective, particularly given that this patient population faces more treatment resistance.
Therefore, there is a need for initial preliminary research to examine whether DMH interventions
are associated with reductions on depressive and anxiety symptoms in the context of MMB.
Methods: This preregistered retrospective cohort intent-to-treat study with 2,819 patients
enrolled in a therapist-supported DMH (TS-DMH) intervention examined the associations
between MMB and mental health.
Results: Results indicated that more MMB was significantly associated with greater presenting
mental health symptom severity. MMB did not have a deleterious influence on depressive
symptom trajectories across treatment, although having one medical condition was associated
with a steeper decrease in anxiety symptoms compared to patients with no medical conditions.
Finally, MMB was not associated with time to dropout, but was associated with higher dropout
and was differentially associated with fewer beneficial treatment outcomes, although this is
likely attributable to higher presenting symptom severity, rather than lesser symptom reductions
during treatment.
Conclusions: The MHP showed preliminary effectiveness as an evidence-based treatment for
patients experiencing depression and anxiety in the context of MMB. Future DMH treatments
and research might investigate tailored barrier reduction and extended treatment lengths for
patients experiencing MMB to allow for greater treatment dose to reduce symptoms below
clinical outcome thresholds.
Introduction
Multimorbidity, or the co-occurrence of two or more health conditions, including both
psychiatric and physical health disorders1, has been described as a “defining challenge”2 and an
“emerging priority” for health systems3. Currently, around 60% of adults experience two or more
conditions, while approximately 40% of adults experience three or more conditions4 and the
global prevalence has increased in recent years3. Multimorbidity is particularly disabling and
impairing5, detrimental to quality of life6, clinically complex and hard to treat4, and
disproportionately influential on healthcare utilization and cost3. Psychiatric and physical health
conditions are bidirectional, such that greater medical multimorbidity (MMB) or the co-
occurrence of multiple physical health disorders are associated with greater psychiatric
complaints7, while individuals experiencing depression and anxiety are at significantly elevated
risk for various deleterious health outcomes and premature mortality8. In fact, the predictive
power of an affective disorder rivals well-known biomedical risk factors, such as smoking,
inactivity, and obesity9, such that individuals with affective disorders lose a median of 10 years
off their lives due to all-cause mortality10. Therefore, the need for effective, accessible, and
scalable psychiatric treatments for patients experiencing MMB it is of utmost importance.
Currently, less than half of patients experiencing psychiatric complications receive
treatment11. A constellation of factors including significant structural barriers12, shortage of
providers13, and affordability12 culminate in significant unmet psychiatric needs. Digital mental
health (DMH) interventions have gained popularity for their purported ability to ameliorate
several of these limitations. Initial evidence for DMH interventions indicates that these
treatments have comparable effectiveness at reducing depressive symptoms when compared to
in-person Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) and superior effects when compared to treatment
as usual and waitlist controls14. DMH interventions have also been found to be superior at
reducing anxiety symptoms when compared to active controls and waitlist controls15. Evidence
suggests that these treatments may be more cost-effective compared to myriad alternatives,
including waitlist, group CBT, telephone counseling, and unguided internet CBT for depression
and anxiety16,17. Despite the promise of DMH interventions, recent meta-analytic estimates of
dropout in smartphone-delivered interventions for depressive symptoms (47.8%)18 appear higher
than meta-analytic dropout estimates for in-person psychotherapy for major depression
(19.9%)19.
Currently, there is a dearth of research examining the effectiveness of these DMH app-
based interventions for treating patients with internalizing symptoms that also experience MMB.
The majority of research has focused on medical telehealth interventions for specific chronic
diseases with supplementary psychiatric components with two recent meta-analyses largely
examining remote telehealth interventions (e.g., phone, video, email, and web-based
consultation) for depressive and anxiety symptoms that co-occur, with secondary medical
conditions20,21. Therefore, there is a pressing need to comprehensively examine the impact of
smartphone-delivered DMH interventions for patients presenting with elevated internalizing
symptoms that also are experiencing multiple medical conditions.
Current Study
This retrospective single-arm cohort intent-to-treat (ITT) study, preregistered on Open
number of medical conditions, here on referred to as MMB, and presenting depressive and
anxiety symptom severity, 2) influence of MMB on both depressive and anxiety symptom
trajectories across the course of an evidence-based DMH treatment, and 3) MMB and various
treatment outcomes. First, we hypothesized that more MMB would show a positive dose-
response association with higher presenting depressive and anxiety symptoms. Second, we
hypothesized that more MMB would moderate the association between treatment week and
depressive and anxiety symptoms, such that patients with more MMB would have flatter
depressive and anxiety trajectories as compared to patients with no MMB. Lastly, we
hypothesized that patients with more MMB would have significantly worse treatment outcomes,
as indexed by lower treatment response, clinically significant improvement, minimally clinically
important difference (MCID), and remission at post-treatment; and have both increased dropout
and earlier dropout.
Methods and Materials
Participants.
The present study included patients treated with the Meru Health Program (MHP), an
evidence-based therapist-supported DMH (TS-DMH) intervention. All data came from 2,819
or after 03/30/2020 and ended treatment on or before 09/01/2021. This study adhered to the
Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) reporting
guideline for cohort studies.
Recruitment.
Patients entered the MHP via referrals from employee assistance programs or via their
healthcare providers. Patients consented to participate and have their collected and deidentified
data used for research purposes when accepting the MHP privacy practices. Data collected as
part of care is stored in Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act-compliant electronic
medical records that includes protected health information. All data are encrypted in transit, and
at rest. Institutional review board exemption for this analysis was obtained from the Pearl
Institutional Review Board (21-MERU-114) for analyses of previously collected and de-
identified data. Inclusion/exclusion criteria of the MHP required patients to be at least 18 years
of age or older, have at least mild levels of depression, anxiety, or burnout, own a smartphone,
and not have an active substance use disorder, severe active suicidal ideation with a specific
plan, severe active self-harm, or a history of psychosis or mania.
Meru Health Program (MHP) Treatment.
The MHP has been described in detail in prior publications22. In sum, the MHP is a 12-
week treatment composed of several different therapist-supported components of evidence-based
therapies delivered via a smartphone app.
Measures. All measures examined in this study were collected in the MHP app at
baseline and biweekly during the MHP including at end-of-treatment.
Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9). Patients completed the PHQ-9 to screen for
depression23, which is comprised of a list of nine depressive symptoms with response options
ranging from 0 (not at all) to 3 (nearly every day) with total scores ranging from 0-27. The PHQ-
9 has excellent internal consistency (Cronbach's α=0.89 in primary care settings), and excellent
test-retest reliability (ICC=0.84)23.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7). Patients completed the GAD-7 to screen for
anxiety24, which is comprised of a list of seven anxiety symptoms with response options ranging
from 0 (not at all) to 3 (nearly every day) with total scores ranging from 0-21. The GAD-7 has
excellent internal consistency (Cronbach's α=0.92), and excellent test-retest reliability
(ICC=0.83)24.
Lifetime Medical Conditions. At intake, patients completed an assessment of lifetime
medical (i.e., physical health) conditions, including diabetes, anemia, hyper or hypothyroidism,
liver disease, heart disease, asthma/chronic bronchitis/emphysema/COPD, cancer, chronic
pain/fibromyalgia, kidney disease, arthritis, lupus/IBS/MS, dementia/Alzheimer’s, and any other
physical health condition. Self-reported medical conditions and medical records have acceptable
agreement25 and checklists have higher accuracy and are more complete when compared to data
collected from routine sources26. The checklist created a MMB categorical variable of increasing
number of medical conditions (0- none, 1- one, 2- two, 3- three or more).
Treatment Outcomes.
• Treatment Response (TR) refers to a clinically significant degree of symptom
reduction following treatment initiation and was defined as a 50% reduction in
PHQ-927 and GAD-727 for patients with a 5 or above starting PHQ-9 and GAD-7
score, respectively.
• Minimally Clinically Important Difference (MCID) refers to smallest change in
scores that are of “perceived benefit” to the patient and was defined as a PHQ-9
score reduction of ≥ 528 and a GAD-7 score reduction of ≥ 429 for patients with a
5 or above starting PHQ-9 and GAD-7 score, respectively.
• Clinically Significant Improvement (CSI) was defined as a 50% PHQ-9 reduction
from the pretreatment score combined with an end-of-treatment PHQ-9 score that
was less than 1023 for patients with a 10 or above starting score. Due to a lack of a
clear definition for CSI for GAD-7, we used this same definition as we used for
the PHQ-9.
• Remission was defined as a PHQ-9 < 530 for patients with a 5 or above starting
PHQ-9. Like the CSI definition above, due to a lack of a clear definition for
remission for the GAD-7 we used the same definition as that for the PHQ-9.
• Dropout was defined as any patient that did not complete at least 50%—or 6 of
12—of the treatment week introductory videos, which unlocked treatment week
materials.
Covariates. Participant age, gender, psychotropic medication use, days actively engaged
with app during each two-week period during treatment, dropout status (all hypotheses, except
for dropout model), and baseline PHQ-9 and GAD-7 symptom severity (hypothesis 2 and 3)
were used as covariates. Age was categorized into 18-25, 26-34, 35-44, 45-54, and 55 and over.
Role of the funding source.
The funder of the study had no role in the study design, interpretation, or writing of the
manuscript. All decisions about the research were taken by the investigative team and were
unrestricted.
Statistical Analysis.
All statistical analyses were conducted with RStudio, Version 1.3.959. Statistical
significance was defined using p-values. Descriptive statistics were calculated for each patient
analysis in which all participants with outcome measures at baseline were included, regardless of
intervention engagement or attrition (see Supplemental Material for more information on
imputation and missing data). All main effect and covariate estimates as well as unadjusted
models can be found in Supplemental Materials.
First, we examined the association between more MMB and presenting baseline
depressive and anxiety symptom severity by running two linear regressions for the association
between MMB and baseline depression and anxiety symptom severity controlling for covariates.
Second, we examined the impact of treatment week on depressive and anxiety symptoms
across the 12-week treatment by conducting a multilevel model that nested treatment week
(Level-1) within individuals (Level-2). Fixed effects including MMB, and covariates were tested
at the level of participants (Level-2). Further, to determine whether more MMB had an impact on
depressive and anxiety symptom trajectories across treatment, we examined the cross-level
interaction between MMB and treatment week in separate models for depression and anxiety
symptoms, while controlling for covariates.
Third, to quantify the clinical significance of the treatment outcomes, we first ran a series
of paired-sample t-tests to examine pre-post changes in PHQ-9 and GAD-7 scores by MMB to
examine whether there were significant reductions in depressive and anxiety symptoms across
treatment. Next, we ran a series of logistic regressions with MMB predicting treatment outcomes
including, dropout, TR, CSI, MCID, and remission controlling for covariates. Finally, to rule out
differential attrition among individuals with MMB as a potential confound for treatment
outcomes, we performed a Kaplan-Meier Survival Analysis and Cox proportional hazard (PH)
model to examine time to dropout (i.e., last active day of app use) and examined the interaction
between MMB and patient age, as age was significantly associated with MMB, X2(df=168,
N=2,819)=378, p<0.001). Treatment completers (i.e., completed at least 50%—or 6 of 12—of
the treatment weeks) were considered right censored.
Results
Demographic and Clinical Characteristics
female (79.78%) with an average age of 39.40 (standard deviation [SD]=11.10). The mean
baseline PHQ-9 was 11.40 (SD=6.02) and the mean baseline GAD-7 was 11.40 (SD=4.84),
indicating moderate levels of depression and anxiety, respectively, which fall above the
diagnostic cutoffs indicative of likely depression and anxiety diagnosis23,24. 27.60% of the
sample reported taking psychiatric medication at intake.
Multimorbidity and Baseline Symptom Severity.
MMB was significantly positively associated with baseline depressive in a dose-response
relationship, such that having one condition (Std.beta=0.10, p=0.022, 95%CI[0.01-0.18]), two
conditions (Std.beta=0.18, p< .001, 95%CI[0.07-0.29]), or three or more conditions (Std.beta =
0.36, p<.001, 95%CI[0.23-0.50]) was associated with greater presenting depressive symptom
severity when compared to patients with no medical conditions, albeit these effects were small
(R2 < .10) after controlling for covariates. Similarly, MMD was significantly positively
associated with baseline anxiety, such that having one condition (Std.beta=0.14, p =0.002,
95%CI[0.05-0.22]), two conditions (Std.beta = 0.11, p =0.043, 95%CI[0.004-0.22]), or three or
more conditions (Std.beta=0.26, p<.001, 95%CI[0.12-0.40]) was associated with greater
presenting anxiety symptom severity when compared to patients with no medical conditions,
albeit these effects were small (R2<.10) after controlling for covariates.
Depressive and Anxiety Symptom Trajectories by Multimorbidity
Treatment week was significantly and inversely associated with PHQ-9 scores
(Std.beta=-0.32, p<.001, 95%CI[-0.34- -0.31]) and GAD-7 (Std.beta=-0.41, p<.001, 95%CI[-
0.42- -0.39]). More MMB was associated with depressive and anxiety symptom levels across
treatment. Specifically, having one medical condition was significantly associated with higher
PHQ-9 (Std.beta=0.02, p=.008, 95%CI [-0.03-0.07]) and GAD-7 (Std.beta=0.06, p<.001,
95%CI[0.004-0.120]) scores when compared to patients with no medical conditions and having
three or more medical conditions were significantly associated with higher PHQ-9
(Std.beta=0.11, p<.001, 95%CI[0.03-0.20]) and GAD-7 (Std.beta=0.22, p<.001, 95%CI[0.13-
0.32]) scores when compared to patients with no medical conditions, although these effects were
not found for patients with two medical conditions (p³.05). For depressive symptom trajectory,
there were no interaction effects between treatment week and multimorbidity (p³.05), indicating
no effect of multimorbidity on depressive symptom trajectories across treatment. In contrast for
anxiety symptom trajectories, there was one interaction effect between treatment week and
having one medical condition (Std.beta=-0.04, p=.003, 95%CI [-0.07- -0.01]), such that those
with one medical condition had a steeper decrease in anxiety symptoms across treatment,
although this effect was not found for any other interaction (p ³ .05). These models had
substantial explanatory power (PHQ-9 Model conditional R2=0.87, GAD-7 Model conditional
R2=0.75) and the marginal R2 or part related to the fixed effects (e.g., MMB and covariates)
alone was 0.62 for the PHQ-9 Model and 0.32 for the GAD-7 Model.
Multimorbidity and Treatment Outcomes
The MHP was associated with significant improvements in depressive symptoms
conditions for patients with no (mean-decrease=-6.11), t(1302)=42.61, p<0.001, !" =1.18,
hedges
95% CI [1.11-1.25); one (mean-decrease=-6.64), t(831)=35.56, p<0.001, !" =1.23, 95% CI
hedges
[1.14-1.32); two (mean-decrease=-5.79), t(438)=25.43, p<0.001, !" =1.21, 95% CI [1.09-
hedges
1.34); and three or more (mean-decrease=-6.90), t(244)=20.72, p<0.001, !" =1.32, 95% CI
hedges
[1.15-1.49) medical conditions. The MHP was also associated with significant improvements in
anxiety symptoms conditions for patients with no (mean-decrease=-6.41), t(1302)=50.92,
p<0.001, !" =1.41, 95% CI [1.33-1.49); one (mean-decrease=-6.98), t(831)=44.42, p<0.001,
hedges
!" =1.54, 95% CI [1.44-1.64); two (mean-decrease=-6.28), t(438)=27.70, p<0.001,
hedges
!" =1.32, 95% CI [1.19-1.45); and three or more (mean-decrease=-6.54), t(244)=20.28,
hedges
p<0.001, !" =1.29, 95% CI [1.12-1.46) medical conditions.
hedges
PHQ-9 Treatment Outcome Categories. While having one medical condition was not
associated with differential treatment outcomes when compared to patients with no medical
conditions; having two conditions was not associated with TR, CSI, or remission, but was
significantly associated with reduced MCID when compared to patients with no medical
conditions; and having three or more conditions wasn’t associated with TR or remission, but was
significantly associated with reduced MCID and CSI when compared to patients with no medical
2).
GAD-7 Treatment Outcomes Categories. While having one medical condition wasn’t
associated with differential treatment outcomes when compared to patients with no medical
conditions; having two medical conditions was significantly associated with fewer beneficial
treatment outcomes of interest as compared to patients with no medical conditions; and having
three or more medical conditions wasn’t associated with CSI, but it was significantly associated
with reduced TR, MCID, and remission when compared to patients with no medical conditions.
Dropout. Having one or three or more medical conditions were associated with higher
Survival Analysis. The Cox PH Model indicated that there were no main effects for
MMB on time to patient dropout, but there were significant protective effects for those aged 45-
54 and those aged 55 and above in models controlling for gender, medication use, and baseline
effects for number of MMB and age, except patients that had two medical conditions and were
35-44 years old, had a lower risk of dropout. In line with these results, Kaplan-Meyer curves,
Supplementary Materials for Kaplan-Meyer curves by age.
Discussion
This preregistered retrospective single-arm ITT study was devised to investigate the
association between MMB and psychiatric outcomes during an evidence-based TS-DMH
intervention among 2,819 patients. Overall, this study showed preliminary effectiveness and
feasibility for a TS-DMH intervention for strongly improving depressive and anxiety symptoms
among patients experiencing MMB.
Our hypotheses verify that MMB is an important and growing concern for DMH to
consider. First, more MMB was significantly associated with greater severity of baseline
depressive and anxiety symptoms, although these were small effects in adjusted analyses. These
findings replicate past research indicating that multimorbidity is more disabling and impairing5,
detrimental to quality of life6, clinically complex, and hard to treat4.
Second, and in contrast to our hypotheses, more MMB did not influence the trajectory of
depressive or anxiety symptoms across treatment and only individuals that experienced one
medical condition had a steeper decrease in anxiety symptom trajectory across treatment when
compared to patients with no medical conditions. These finding are particularly hopeful from a
clinical perspective, such that more MMB did not negatively influence the trajectory of
depressive and anxiety symptoms across treatment.
In terms of treatment outcomes, results were pleasantly surprising, in that they did not
uphold the hypotheses that MMB would blunt the overall reduction in depressive and anxiety
symptoms. Overall, the MHP was associated with large effect size decreases in depressive and
anxiety symptoms regardless of the number of MMB. For depressive symptom outcomes,
although having one medical condition was not associated with differential treatment outcomes
when compared to patients without any medical conditions, having two conditions was
associated with reduced MCID and having three or more conditions was associated with reduced
MCID and CSI when compared to patients with no medical conditions. Interestingly, MMB had
no relationship with depressive symptom remission; however, these findings are not surprising
when considering that more MMB was associated with higher baseline depressive symptoms, but
not depressive symptom trajectory as compared to those with no MMB. That is, those with more
MMB had similar depressive symptom decreases as those with no MMB, but due to higher
starting symptom severity they were less likely to pass defined thresholds.
For anxiety outcomes, having one medical condition was not associated with differential
treatment outcomes when compared to patients with no medical conditions. This finding may
have been due to beneficial effects of more healthcare system contact, but not experiencing
enough MMB that it overpowered potential beneficial effects of having greater healthcare system
contact. In contrast, as compared with those with no MMB, having two medical conditions was
significantly associated with reduction in all treatment outcomes when compared to patients with
no medical conditions; and having three or more medical conditions was associated with
significantly reduced TR, MCID, and remission when compared to patients with no medical
conditions, which may relate to the point above and indicate that once patients pass having one
medical condition, the detrimental effects of MMB overpower any beneficial effect of increased
contact with the healthcare system.
Lastly, having one or three or more medical conditions was associated with higher
dropout, compared to those with no conditions. Interestingly, this was not found for the
comparison between those with no versus two medical conditions. In addition, survival analyses
examining the time to dropout indicated that more MMB didn’t influence dropout timing, while
older age was associated with lower risk of earlier drop out. Again, there was only one
multimorbidity interaction with age (patients that had two medical conditions and were 35-44
years old had a lower dropout risk). Again, findings provide a hopeful clinical message that those
with more MMB were no more likely to have earlier dropout when compared to patients with no
MMB.
Limitations and Future Directions
While this study had several significant strengths including a large patient sample with an
ITT study design, the study findings should be interpreted considering several limitations. Most
limitations are related to real-world data collection as part of continuous TS-DMH intervention
improvement. First, this single-arm observational study precluded the ability to conclude that
treatment effects were due to MHP as opposed to unspecified factors. We plan to conduct
blinded randomized control trials to examine MHP effectiveness when compared to other
evidence-based in-person interventions. Second, we started collecting race/ethnicity data after we
began collecting medical conditions leading to high rates of demographic missingness that
prevented their use as covariates. This currently limits the generalizability of these findings to
specific racial and ethnicity groups; however, we now collect this important information and will
include these variables as future covariates. Finally, although we didn’t collect medical condition
severity, impairment, or the full spectrum of possible medical conditions, these limitations are
common1 and these variables may be important to consider in future research.
Conclusion
This study replicated the association between more MMB and higher psychiatric
symptoms, while advancing this research to an evidence-based TS-DMH intervention. Results
indicated that more MMB wasn’t associated with a psychiatric symptom trajectories or time to
dropout, although there were differential treatment outcomes depending on MMB, however,
these outcomes may be attributable to starting with higher symptoms, rather than experiencing
lesser symptom reductions during treatment. Future research should account for MMB in DMH
interventions as they have a diverse impact on patient outcomes.
Author Contributions.
B.N., N.C.P, K.A., and V.L.F.H. contributed to the interpretation of the results, provided critical
feedback, and helped shape the research, analysis, and manuscript. B.N. conceived, wrote the
initial draft of the manuscript, and ran analyses for the manuscript.
Role of Funding Source
Meru Health Inc. provided the funding to conduct the research. The funder of the study had no
role in the study design, data interpretation, or writing of the manuscript. All decisions about the
research were taken by the investigative team and were unrestricted as the study was
preregistered.
Conflicts of Interest
Meru Health is the full-time employer of the authors. Meru Health had no role in the
conceptualization or design of the study, analysis or interpretation of these data, writing of the
manuscript, or in the decision to publish these findings.
Ethics Committee Approval
Institutional review board exemption for this analysis was obtained from the Pearl Institutional
Review Board (21-MERU-114).
Guarantor.
B.N. and V.L.F.H.
Acknowledgement.
We would like to thank all the participants that have contributed to this study.