BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 1
Validation of the General and Personal Belief in a Just World scales in Iran
and Their Relations to Perceived Threat of Kin Favoritism
1 2 3
Mehdi Mikani , Parisa Rafiee , and Matthias Donat
Tarbiat Modares University
University of Rhode Island
Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg
Author Note
Statements and Declarations
The authors received no specific funding for this work.
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
All applicable international and national ethical guidelines were followed.
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are
©2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record
and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not
copy or cite without authors’ permission. The final article will beavailable, upon
publication, at [pending].
Corresponding author email: mahdimiki74@gmail.com
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 2
Abstract
People possess a pre-conscious need to believe in the existence of justice in the world. This
belief in a just world (BJW) is usually measured with self-report scales. Dalbert et al.
(1987) and Dalbert (1999) have developed the general belief in a just world (GBJW) and
personal belief in a just world (PBJW) scales as psychometrically robust measures of
just-world beliefs. We conducted three studies to demonstrate the validity of the Persian
versions of belief in a just world scales and the importance of distinguishing between
GBJW and PBJW. First, we confirmed the factor structure. reliability, convergent validity
(self-esteem, life satisfaction, and religiosity), and divergent validity (big five personality
factors and dark triad traits) of GBJW and PBJW using Iranian participants (N1 = 454).
Second, the associations of GBJW and PBJW with perceived threat of unjust behavior
directed to self or others were assessed using two scenario-based studies (N2 = 81, N3 =
71) in the context of kin favoritism. While GBJW negatively predicted perceived threat of
kin favoritism directed to others, PBJW was a negative predictor of perceived threat of kin
favoritism directed to self. Consistent with theoretical assumptions, perceived likelihood of
punishment mediated these associations. In addition to providing further evidence for the
differentiation between GBJW and PBJW, the findings of Study 2 and 3 also support the
idea of an optimistic bias towards self by showing that people perceived less threat of kin
favoritism when others, rather than themselves, were potential victims of injustice.
Keywords: Belief in a just world, General belief in a just world, Personal belief in a
just world, Kin favoritism, Discrimination, Perceived injustice
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 3
Validation of the General and Personal Belief in a Just World scales in Iran
and Their Relations to Perceived Threat of Kin Favoritism
Introduction
Humanity suffers from varieties of injustice such as world hunger and wars or everyday
discrimination against women as well as racial, religious, and sexual minorities. Yet
according to one of the most influential theories about human belief systems, people adopt
just-world beliefs that serve to enable them to construe their social environment as if it
were just, stable, and orderly (Lerner, 1980). Furthermore, these beliefs provide people
with certain cognitive ways to justify the status quo, underestimate the prevalence of
injustice, or even blame innocent victims. Given these functions, just-world beliefs have
been found to be an important factor in well-being, religion, and justice-related perceptions
or behavior. Despite the prevalence and importance of just-world beliefs, rigorous research
on the psychology of these beliefs is lacking in Iran. To help overcome this gap, we aimed
to validate self-report measures of individual differences in just-world beliefs, and test their
correlates and predictive implications. As a common and understudied justice-related issue
that many people, especially in Iran, are confronted with on a daily basis takes root in
favoritism toward kinship, we focus on perceptions of kin favoritism as a part of
investigating the validity of just-world belief scales.
Belief in a just world
According to just-world theory, many people across the world believe in a just world
where people get what they deserve and deserve what they get. The BJW is considered a
personality trait with an importance in the interaction between personality and other areas
of social science. There are some adaptive functions that BJW is thought to serve, such as
the confidence that important decisions about people are made with justice and the
perception of life as safe and structured. In line with this idea, BJW has been found to be
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 4
associated with self-esteem (Donat et al., 2016; Tatsi & Panagiotopoulou, 2021), life
satisfaction (Dalbert, 1999), and a decrease in the perception of discrimination and
unfairness of others (Furnham, 2003). It is essential to consider that while an individual
can be an observer who only judges and interprets the world, the individual can also act as
a participant. Therefore, Lipkus et al. (1996) propose that a general belief in a just world
(GBJW) should be distinguished from a personal belief in a just world (PBJW).
The general and personal belief in a just world scales were developed to measure the
explicit endorsement of just-world beliefs (Dalbert, 1999; Dalbert et al., 1987). GBJW
refers to the confidence that people, in general, get what they deserve and deserve what
they get. On the other hand, PBJW refers to the confidence that a person is usually
treated in a just manner and plays an important adaptive role for people.
GBJW and PBJW were found to be positively correlated, however, they are
identified with different meanings and psychological functions (see Dalbert, 1999; Lipkus
et al., 1996; Nartova-Bochaver et al., 2018; Sutton & Douglas, 2005). GBJW helps people
maintain subjective well being (Dalbert, 1999), minimize the perceived injustices (Sutton &
Douglas, 2005), and defend against threats to just-world beliefs by strategies such as victim
blaming (Hafer & Gosse, 2011). PBJW positively relates to individuals’ forgiveness
(Strelan & Sutton, 2011), trust in others (Cubela Adoric & Kvartuc, 2007; Yu et al., 2020),
and different aspects of subjective well-being (Dalbert, 1999; Donat et al., 2016). In
attempting to examine the distinction between GBJW and PBJW we will explore people’s
trust in justice.
BJW, trust in justice, and the differentiation of GBJW and PBJW
As noted earlier, a function of both GBJW and PBJW is that it could shape
individuals’ trust in others or the perceived risk of becoming a victim of unfair decisions
(Bai et al., 2014; Cubela Adoric & Kvartuc, 2007; Hafer & Gosse, 2011). To the extent that
individuals believe the world treats others fairly (GBJW), they are less likely to perceive
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 5
injustice as prevalent and anticipate that others will not become a victim of injustice. In a
similar fashion, individuals’ belief about how they themselves are treated by the world
(PBJW) is linked to a prediction of outcomes in situations where they are the potential
victims of injustice. In this article, we leverage the above mentioned arguments to validate
BJW scales and also look at the differentiation between GBJW and PBJW.
Injustice can take many forms among which there is kin favoritism. Kin favoritism
is a common type of injustice that arises from people’s preferences to favor members of
their own extended family at the expense of injustice to outsiders. Such favoritism is
especially prevalent in societies that have large close-knit family groups and strong family
ties, such as Iran (Akbari et al., 2020). Thus, we focus on kin favoritism to investigate
individuals’ perceived threat of injustice.
Next, we go beyond examining the mere association between BJW and perceived
threats and take the further step of identifying the underlying process which mediate the
relationship. First, BJW has been linked with anticipating a high possibility of punishment
(Bai et al., 2014, 2016). This link stems from a fundamental premise of BJW, which is that
good behaviors are rewarded and bad behaviors are punished. Second, perceived risk of
punishment is a factor that people consider when they estimate the threat and prevalence
of injustice. This relation occurs because, intuitively, people tend to engage in less illegal
behaviors when the risk of punishment is high. Taken together, believing in a just world
indicates the extent to which individuals believe that people who do wrong will get
punished which in turn leads to the estimation of the likelihood that injustice takes place
(Bai et al., 2014). While legal punishment is a central deterrent, the possibility of moral
punishment and negative judgments of others can also relate to people’s perceived threat of
injustice. Thus, the role of the perceived risk of moral and legal punishment in the
relationship between BJW and the perceived threat of kin favoritism is worthy of
investigation.
In summary, we expect that GBJW, compared to PBJW, is more strongly
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 6
associated with the perceived threat of injustice (kin favoritism in this case) and
punishment when the person is a mere witness of potential injustice. In contrast, when the
person is the unfortunate target of unfair treatment, PBJW is expected to be more
strongly associated with the anticipation of outcomes. Moreover, perceived likelihood of
punishment is expected to explain the relationship between BJW dimensions and the
perceived threat of kin favoritism.
While our focus in this paper is validating BJW scales and testing their predictive
implications, a trace of optimistic bias can be found in the investigation of injustice threats.
Literature on optimistic bias suggests that people tend to assume that they are more likely,
compared to similar others, to avoid an undesirable outcome or reach a favorable one
(Shepperd et al., 2013; Strelan & Callisto, 2020). Thus, we briefly analyze the optimistic
bias in the context of kin favoritism in Iran, as we discuss shortly, individuals are expected
to predict that others are more likely than themselves to become victims of kin favoritism.
BJW and well-being
The just-world hypothesis states that people who believe that the world treats them
fairly may be confident in planning for long-term future goals, expect their lives to be
orderly, meaningful, and controllable. Directly or indirectly mediated by these
implications, mental health is improved (Kiral Ucar et al., 2019). Indeed, previous research
on BJW’s effects on well-being suggests that both GBJW and PBJW are associated with
self-esteem (i.e. high self-esteem reflects a primary feeling of self-worth and self-admiration,
while low self-esteem represents unhappiness with oneself, self-denial, and lack of
self-respect), life satisfaction, and other components of well-being (Donat et al., 2016;
Nartova-Bochaver et al., 2019; Tatsi & Panagiotopoulou, 2021). Also, the literature
emphasizes that PBJW is a stronger predictor of these constructs.
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 7
BJW and religiosity
Religious teachings promote the ideas that sufferings will be compensated and good
deeds will ultimately be rewarded. Furthermore, several religious traditions and teachings
across different religious affiliations, especially karmic religions, provide a supernatural
framework in which actions are expected to lead to valence-congruent outcomes, meaning
that mean people experience misfortune, and nice people experience success (Harvey &
Callan, 2014; White et al., 2019). This idea reflects just-world believers’ conviction that–in
a just world–good things happen to good people and bad things happen to bad people.
The literature also generally supports a positive relationship between BJW and religiosity
(Bègue, 2002; Harvey & Callan, 2014).
BJW and personality
BJW and the Big Five personality factors represent divergent constructs
conceptualized as assumptions about justice in the world and self-describing attributes,
respectively. Accordingly, Big Five personality factors can be used for testing the divergent
validity of BJW scales. Although the two constructs are broadly considered as
differentiable constructs and the Big Five items do not include the words “fair” or “just”,
researchers found inconsistent results about the associations of GBJW and PBJW with the
Big Five factors (Bollmann et al., 2015; Nudelman, 2013). Previous studies investigating
these associations did not report any notable difference in the strength of the correlations
with regard to GBJW and PBJW. Consistent with the literature (Bollmann et al., 2015;
Nudelman, 2013), we expect that both BJW dimensions will have weak positive
associations with extraversion and emotional stability, and nonsignificant associations with
agreeableness, conscientiousness, and openness to experience.
Dark Triad traits (i.e. narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism) are
characterized by exploiting others, dishonesty, aggressiveness, duplicity, and emotional
coldness (Paulhus & Williams, 2002). We argue that antisocial people do not need to form
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 8
a specific assumption about justice in the world as they may not care for justice and
fairness at all. However, one might argue that BJW has been negatively correlated with
rule-breaking behavior and antisocial tendencies (e.g., Donat et al., 2012). Thus, we argue
that dark triad traits could be used for divergent validity as we expect that there will be
weak negative relationships between BJW dimensions and the dark triad traits, if any.
Consistent with this assumption, previous research found no significant associations
between BJW and narcissism (Ames et al., 2006) as well as honesty-humility personality
factor (Bollmann et al., 2015).
The present studies
The aim of the present set of studies is two-fold. In study 1, a principal component
analysis (PCA) and a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) were done on the Persian version
of the GBJW and PBJW in order to investigate whether the two-factor structure, as
reported in other cultures, can be supported in the Iranian context. Furthermore, the
convergent and divergent validity of the Persian BJW scales were examined. For
convergent validity, we tested the correlations of BJW scales with self-esteem, life
satisfaction, and religiosity. For divergent validity, we examined the correlations of BJW
scales with Big Five personality factors (Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness,
Emotional Stability, and Openness) as well as Dark Triad traits (Narcissism, Psychopathy,
and Machiavellianism). More specifically, we hypothesize that both GBJW and PBJW will
be positively associated with life satisfaction, self-esteem, and religiosity, but negatively
associated with dark triad traits. Moreover, Big Five factors will be unrelated or weakly
associated with GBJW and PBJW.
In study 2 and study 3, we aim to further test the validity of the scales by assessing
the distinction between GBJW and PBJW in predicting the perceived threat of injustice
and punishment directed at others (study 2) and themselves (study 3). Iran is a country
with strong family ties and a large portion of close-knit family groups, and is ranked 149th
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 9
in the corruption perception index (CPI, 2020). Kin favoritism is the form of injustice that
we plan to investigate because kin-based favoritism is probably the most common type of
corruption in Iran.
Study 1
In the first study, our aim was to test the psychometric properties of the Persian
version of the General and Personal Belief in a Just World scales by using exploratory and
confirmatory factor analysis, and examine the convergent and divergent validity of these
scales.
Method
Participants
A total of 454 Iranian participants, aged between 17 and 65 years (M =32.09,
SD=10.628), were recruited through online social media platforms such as Instagram,
Twitter, etc. The sample consisted of 68.5% female and 31.5% male participants and the
majority (59.5%) were not married. Among the participants, 35 held a doctorate degree,
191 held a master’s degree, 138 held a bachelor’s degree and 91 had a diploma or less.
Procedure and Measures
After a brief introduction, the consenting participants completed an online
questionnaire consisting of the General and Personal Belief in a Just World scales, as well
as Rosenberg Self-esteem scale, Satisfaction with Life scale, Religiosity scale, Big Five
scale, and the Dirty Dozen Dark Triad scale. Except for items in the religiosity scale, the
extent to which the participants agreed with each statement was measured through a
seven-point Likert scale that ranged from 1 (totally disagree) to 7 (totally agree).
Belief in a Just World. The General and Personal Belief in a Just World scales,
the psychometric properties of which were identified by Dalbert (1999) and Dalbert et al.
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 10
(1987), were translated into Persian through the method of translation-back translation.
Participants are asked to indicate the degree to which they agree with the statements
about general BJW (6 items) and personal BJW (7 items).
Self-esteem. We measured self-esteem with the Persian version of the 10-item
Rosenberg Self-esteem Scale (RSES; Rosenberg, 1965). The RSES is commonly used to
measure a person’s overall self-esteem (e.g., "On the whole, I am satisfied with myself.").
The Persian translation of this scale has shown adequate validity and reliability in previous
work (Shapurian et al., 1987). The alpha coefficient of the RSES for this sample was .85.
Life Satisfaction. The 5-item Satisfaction with Life Scale (SWLS; Diener et al.,
1985) was used to assess participants’ global life satisfaction (e.g., “In most ways my life is
close to my ideal.”). The Persian version of the scale has shown adequate psychometric
properties in previous research (Joshanloo & Afshari, 2011). In our sample, Cronbach’s
alpha was .86.
Religiosity. Finally, participants responded to the 5-item Duke University
Religion Index (DUREL; Koenig et al., 1997). The first two items measuring religious
activities (e.g., "How often do you attend mosque or other religious meetings?") are rated
along a 6-point scale ranging from 1 (never ) to 6 (more than once a week/day). The last
three items measuring intrinsic religiosity (e.g., "In my life, I experience the presence of
God.") are rated along a five-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (definitely not true) to
5 (definitely true of me). The scores were transformed to z -scores since they have different
response scales. The Persian version of this scale has shown very good psychometric
characteristics (Hafizi et al., 2013). In the present study, the alpha coefficient of the scale
was .89.
Big Five Personality. We measured the Big Five personality factors with the
Ten-Item Personality Inventory (TIPI; Gosling et al., 2003) which is a very short measure
of the Big Five. The TIPI consists of five subscales: Extraversion (e.g., "I see myself as:
extraverted, enthusiastic."), Agreeableness (e.g., "I see myself as: sympathetic, warm."),
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 11
Conscientiousness (e.g., "I see myself as: dependable, self-disciplined."), Emotional Stability
(e.g., "I see myself as: calm, emotionally stable."), and Openness to Experience (e.g., "I see
myself as: open to new experiences, complex."); each of them measured with two items. In
the present study, internal consistency coefficients for extraversion, agreeableness,
conscientiousness, emotional Stability, and openness to Experience were .77, .17, .53, .52,
and .32, respectively. Despite being used extensively, estimates of the internal consistency
of the TIPI are low in different contexts (Ehrhart et al., 2009; Gosling et al., 2003; Romero
et al., 2012). The Persian translation of this scale has been used in previous research in
Iran (Atari & Yaghoubirad, 2016).
Dark Triad Traits. The Dark Triad Dirty Dozen Scale (Jonason & Webster,
2010) was used to measure narcissism (4 items; e.g., “I tend to seek prestige or status”),
psychopathy (4 items; e.g., “I tend to lack remorse”), and Machiavellianism (4 items; e.g.,
“I tend to manipulate others to get my way”). The Persian translation of the 12-item
questionnaire has shown satisfactory psychometric characteristics in previous research
(Aghababaei et al., 2014). In the present study, internal consistency coefficients for
narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism were .81, .23, and .73, respectively.
Results
In order to investigate the dimensional structure of the Persian BJW items,
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Confirmatory Factor Analyses (CFA) were
employed. First, the data sample was randomly split into two equal subsamples. The first
subsample was used for PCA (n = 227) and the second subsample was used for CFA (n =
227).
Principal component analysis. We evaluated the structure of the 13 items
using a PCA with direct oblimin rotation. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO=0.902) and
Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity (<0.001) indicated that our sample is adequate and suitable
for PCA. The first principal component analysis showed two factors with eigenvalues
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 12
greater than 1 (6.105 and 1.715), which was also confirmed by a Parallel and Scree Analyses
as well. Consequently, a second PCA with direct oblimin rotation was performed with a
just world formed the first factor, and all items of the general belief in a just world formed
the second factor. This two-factor solution accounted for 60.15% of the total variance.
Consistent with previous studies (Dalbert, 1999), participants endorsed the PBJW
more strongly than the GBJW, M = 4.38 (SD = 1.32) versus M = 3.50 (SD = 1.44), t(1,
453) = -14.588, p < .001. Also, age was positively correlated with GBJW (r = .20, p <
.001), but not with PBJW (r = .02, p = .532). However, there were no gender differences in
GBJW (Welch t statistic = .623, p = .430) and PBJW (Welch t statistic = .315, p = .575).
Confirmatory factor analysis. We used CFA to examine the previously
identified factor structure of the scale. Due to positive correlations between GBJW and
PBJW, the two factors were permitted to co-vary. We assessed model fit using the
Chi-square over degree-of-freedom ( 2 /df), Goodness-of-Fit Index (GFI), the Comparative
Fit Index (CFI), the Tucker–Lewis Index (TLI), the Root Mean Square Error of
Approximation (RMSEA), and the Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR).
Maximum likelihood was used as the estimation method. The analysis was performed using
the lavaan statistical package in the R software environment.
In the first model, we assumed that the two-factor with a covariation between latent
factors would account for the variance of 13 items. Similar to the Russian adaptation of
just-world scales, our first model was not fit ( 2 (64) = 217.504, 2/df = 3.398; GFI =
χ χ
.872, CFI = .890; TLI = .866; RMSEA = .103; SRMR = .069). Following
Nartova-Bochaver et al. (2018)’s solution, we allowed the items with wording similarities
that might share common variance to correlate (PBJW1 & PBJW3, PBJW3 & GBJW2,
PBJW5 & GBJW5, and GBJW3 & GBJW5). The second model fit parameters reached
values indicating good fit of the model ( 2 (64) = 136.168, 2/df = 2.127; GFI = .921, CFI
χ χ
= .945; TLI = .929; RMSEA = .075; SRMR = .055). Internal consistency scores of GBJW
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 13
(α = .85) and PBJW (α = .87) were high. To sum up, the two-dimensional structure of
the Persian version of the BJW Scale and the distinction between GBJW and PBJW has
been confirmed.
Convergent Validity. Self-esteem, life satisfaction, and religiosity were used to
self-esteem is positively associated with PBJW and GBJW. Also, self-esteem was more
strongly associated with PBJW than GBJW (Fisher’s ζ = 4.467, p < .001). Results
yielded significant associations between life satisfaction and both PBJW and GBJW.
Similar to self-esteem, life satisfaction was more strongly associated with PBJW than
GBJW (Fisher’s ζ = 4.172, p < .001). Moreover, there was a positive correlation between
religiosity and both dimensions of BJW. However, the association between religiosity and
GBJW was stronger (Fisher’s ζ = 6.56, p < .001).
Divergent Validity. To inspect the divergent validity of the BJW scales, we
tested the correlations between PBJW and GBJW with the Big Five personality factors
(Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Openness) and
dark triad traits. The results indicated that GBJW was positively associated with
extraversion , conscientiousness , and emotional stability . In a similar pattern, PBJW was
positively associated with extraversion, conscientiousness, and emotional stability.
However, the associations of the BJW dimensions with agreeableness and openness were not
significant. Concerning the relations between dark triad traits and BJW dimensions, while
Machiavellianism and narcissism were not significantly associated with BJW dimensions,
there was a weak positive association of both GBJW and PBJW with psychopathy.
Discussion
The findings of this study confirm the two-dimensional structure of the Persian
version of the BJW Scale, thus replicating the previous findings (Dalbert, 1999;
Nartova-Bochaver et al., 2018). Consistent with the literature (Dalbert, 1999;
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 14
Nartova-Bochaver et al., 2018; Sutton & Douglas, 2005), GBJW among Iranians was higher
than PBJW. Regarding the relations between age and BJW dimensions, we found that
older individuals believed more in GBJW than younger people. However, there was no
significant relation between PBJW and age. Furthermore, in line with prior research
(Nartova-Bochaver et al., 2018; Sutton & Douglas, 2005), GBJW and PBJW scores were
not different with respect to gender.
The significant positive relations between BJW dimensions and self-esteem as well
as life satisfaction and religiosity demonstrate the convergent validity of GBJW and PBJW
scales. Moreover, the stronger correlations of PBJW, compared to GBJW, with self-esteem
and life satisfaction indicate that well-being may be more dependent on individuals’ belief
in being treated fairly by others rather than their belief in the existence of justice for
people in general. Conversely, the stronger correlation of GBJW, compared to PBJW, with
religiosity implies that religion may be more involved with the aspects of justice in society
and for people in general. In addition to replicating previous research on BJW correlates
(Bègue, 2002; Donat et al., 2016; Nartova-Bochaver et al., 2019), these finding support the
different psychological functioning of GBJW and PBJW.
Our findings showed weak effect sizes or non-significant correlations of BJW
dimensions with big five personality factors which partially confirm the divergent validity
of BJW scales. However, as we will discuss in the limitations of this study, these findings
should be interpreted cautiously due to low internal consistency of the scales. In line with
previous studies (Nudelman, 2013), there were positive correlations of GBJW and PBJW
with extraversion suggesting that believing in a just world may contribute to sociability
and energetic behavior by reducing feelings of vulnerability. Furthermore, our findings on
the relations between BJW dimensions and conscientiousness were consistent with
Nudelman and Otto (2021)’s meta-analysis. We found positive correlations of both GBJW
and PBJW with conscientiousness which demonstrates that just-world beliefs may be
positively related to diligence, carefulness, and deliberation because believers in a just
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 15
world are convinced that being conscientious will lead to deserved outcomes. Also, the
positive associations between BJW dimensions and emotional stability were consistent with
previous research (Nudemlan, 2013). This finding supports the notion that GBJW and
PBJW are buffers against unfortunate incidents in one’s life that decrease anxiety and
depression (Furnham, 2003; Lipkus et al., 1996). Finally, agreeableness and openness did
not have significant relationship with BJW dimensions which supports findings of previous
research (Bollmann et al., 2015; Nudelman, 2013).
Regarding the relations with dark triad traits, there was no relationship between
BJW dimensions and Machiavellianism as well as narcissism which further confirms the
divergent validity of BJW scales. People high in Machiavellianism and narcissism may not
simply care about justice and fairness, in turn they may not feel the need to form a
particular view about the existence of justice in the world. Although psychopathy had
weak positive correlations with GBJW and PBJW, this finding is unreliable because the
internal consistency coefficient of psychopathy scale in this study was very low.
Study 2
In this study, we aim to test the relations of GBJW and PBJW with perceived
threat of kin favoritism which participants witnessed as a potential injustice. This relation
is expected to be mediated by perceived likelihood of punishment.
Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited from social media platforms (e.g., Twitter, Telegram)
who were randomly assigned to study 2. Participants were 81 Iranians recruited from social
media platforms (e.g., Twitter, Telegram), 35 males and 46 females who were between 24
and 58 years old (M = 32.57; SD = 7.396).
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 16
Procedure and measures
After reading the informed consent, participants first completed the GBJW and
PBJW scales. Then, they read the designed scenarios and responded to measures of
perceived likelihood of injustice and perceived likelihood of punishment. After completing
the questionnaire, participants were thanked and fully debriefed. The contact information
of the main researcher was provided in case participants had further questions. Full ethical
review and approval were not required for this study in accordance with the national and
institutional guidelines.
Belief in a just world. BJW was assessed with the Persian translation of the
6-item General Belief in a Just World and 7-item Personal Belief in a Just World Scale
that were validated in study 1. All responses were made on 7-point scales. The scores from
the GBJW and PBJW items were averaged showing good internal consistency (α = .89
and α = .88, respectively). Higher scores indicated stronger endorsement of the GBJW and
PBJW.
The kin favoritism scenarios. We designed five scenarios in a panel discussion
among the authors and a social activist in justice-related issues. In these scenarios, three
individuals were portrayed; a target of injustice, a favor receiver, and a favor provider. The
favor provider could unfairly treat his/her kin favorably in each scenario which were in
different contexts, including hiring for a government job and applying for an educational
position. A sample scenario about hiring for a government job reads:
Two individuals have been chosen as the final candidates for a government job
position. Considering the resumes, one of them is clearly better qualified for the job. A
recruiter who works under the supervision of higher ranks has to do an interview with
these candidates to decide who gets the job. Coincidentally, the recruiter turned out to be
a relative of the less qualified candidate. This recruiter knows that discriminating between
candidates and not choosing the most qualified person is against the rules.
Following each scenario, the perceived threat of kin favoritism was assessed by
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 17
“please estimate the likelihood that the favor provider will favor/choose his/her kin” in a
9-point scales ranging from 1 (definitely will not) to 9 (definitely will). For the perceived
likelihood of punishment, participants answered two questions; the likelihood of legal
punishment and the likelihood of negative moral judgment by others. A sample item was
“please estimate the likelihood of legal punishment from the favor provider’s authorities if
he/she favors his/her kin” on 9-point scales ranging from 1 (definitely will not be) to 9
(definitely will be). We averaged the scores of the five scenarios for the perceived threat of
kin favoritism (5 items, α = .71) and perceived likelihood of punishment (10 items, α =
.85).
Results
Correlations between GBJW, PBJW, perceived likelihood of punishment, and perceived
threat of kin favoritism were significant in the expected directions.
Using the lavaan statistical package in the R software environment, a series of
hierarchical regression analysis were performed to examine the effects of GBJW, PBJW,
perceived punishment, and demographics on perceived threat of kin favoritism. As shown
GBJW and PBJW in the second step. As expected, GBJW ( = -.332, t = -2.718, p =
.008), but not PBJW ( = -.188, t = -1.541, p = .128) predicted perceived threat of kin
favoritism. In the third step, perceived likelihood of punishment was included as a variable
in the regression analysis and emerged as the only variable to significantly predict
perceived treat of kin favoritism ( = -.453, t = -4.714, p < .001). The effect of GBJW
became non-significant after including perceived likelihood of punishment ( = -.167, t =
-1.474, p = .145).
We further investigated the mediating effect of perceived likelihood of punishment
in the relationship between GBJW and perceived threat of kin favoritism. The results
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 18
showed that the indirect effect of GBJW on perceived threat of kin favoritism was
significant ( = -.136, p = .005). Indirect effects are not altered much when the PBJW is
included as a covariate ( = -.144, p = .009).
Discussion
The results of study 2 provide empirical support for the distinction between GBJW
and PBJW and underscore the importance of considering this distinction in research on the
functions of just-world beliefs in risk perception and trust in justice (Cubela Adoric &
Kvartuc, 2007; Hafer & Gosse, 2011). The findings demonstrate that when individuals are
mere observers of potential unjust behavior, GBJW is central in their perceived risk of
injustice. Furthermore, perceived likelihood of punishment mediated the relation between
GBJW and the perceived threat of kin favoritism. Our findings are consistent with previous
research on the relations between BJW and corruption perception (Bai et al., 2014).
Study 3
In the third study, we aim to test the relations of GBJW and PBJW with perceived
threat of kin favoritism which participants imagined as a potential injustice directed to
themselves. This relation is expected to be mediated by perceived likelihood of punishment.
In addition, we plan to assess whether the perceived risk of becoming a victim
injustice is higher when the threat of unjust behavior is directed to self rather than others.
To do so, the second and third studies were identically designed and the participants were
randomly assigned to them.
Methods
Participants
The participants who were assigned to this study were 71 Iranians recruited from
social media platforms (e.g., Twitter, Telegram). There were 33 males and 38 females
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 19
between 23 and 48 years old (M = 30.52; SD = 5.079).
Procedure and measures
The study was presented to participants as in Study 1. Participants were asked to
read the informed consent before reading the scenarios and answering the questions.
Belief in a just world. GBJW and PBJW were assessed using previous studies’
measures. The internal consistency for both GBJW and PBJW were .89.
The kin favoritism scenarios. The same five scenarios as study 2 were used
with only a difference in the subject of injustice; participants imagined themselves as
someone who is the unfortunate target of potential injustice. A sample scenario that
participants read was:
“You have been chosen as one of the two final candidates for a government job
position. Considering the resumes, you are clearly better qualified for the job than the
other candidate. A recruiter who works under the supervision of higher ranks has to do an
interview with you and the other candidate to decide who gets the job. Coincidentally, the
recruiter turned out to be a relative of the other candidate. This recruiter knows that
discriminating between candidates and not choosing the most qualified person is against
the rules.”
Following each scenario, the same items as study 2 for measuring perceived threat of
kin favoritism and perceived likelihood of punishment were used. The scores of the five
scenarios were averaged for the perceived threat of kin favoritism (5 items, α = .81) and
perceived likelihood of punishment (10 items, α = .87).
Results
There were significant correlations between GBJW, PBJW, perceived likelihood of
punishment, and perceived threat of kin favoritism in the expected directions.
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 20
We used the lavaan statistical package in the R software environment for regression
and mediation analyses. Initially, a series of hierarchical regression analysis were conducted
to investigate the effects of GBJW, PBJW, perceived likelihood punishment, and
age and gender as controlled variables in first step before entering GBJW and PBJW in
the second step. As expected, PBJW ( = -.323, t = -2.319, p = .024), but not GBJW (
β β
= -.137, t = -.982, p = .330) predicted perceived threat of kin favoritism. In the third step,
perceived likelihood of punishment was included as a variable in the regression analysis and
emerged as the variable to negatively predict perceived threat of kin favoritism ( = -.367,
t = -3.108, p = .003). The effect of PBJW became non-significant after including perceived
likelihood punishment ( = -.202, t = -1.480, p = .144).
Then, we further investigated the mediating effect of perceived likelihood of
punishment in the relationship between PBJW and perceived threat of kin favoritism. The
results showed that the indirect effect of PBJW on perceived threat of kin favoritism was
significant ( = -.192, p = 0.015) and did not change much when the GBJW was included
as a covariate ( = -.163, p = .036).
As the second and third studies were identical except for the potential victim of
favoritism, we were able to test whether individuals perceive a higher level of injustice
threat directed to others than themselves. According to results, participants in the first
study (M = 6.26, SD = 1.27) estimated a higher possibility of unjust behavior (Welch t
statistic = 8.493, p = .004) than participants in the second study (M = 5.55, SD = 1.67).
Discussion
The analyses in study 3, provide further empirical evidence for the distinction
between GBJW and PBJW. The findings of this study indicate that when individuals are
the unfortunate targets of potential injustice, PBJW is the central dimension of the beliefs
in a just world that relates to their perceived likelihood of injustice and punishment.
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 21
Furthermore, perceived likelihood of punishment mediated the relation between PBJW and
the perceived risk of becoming a victim of kin favoritism. Our findings are in line with the
literature on the function of BJW in people’s trust in others and risk perception (Bai et al.,
2014; Cubela Adoric & Kvartuc, 2007; Hafer & Gosse, 2011).
In addition, our findings are of high importance because strong believers in a just
world may strive to achieve their goals by just means because they trust in others’ fairness
(Čábelková & Hanousek, 2004). Therefore, BJW could further be a predictor of a person’s
own intentions for engaging in unjust behaviors (see Bai et al., 2016). Consistent with this
idea, prior research has found that people with strong BJW are less likely to have illegal
intentions and behaviors such as bribery (Bai et al., 2016; Dalbert, 1999) and engage in
less bullying and cheating behavior at a young age (Donat et al., 2014; Donat et al., 2018).
Consistent with previous research on optimistic bias towards the self compared to
others (for a review, see Shepperd et al., 2013), we found evidence of a bias for the
perception of a negative outcome which was injustice victimization in the case of the
present studies. Also, our findings to some extent support Strelan and Callisto (2020)’s
claim that BJW is associated with the optimistic bias.
Limitations
There were some limitations in present studies. First, our samples mainly consisted
of educated people living in Tehran which is the capital of Iran with a population of
above-average education, economic status, and liberal political orientation. Thus, the
results of our studies can be generalized to only some degree. Also, the second and third
study have rather small sample sizes. Future research should replicate our findings in a
more representative sample of Iranians with larger sample sizes.
A major limitation concerns our measures of the big five personality factors and
dark triad traits. Big five personality dimensions were assessed using a short measure with
two items for each factor. Given the brevity of the TIPI scales, it is not surprising that
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 22
they usually have low alpha coefficients (Atari & Yaghoubirad, 2016; Ehrhart et al., 2009;
Romero et al., 2012). The original creators of TIPI have noted that the scale was designed
to maximize the content validity and breadth of coverage in a few adjectives which would
cost them the standards of internal consistency. Nevertheless, future studies could use
longer versions of the big five personality factors scales to rule out measurement errors of
short scales. Moreover, the internal consistency of the psychopathy subscale in the dark
triad traits scale was very low. Therefore, we encourage future researchers to consider these
issues in their work.
Finally, a methodological limitation of the current studies is their correlational
nature which implies that one should be cautious in ascribing causality to our findings.
Future studies should use experimental designs for investigating BJW’s role in well-being,
religiosity, and perceived threat of injustice. Although GBJW and PBJW are usually
measured as traits, it is also possible to manipulate them (see Kogut, 2011).
Conclusion
This set of studies provided support for the BJW scales in a predominantly Muslim
country. As in the case of the original, the two-factor model that includes GBJW and
PBJW was proved to fit well. The validity of GBJW and PBJW scales was further
investigated by examining the associations between these dimensions and self-esteem, life
satisfaction, religiosity, big five personality factors, and dark triad traits. Consistent with
the literature, GBJW and PBJW were correlated with these constructs with different
strengths.
In order to provide additional support for the validity of the distinction between
PBJW and GBJW, perceptions of injustice as kin favoritism were explored in two
conditions. For the first condition in which individuals imagined other people as potential
victims of injustice, the beliefs about the existence of justice in general were more
important in how they perceived the outcomes of the scenarios than the belief in a
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 23
personally just world. However, in the second condition in which they imagined themselves
in the same scenarios, the belief about whether they are personally treated fairly by others
were dominant predictors of their outcome perceptions. Furthermore, perceived moral and
legal punishments partially explained the relationships between BJW and perceived
intention of kin favoritism in both conditions. While replicating previous research on the
role of BJW in risk perception and trust in others, we examined BJW’s role in perceived
threat of becoming a victim of injustice in the context of kin favoritism which is an
overlooked and pervasive form of injustice. Future research should explore other aspects of
kin favoritism, especially in societies with stronger family ties that suffer more from this
type of injustice.
BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD AND PERCEIVED THREAT OF KIN FAVORITISM 24