Interactions within the social brain: Co-activation and connectivity
among networks enabling empathy and Theory of Mind
Lara Z. Maliskea*, Matthias Schurzb,c,d, Philipp Kanskea,e
Clinical Psychology and Behavioral Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology, Technische
Universität Dresden, Chemnitzer Straße 46, 01187 Dresden, Germany
Institute of Psychology and Digital Science Center, University of Innsbruck, Innrain 52,
6020 Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, & Behaviour, Radboud University, Heyendaalseweg
135, 6525 Nijmegen, Netherlands
Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, 13 Mansifield Road, Oxford OX1 3SR, United Kingdom
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Stephanstraße 1a, 04103
Leipzig, Germany
*Corresponding author.
Abstract
While empathy and Theory of Mind (ToM) have classically been studied as separate social
functions, recent advances demonstrate the need to investigate the two in interaction:
Naturalistic settings often blur the distinction of affect and cognition and demand the
simultaneous processing of such different stimulus dimensions. Here, we investigate how
empathy and ToM related brain networks interact in contexts wherein multiple cognitive and
affective demands must be processed simultaneously. Building on the findings of a recent
meta-analysis and hierarchical clustering analysis, we perform meta-analytic connectivity
modeling to determine patterns of task-context specific network changes. We analyze 140
studies including classical empathy and ToM tasks, as well as complex social tasks. For
studies at the intersection of empathy and ToM, neural co-activation patterns included areas
typically associated with both empathy and ToM. Network integration is discussed as a means
of combining mechanisms across unique behavioral domains. Such integration may enable
adaptive behavior in complex, naturalistic social settings that require simultaneous processing
of a multitude of different affective and cognitive information.
Key words: social cognition, fmri, meta-analysis, functional connectivity, co-activation
1. Introduction
Successfully navigating everyday social interactions requires the ability to flexibly adapt to
constantly changing environmental demands. This ability is greatly benefitted by an
understanding of others’ overt behaviors, but also of the motives underlying their behavior,
that is, others’ affective and cognitive states. Over the past 20 years of neuroimaging research,
processes enabling us to smoothly navigate these social encounters have been extensively
studied and gained more and more popularity. Especially the constructs of empathy and
Theory of Mind (ToM) have attracted attention as key processes enabling social interactions.
Empathy describes an affective representation of others’ emotions (Gallese, 2003; Titchener,
1909), that is, the ability to share others’ emotional states, while being aware that others are
the source of those emotions (de Vignemont and Singer, 2006). ToM, on the other hand,
describes a cognitive representation of others’ mental states (Adolphs, 2009; Kanske, 2018),
reasoning about and inferring others’ thoughts, beliefs, or emotions (Frith and Frith, 2005;
Mitchell et al., 2005; Premack and Woodruff, 1978).
At the neural level, empathy and ToM are commonly associated with two distinct brain
networks. Areas associated with ToM fall into bilateral temporo-parietal and anterior
temporal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and precuneus
(Amodio and Frith, 2006; Frith and Frith, 2006; Mitchell, 2009; Schurz et al., 2014), areas
largely overlapping with the so-called Default Mode Network (DMN, see Raichle et al., 2001;
for an overlap of social affect and cognition networks with canonical resting-state network
parcellations, see Schurz et al., 2020). The DMN is assumed to mediate self-generated
cognition which is decoupled from the physical world (Andrews‐Hanna et al., 2014), a
necessary function for a wide range of ToM tasks (Buckner and Carroll, 2007; Bzdok et al.,
2013; Frith and Frith, 2003; Lieberman, 2006; Mars et al., 2012a). As for empathy,
activations are typically observed in bilateral anterior insular cortex, inferior frontal gyri
(IFG), midcingulate cortex, supramarginal gyrus, as well as somatosensory cortex (Bzdok et
al., 2012; Decety and Jackson, 2004; Kanske et al., 2015; Lamm et al., 2011). These areas
largely overlap with the Ventral Attention (VAN) or Salience Network (Menon and Uddin,
2010; Schurz et al., 2020; Yeo et al., 2011), which has been associated with detecting
behaviorally salient stimuli and directing neural resources towards their processing. Using
prototypical tasks, empathy and ToM have been shown to be unrelated, both at the behavioral
and task-related neural level (Dziobek et al., 2006; Kanske et al., 2015; Rice et al., 2016;
Shamay-Tsoory et al., 2009; Shamay-Tsoory and Aharon-Peretz, 2007): Kanske and
colleagues (2016), for example, used Principal Component Analysis to show that behavioral
measures and task-related neural activation of empathy and ToM are organized into clearly
distinguishable, uncorrelated composites. This separability holds true not only in terms of
social task-related behavioral measures and neural activity, but also for other, non-social task
contexts and in terms of task-free brain organization. Networks associated with empathy
(VAN) and ToM (DMN) have been found to be unrelated (Alcalá-López et al., 2018) and
even anti-correlated in certain task-contexts and during rest (Bzdok et al., 2013; Chai et al.,
2012; Fox et al., 2005; Trautwein et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2018).
In contrast to this notion of independence, there is a considerable number of social affect and
cognition studies yielding neural activation patterns that overlap with both, networks related
to empathy and ToM, such as the VAN and DMN (for a review, see Schurz et al., 2020). For
example, as part of a meta-analysis on neural networks of empathy for pain, Lamm and
colleagues (2011) found not only engagement of the typical empathy network, but also of
brain regions involved in ToM. The precuneus, ventral medial prefrontal cortex, medial and
superior temporal gyrus, temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), and temporal pole were activated in
a sub-set of studies wherein participants had to infer upcoming nociceptive stimulation from
simple cues, rather than being shown the painful stimulation directly.
To further explore the relationship between empathy and ToM, we took an approach that went
beyond a simple “semantic differentiation” between empathy and ToM and used a data-driven
approach to distinguish between both constructs (Schurz et al., 2021). We identified 11 types
of social tasks from the neuroscientific literature on empathy and ToM, covering a wide range
of different stimuli and instructions. We then performed a meta-analysis and subsequent
hierarchical clustering analysis (Schurz et al., 2021) to address the separability of these
functions at the task- and overarching process-level. Interestingly, next to the two well-known
and clearly separable empathy and ToM related networks described above, we also observed
task-related neural activation falling into a third category. This category comprised tasks that
contained both, affective and cognitive stimulus elements (e.g., reasoning about a character’s
next actions based on their emotions, see Kim et al., 2010; Sebastian et al., 2012; Völlm et al.,
2006). At the neural level, activations associated with these tasks fell in areas typically
Our previous meta-analysis has identified studies that concurrently engaged empathy and
ToM networks (termed the “intermediate cluster”). However, our findings were based on
averaging of activation patterns across different studies and not on measuring co-activation
among areas. That is, the meta-analysis might yield conjoint activation of empathy and ToM
areas when averaging across multiple studies, that may, however, not reflect systematic co-
activation of these regions in individual studies. While the results of our previous meta-
analysis yielded a comprehensive hierarchical model of how social affect and cognition is
organized in the brain, questions regarding the nature of this neural organization remain
unanswered: does the concurrent activation of regions associated with empathy and ToM in
the intermediate cluster actually reflect cross-network interaction? And if so: how do these
networks interact and what probes cross-network interactions? To address these issues, we
here use meta-analytic connectivity modeling (MACM, Robinson et al., 2009; see also
Friston, 1994; Koski and Paus, 2000) to estimate how empathy and ToM networks are
functionally coupled, using the studies included in our previous meta-analysis (Schurz et al.,
2021). Co-activation maps as identified using MACM correspond well with functional
networks identified using resting-state functional connectivity (Kerestes et al., 2017;
Robinson et al., 2012, 2009) and can be seen as a measure of functional coupling of different
regions. During cognitive tasks, both MACM (Van Overwalle et al., 2015) and functional
connectivity mapping (Krienen et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2016) show that functional networks
systematically differ depending on the cognitive state elicited by stimuli and instructions.
We aim to investigate differing patterns of co-activation in social affect and cognition tasks to
address our overarching question of the nature of context-dependent social network
interaction. Using MACM, we want to probe situation-specific neural network configuration
for tasks in which classical empathy and ToM networks are conjointly activated, integrating
both processes: How do empathy and ToM networks interact in tasks that require conjoint
processing of affective and cognitive information? We follow up on previously observed co-
activation patterns (Schurz et al., 2021) by first identifying common regions of activation
across all sub-domains of social affect and cognition. We then identify studies that show
activation at the corresponding region of interest (ROI) and perform MACM on these studies.
Lastly, we compare observed co-activation patterns with other meta-analytical and functional
connectivity patterns.
2. Methods
We employed a modified version of MACM (see Robinson et al., 2009) similar to Van
Overwalle, D’aes, and Mariën (2015) to determine patterns of co-activation across social
affect and cognition dimensions. More precisely, in order to investigate specific patterns of
co-activation within the realm of empathy and ToM paradigms, we used the assorted task
groups from our previous meta-analysis (Schurz et al., 2021) as input into a MACM analysis.
In the following, we will describe the study selection and clustering of social affect and
cognition tasks that is based on our previous meta-analysis, the methods of ROI selection,
implementation of MACM as well as additional analyses to further characterize the co-
activation patterns.
2.1 Hierarchical model of social cognition: a meta-analysis and hierarchical clustering
As the current study is based on the sample and clustering approach from our previous meta-
analysis (Schurz et al., 2021), we will briefly describe methods relevant to this study here.
2.1.1 Literature Search
For a complete description of search strategy and inclusion criteria, we refer the interested
reader to our previous meta-analysis (Schurz et al., 2021). In short, we performed literature
searches in common databases (PubMed, ISI Web of Science core collection) and included
literature published up until November 2019. We identified studies using a combination of the
following search terms: neuroimaging or fmri or PET AND empathy or empathetic or
altruism or sympathy or emotional contagion or compassion (to represent studies in a broad
empathy category) as well as neuroimaging or fmri or PET AND theory of mind or
mentalizing or mindreading (to represent studies in a broad ToM category). Additionally,
studies fulfilled selection criteria as required for coordinate-based meta-analysis (see e.g.,
Radua et al., 2012): reported coordinates had to correspond to standard space (MNI or
Talairach), stem from whole-brain analysis, and use a consistent threshold throughout the
entire brain. Only data from non-clinical, adult samples were included. Using these criteria,
we obtained 188 studies (85 from the empathy literature, 103 from the ToM literature) across
11 more narrow task categories within the respective fields of research (for an overview of
included task groups, see Schurz et al., 2021, or supplementary tables S2 and S3).
2.1.2 Meta-analysis method and hierarchical clustering
For a detailed description of meta-analysis method and method of hierarchical clustering, we
refer the reader to our previous meta-analysis (Schurz et al., 2021). In short, we performed
effect-size based meta-analysis across 188 studies and 11 more narrow task-groups to receive
task-group specific activation maps. We then applied agglomerative hierarchical clustering to
the assorted task-group activation maps to identify a hierarchical structure of social affect and
cognition task groups. While multiple levels of clustering solutions were compared (e.g., one
cluster representing all studies within the database), the optimal solution regarding our
concepts of interest was found at a three-cluster level. These represented a) classical ToM
tasks (“cognitive” task cluster, comprising False Belief, Trait Judgment, Strategic Games), b)
classical empathy tasks (“affective” task cluster, comprising Observing Pain, Observing
Emotions, Sharing Emotions or Pain, Reading the Mind in the Eyes), and c) tasks presenting
affective and cognitive stimulus elements together (“intermediate” task cluster, comprising
Evaluating Situated Emotions, Reasoning about Emotions, Rational Actions, Social
Animations). Our initial database contained 57 studies from the cognitive, 58 studies from the
analysis workflow.
clustering, we identified 188 studies (103 Theory of Mind, 85 Empathy) to be included in the
meta-analysis. (b) Meta-analysis across 11 task groups revealed distinct associated neural
patterns, (c) best described by a hierarchical three cluster solution, comprising classical
Theory of Mind tasks (cognitive), classical empathy tasks (affective), complex social tasks,
that present affective and cognitive information in concert (intermediate). To identify how
empathy and Theory of Mind networks interact during combined affective and cognitive
information processing, we performed meta-analytic connectivity modeling (MACM) on
selected studies from our initial meta-analytic sample. (d) We identified ROIs for the MACM
analysis that showed activation across all tasks groups, allowing for a fine-grained
differentiation between them in the course of the analysis, namely anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), and insula. (e) For
each ROI, we determined studies within our sample that showed activation at the
corresponding ROI and performed meta-analytic linear contrasts to determine activation
patterns specific to each of the three overarching task group clusters (cognitive, affective,
intermediate). (f) Finally, we compared the task-group wise activation patterns with other
meta-analysis maps (using Neurosynth decoding), and determined their overlap with basic
networks of the brain (Yeo et al., 2011), as well as task-free functional connectivity profiles
of the corresponding ROI.
In the following, we base our analysis on the sample obtained from the literature search
described above and will retain the three-group clustering of studies to describe neural
activation patterns associated with classical empathy and ToM tasks, as well as tasks
presenting elements from both empathy and ToM subfields.
2.2 Meta-analysis method, Region of Interest Definition, and Study Selection
Arguably, ROI definition is the most important parameter to be set in any MACM analysis. In
order to compare co-activation patterns between social affect and cognition task clusters, our
ROIs should correspond to areas that show activation across all three task clusters. To identify
areas that fulfill this criterion, we investigated common peaks of activation across all task
groups in a meta-analysis across all 188 studies from our database (the one-cluster solution in
our agglomerative hierarchical clustering, Schurz et al., 2021).
To identify ROIs to be included in the further MACM analysis, activation peaks from our
cross-task meta-analysis must fulfill the following additional criteria: they must ensure
sufficient sample size to perform robust meta-analysis on and determine linear contrasts
between task clusters (i.e., enough studies from each task cluster must show activation at the
corresponding ROI, see e.g., Eickhoff et al., 2016), the ROI should lie within a network
associated with social affect and cognition processes (to reduce the influence from processes
secondary to our main research question, such as processing of visual or somatosensory
information, see e.g., Schurz et al., 2020). Activation peaks were selected as ROIs for further
analysis for which i) the ROI is located within a canonical neural network related to social
affect and cognition processes (i.e., VAN, Frontoparietal Network, FPN, and DMN, see
Schurz et al., 2020), and ii) at least 10 studies within each of the three task clusters show
activation at the corresponding ROI (note that it is suggested to include at least 20
experiments in a meta-analysis to obtain results of moderate effect size, see Eickhoff et al.,
2016. For reasons of feasibility, we here decided on a more liberal sample size threshold for
our ROI selection but remain cautious to draw conclusion from analyses wherein less than 20
experiments per comparison group are included). To identify studies in our database that
showed activation at the corresponding activation peaks, we calculated Euclidean distance
from each reported coordinate from within our study database to each activation peak. Studies
were deemed to show activation at the corresponding activation peak where Euclidean
distance was smaller than 20 mm.
In a final step, we then performed a meta-analysis across the studies we identified in the
previous step for each ROI. We carried out effect-size based meta-analyses using the
anisotropic effect-size based algorithm of the seed-based d mapping method (AES-SDM 5.15,
to other widely used meta-analysis methods such as Activation-Likelihood Estimation
(Eickhoff et al., 2016), SDM incorporates the effect sizes of reported activations into the
analysis, allowing for a detailed description of the reported activation peaks from the
literature. Based on studies’ t-values and reported sample sizes, effect size and variance maps
are created for each study (Hedge’s g effect size measure, variance maps derived from
reported effect size distribution). Statistical significance is determined by permutation tests
randomizing the location of the voxels within a grey-matter mask (100 randomizations were
performed). Results are reported in MNI space at a statistical threshold of p < 0.005
uncorrected (voxel-level) and at a cluster threshold of 10 voxels, which has been found to
optimally balance specificity and sensitivity equivalent to a corrected threshold of p < 0.05 in
the original studies (Radua et al., 2012). To determine differences in co-activation patterns
between our three task clusters, we calculated contrasts using SDM’s linear model function,
which calculates the difference in effect size between meta-analyses while accounting for
an overview of MACM analysis workflow).
2.3 Analysis of overlap with resting-state functional connectivity atlas and other meta-
analyses
MACM approximates functional connectivity by looking at patterns of co-activation
commonly observed for a specific ROI or set of ROIs (Robinson et al., 2009). Please note,
however, that reported clusters of activation represent regions that are commonly observed to
be activated in conjunction. We cannot, however, infer the underlying neuronal functional
relationship between two areas, but rather infer functional relationship from common patterns
of co-activations.
Analogous to Yang and colleagues (2015), we furthermore compared our co-activation maps
to maps of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) resting-state functional
connectivity, as these provide ample information about the functional relationship between
two spatially isolated neural regions (Cole et al., 2016; Passingham et al., 2002; Smith et al.,
2009; Tavor et al., 2016). We obtained resting-state functional connectivity maps for each
ROI as seed regions in a sample of 1000 subjects (for details of data collection, acquisition
parameters, data preprocessing, and connectivity analysis, see Buckner et al., 2011; Choi et
al., 2012; Yeo et al., 2011). Maps were obtained from the Neurosynth location tool (Yarkoni
et al., 2011). In order to determine common activations between meta-analytic co-activation
patterns, networks from a resting-state functional connectivity parcellation (Yeo et al., 2011),
and corresponding patterns of fMRI seed-based functional connectivity, we used conjunction
minimum analysis (see e.g., Nichols et al., 2005) as implemented in the image calculator
wise overlap using a variant of the dice score: for each result map, we calculated the
percentage of voxels that fell within different canonical resting-state networks (or seed-based
functional connectivity maps). As our main interest lay in the overlap with specific parts of
the functional connectivity atlas (namely the VAN, FPN, and DMN), we restricted our
analysis of overlap to these three networks.
We also compared our results with a set of automatically generated meta-analyses across a
multitude of topics. This allowed us to discuss our results in the context of a wide range of
processes (we restricted our analysis of overlap to social processes, as these are of particular
interest to the present study). We used the decoding tool from the Neurosynth database
(Yarkoni et al., 2011), accessed through the neuroimaging repository Neurovault.org
(Gorgolewski et al., 2015). Here, we input un-thresholded co-activation maps per ROI and
task group (cognitive, intermediate, affective). We display posterior probabilities of the
decoding, which describe the similarity between our result maps and automatically generated
meta-analyses for topics identified by text mining of literature databases (i.e., the probability
of a term being reported when brain activation at a certain voxel is present). We also display
only those topics with highest similarity (posterior probability). Furthermore, we discarded
topics of little interest to this analysis (anatomical labels, such as insula), as well as language-
related terms (such as word, sentence, or syntactic).
3. Results
We investigated meta-analytic findings of 188 social affect and cognition studies to identify
ROIs commonly activated across a wide range of empathy and ToM tasks. We then
performed MACM, in order to investigate patterns of network co-activation specific to sub-
processes of social affect and cognition (more cognitive, more affective, or complex social
tasks).
We expected simultaneous processing of affective and cognitive stimuli (intermediate cluster)
to be reflected in increased levels of cross-network interactions. Individual processing of
either affective (affective cluster) or cognitive stimulus elements (cognitive cluster) should be
reflected in co-activation patterns within the respective previously found empathy and ToM
networks. Furthermore, at the network level (in terms of networks described by Yeo et al.,
2011), we expected to find network configurations to resemble observed patterns from our
previous work (Schurz et al., 2020).
3.1 ROI Selection and study inclusion
In the meta-analysis across all 188 studies in our database, we identified three broad clusters
peaks). Using our criteria described above, we identified four ROIs as the basis of our
following analysis, namely right anterior cingulate cortex (ACC, with coordinates in MNI
space at 2, 36, 32), PCC (at 0, -36, 34), left TPJ (at -52, -60, 16), and left insula (at -46, 2, -
10).
they are divided among the different ROIs and task groups. Note that, since most studies
within our database reported multiple regions of activation, studies could be included in the
analysis for more than one ROI (e.g., one study might report activation in a False Belief task
at the PCC and TPJ and would therefore be included in the meta-analyses for both our PCC
and our TPJ ROI). Supplementary tables S2 and S3 give an overview of all studies included in
the overall meta-analysis, as well as which studies were included in the MACM analysis.
number of participants.
ROI incl. studies participants cognitive intermediate affective
ACC 50 1289 22 studies 16 studies 12 studies
(502 participants) (502 participants) (362 participants)
PCC 46 1115 18 studies 18 studies 10 studies
(392 participants) (547 participants) (176 participants)
TPJ 93 2177 36 studies 38 studies 19 studies
(751 participants) (1054 participants) (372 participants)
Insula 55 1211 12 studies 19 studies 24 studies
(292 participants) (396 participants) (523 participants)
Note. ROI: region of interest, ACC: anterior cingulate cortex, PCC: posterior cingulate cortex,
TPJ: temporoparietal junction, cognitive: cognitive social task group, intermediate:
intermediate social task group, affective: affective social task group.
3.2 Task-group specific patterns of network re-configuration
For each of our ROIs, we observed task-group specific network re-configurations. ROI-
we will focus our discussion on the three most strongly co-activated regions per ROI and task-
depth account of each ROI and task-group specific co-activation network), but still discuss
overall patterns of network re-configurations.
contrasts between task-group clusters (cognitive cluster in blue, intermediate cluster in green,
affective cluster in red) reveal patterns of network co-activation overlapping to some extent
but showing clearly discernable differences between task groups. Results are portrayed for the
anterior cingulate cortex ROI (box ACC co-activations, top), posterior cingulate cortex ROI
(box PCC co-activations), temporo-parietal junction ROI (box TPJ co-activations), as well as
the insula ROI (box Insula co-activations, bottom).
3.2.1 Cognitive Cluster
Across our samples, studies within the cognitive task cluster exhibited similar patterns of co-
activation. For our four ROIs, we observed strongest co-activation patterns for areas within
the DMN. And while for some ROIs we observed significant co-activations with areas from
networks other than the DMN, these were only sparse (e.g., subcortical areas within the PCC
co-activation maps, areas that fall at the borders of VAN and DMN within the TPJ co-
activation map). All ROI co-activation maps from the cognitive task groups displayed largest
overlap with the DMN (with 71.6%, 69.4%, 62.8%, and 81.5% of activation for the cognitive
co-activation maps lying within the DMN, for ACC, PCC, TPJ, and insula, respectively; see
Besides clusters of co-activation at or approximately at the ROI itself, we observed clusters of
highest co-activation in the precuneus (for TPJ and insula, we found coupling with the right
precuneus; for the ACC, we observed coupling with the left precuneus), left middle temporal
gyrus (within PCC and insula co-activation maps), angular gyrus (ACC, PCC, TPJ, and insula
co-activation maps), and superior frontal gyrus (TPJ co-activation maps).
3.2.2 Affective Cluster
In terms of co-activation patterns for studies from our affective task cluster, we expected to
observe a similarly homogeneous picture. However, we found co-activation patterns to be
somewhat more complex. Overall, the co-activation maps from the affective task cluster for
the ACC, TPJ, and insula ROIs displayed largest overlap with the VAN (39.6%, 33.2%, and
36.8%), yet loadings on the FPN and DMN did not trail far behind. Interestingly, the co-
activation map from the PCC ROI displayed a reversed picture, more similar to the patterns
observed in the cognitive task clusters: Here, largest overlap for the co-activation map was
observed in the DMN, FPN and VAN displayed similar loadings (see discussion section for
possible explanation of this result pattern).
We observed clusters of strongest co-activation in the insula (left insula within the PCC co-
activation maps, right insula within the ACC and TPJ co-activation maps), left supramarginal
gyrus (ACC co-activation map), left superior temporal gyrus (PCC co-activation map) and
middle temporal gyrus (TPJ and insula co-activation maps), and left IFG (TPJ co-activation
maps).
3.2.3 Intermediate Cluster
As expected, patterns of co-activations for studies from the intermediate cluster showed the
most heterogeneous picture. For all four ROIs, the co-activation maps from the intermediate
task cluster showed activation clusters lying within most of the seven resting state networks
(except for the Limbic Network), as well as within subcortical regions. For all four ROI co-
activation maps, the majority of activation fell within the DMN (42.8%, 47.2%, 41.6%, and
56%, for ACC, PCC, TPJ, and insula, respectively), but we also observed considerable
overlap with the VAN (16.2%, 13.3%, 17.8%, and 12.7%, for ACC, PCC, TPJ, and insula,
respectively). Note, though, that in contrast to co-activations from the cognitive cluster,
overall overlap was considerably smaller, and overlap with other canonical resting-state
networks was not negligible.
Clusters of highest co-activations were observed at the left middle temporal gyrus (ACC, TPJ,
and insula co-activation maps), superior temporal gyrus (ACC and insula co-activation maps),
paracingulate gyrus (ACC and PCC co-activation map), superior frontal gyrus (PCC and TPJ
co-activation maps), left supramarginal gyrus (PCC co-activation map), and left IFG (TPJ co-
activation map).
3.2 Analysis of overlap with resting-state functional connectivity
As we wanted to analyze the underlying neural functional relationship of our ROIs and their
co-activation patterns, we compared co-activation maps with the respective seed-based
functional connectivity maps of the ROIs. An interesting pattern emerged when looking at the
ACC and PCC, a substantial amount of the co-activation map overlapped with the
corresponding seed-based connectivity map (for ACC: overlap cognitive cluster 30.4%,
intermediate cluster 44.2%, and affective cluster 30.6%; for PCC: for cognitive cluster 50.6%,
for intermediate cluster 35.7%, and for affective cluster 47.1%). The opposite pattern was
present for the overlap of TPJ and insula co-activation and corresponding seed-based
connectivity maps: Here, only a maximum of 16% of a co-activation map overlapped with the
corresponding functional connectivity map (for TPJ intermediate cluster 16.4%; for cognitive
cluster 10.1%, for affective cluster 9%; for insula: cognitive cluster 3.3%, intermediate cluster
9.1%, and affective cluster 15.2%). This points to a rather high level of network integration
(that is to say, cross-network interaction); possible mechanisms and implications of these
results will be explored in the discussion section.
functional connectivity maps. (a-c) Overlap of task-group specific co-activation patterns with
canonical resting-state networks associated with empathy and ToM, (d) as well as
corresponding seed-based functional connectivity maps.
3.3 Analysis of overlap with other meta-analyses
Finally, we used Neurosynth decoding to characterize patterns of co-activation in terms of
our ROIs and each task group. Interestingly, resulting topics overlapped substantially for the
cognitive and intermediate cluster, while the affective cluster displayed a more independent
topic-profile. For the cognitive and intermediate cluster, decoding showed mostly ToM-
related terms, such as “theory mind”, “mentalizing”, “social cognition”, and “belief”.
Furthermore, a high posterior probability for the term “social” was also decoded for cognitive
and intermediate co-activation maps, while this association was not as strong for the affective
cluster co-activation maps. Additionally, for the cognitive cluster, terms such as “self-
referential” or “intentions” showed high posterior probabilities (terms also associated with the
DMN). Decoding for the affective cluster revealed terms such as “pain” or “painful”,
“valence”, “emotional”, as well as the clinical term “asd” (autism spectrum disorder). One
term that showed similar posterior probabilities across task groups in most ROIs was the term
“empathy”. Interestingly, decoding maps did not differ substantially between ROIs in terms of
which topics were decoded. Only their association (the posterior probability) differed between
task clusters (for terms that were associated with cognitive and intermediate cluster, all terms
showed higher association with the cognitive cluster).
decoding of un-thresholded task-group wise linear contrast maps for each ACC ROI (a), PCC
ROI (b), TPJ ROI (c), and insula ROI (d). Displayed are posterior probabilities (pearson
correlation coefficient) of terms associated with neural activation patterns. For illustrative
purposes, we only included social terms (note that while asd is technically a clinical term, the
diagnosis is closely linked to difficulties in relevant social domains and was therefore
portrayed as well), that were associated with more than one task group to allow comparison
between groups. We discarded anatomical or other non-social/ cognitive terms, as these were
not as relevant to our analysis.
4. Discussion
In this meta-analysis, we investigated task-related patterns of cross-network interactions and
re-configurations in two domains of social cognition (empathy, ToM). We evaluated whether
patterns of co-activation would change, depending on the different tasks employed to measure
each domain. Furthermore, we compared resultant domain-specific patterns of co-activation
with basic (resting-state) networks of the brain and other existing meta-analyses. Our main
hypothesis was that while empathy and ToM represent independent processes, some task
characteristics require conjoint activation of both networks.
Our previous analysis (Schurz et al., 2021) introduced a tripartite hierarchical model of social
affect and cognition, including robust and data-driven evidence for co-activation of areas
typically associated with empathy and ToM. This analysis did not, however, allow us to test
whether the common activation of those networks arose from the simultaneous activation of
both networks within one task, or whether an averaging of activation across multiple task-
specific activation patterns drove these effects. Furthermore, our method of analysis did not
allow for us to investigate how the social context modulated the emerging patterns of co-
activations. Nonetheless, these findings pose the question how social processing is
implemented within the brain when socio-affective and -cognitive demands are
simultaneously present. Here, we followed up on this finding and show that for tasks
presenting affective and cognitive stimulus elements in combination (intermediate task
cluster), empathy and ToM networks are indeed engaged simultaneously (see e.g., Amodio
and Frith, 2006; Bzdok et al., 2012; Fan et al., 2011; Frith and Frith, 2006; Lamm et al., 2011;
Mitchell, 2009; Saxe and Kanwisher, 2003; Schurz et al., 2014).
More specifically, across our four social affect and cognition ROIs, strongest co-activations
were observed in the left middle temporal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus, left median
cingulate/ paracingulate gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, left supramarginal gyrus, and left IFG,
areas previously associated with both empathy and ToM networks (Schurz et al., 2021). Our
findings of cross-network interaction are in line with a considerable number of social affect
and cognition studies that report neural activation patterns distributed among a range of
different networks related to empathy and ToM, such as the DMN and VAN (for a review, see
Schurz et al., 2020). Co-activation of both empathy and ToM networks has been associated
with more naturalistic social cognition (e.g, Harvey et al., 2013; Hildebrandt et al., 2021;
Kanske et al., 2015; Reyes-Aguilar et al., 2017; Tholen et al., 2020; Zaki et al., 2009) and
everyday social interactions (e.g., Deuse et al., 2016; Schilbach et al., 2013, 2008; Wolf et al.,
2010). It could be argued that cross-network interactions might represent one process enabling
or inhibiting the other (in the sense that, e.g., sharing another’s emotion might facilitate taking
their perspective, in the case of positive coupling of empathy and ToM networks). In line with
this notion, Kanske and colleagues (2016) observed inhibitory cross-network interaction from
nodes of the FPN onto DMN, a pattern that became even more pronounced in highly
emotional situations, which could represent processing of affective stimulus elements (i.e.,
empathizing with the demonstrator) being prioritized over processing of cognitive stimulus
elements (i.e., mentalizing). They suggest that a down-regulation of the DMN might represent
re-orienting of attentional resources towards salient aspects of a social situation that require
the most immediate action (Menon and Uddin, 2010). On the other hand, positive coupling
(excitatory influence from one network onto another) has been observed in response to
increased task complexity (Shine et al., 2016) or when information from different sources
must be integrated for successful task performance (see e.g., Schuwerk et al., 2017). A pattern
of positive coupling between empathy and ToM networks is commonly seen, for example, in
studies wherein participants must infer a character’s beliefs or intentions based on linguistic
information (Tettamanti et al., 2017; van Ackeren et al., 2016) or another’s actions
(Ciaramidaro et al., 2014; Schippers et al., 2010, 2009; Sperduti et al., 2014; Spunt and
Lieberman, 2012a; Thioux et al., 2018). This example of informational integration (e.g.,
participants must integrate information about another’s actions in order to infer their mental
state) is a potentially relevant process for multiple studies from our intermediate task group,
and also a common pattern of co-activation that we observed for our intermediate task group.
For example, the co-activation map for our insula ROI (located in the VAN) presents strong
coupling with the superior temporal gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, middle temporal gyrus, and
IFG, areas located within the DMN. Similarly, for the TPJ ROI co-activation pattern (located
in the DMN), we observed strong coupling with the left insula located in the VAN.
4.1 What are the task characteristics requiring cross-network interaction?
Our analysis of co-activation on the basis of activation peaks does not allow for a comparison
of directed connectivity as is discussed above, however our results show that in tasks from the
intermediate cluster especially, informational exchange between nodes of the DMN and the
Control Networks (as VAN, FPN, and DAN are sometimes referred to, see Cole et al., 2014;
Dosenbach et al., 2008) seems to be especially relevant. Rich, naturalistic social cognition and
social interaction tasks (Schilbach et al., 2008; Zaki et al., 2009) require simultaneous
processing of a multitude of different information, blocking out those that are irrelevant to the
task at hand and integrating those functions that are required to be performed conjointly (see
e.g., Anticevic et al., 2012; Goulden et al., 2014; Trautwein et al., 2016; Vatansever et al.,
2015; Wen et al., 2013). Our tasks included in the intermediate task cluster paint a rather
heterogeneous picture in terms of task characteristics. However, most tasks gave participants
contextual information about the content of the task, portray social interactions (dynamically
using videos, statically using written text) with human or abstract non-human demonstrators
(e.g., a comic character, anthropomorphic geometric forms), and required participants to
reason about and/or report their own or an observed other’s state of mind (emotional,
cognitive).
In contrast to classical ToM tasks, for example in tasks from the intermediate cluster,
participants are presented with both cognitive and affective information simultaneously.
Inference of mental states is supported by giving the participants information about the
context of a social situation, for example through narrations. Similar to our results presented
here, this intricate pattern of cross-network interactions between “social cognition networks”
has been shown in studies wherein participants were asked to infer mental states from
linguistic information (such as mutterings, see Tettamanti et al., 2017; van Ackeren et al.,
2016), from actions (see e.g., Ciaramidaro et al., 2014; Spunt and Lieberman, 2012b; Thioux
et al., 2018), or in socially-guided attentional reorienting (Schuwerk et al., 2017; for a
comprehensive review of cross-network connectivity in the context of social affect and
cognition, see also Schurz et al., 2020). This aspect of informational integration for tasks from
the intermediate cluster is also very pronounced in the comparison of our results with other
meta-analyses (Neurosynth decoding). The decoding patterns for co-activation maps from the
intermediate and cognitive task group appear to be quite similar for the social terms, but the
decoding patterns for non-social terms for the intermediate (and affective) task group were
much more diverse than portrayed above. Next to anatomical, we also found a multitude of
language-related or other non-social terms (e.g., “task”, “monitoring” or “error”). This points
to the importance of an integration of different processes for tasks from the intermediate task
group: while the decoding profile for classical ToM tasks is rather “clean cut” in that we
primarily found terms related to mentalizing, the more complex social tasks seem to require a
wider range of different processes to be engaged conjointly (Schilbach et al., 2013; Zaki et al.,
2009).
4.2 Network integration paves the way for complex, naturalistic social cognition
The VAN and DMN are richly interconnected networks, portraying extensive brain-wide
patterns of connectivity, and studies have shown that these can be flexibly updated to adapt to
changing task demands (Ciaramidaro et al., 2014; Power et al., 2011; Sakai, 2008; Spunt and
Lieberman, 2012b). Core nodes of the empathy and ToM networks, which we have so far
largely equated with the VAN and DMN, are furthermore characterized by a high degree of
connectivity to other regions. Therefore, a holistic model of, for instance, TPJ and insula
functioning can benefit from considering how they are connected with the rest of the brain.
While network organization is constrained by anatomical and functional connections (see e.g.,
Bullmore and Sporns, 2009; Honey et al., 2009), neural systems can flexibly reconfigure their
structure to adapt to changing environmental or task demands (for a review, see Shine and
Poldrack, 2018). Several studies found that network segregation, strong grouping of a network
into its’ sub-components, showing high intra-network and low inter-network connectivity, is
associated with more automatic processing (e.g., motor learning: Bassett et al., 2015;
sustained vigilance: Sadaghiani et al., 2015). Network integration, on the other hand, that is,
how modular networks interact among their sub-components, has been shown to be associated
with tasks requiring more effortful and controlled processing, or in response to cognitively
demanding tasks (e.g., memory recall: Fornito et al., 2012; Spreng et al., 2010; high-level n-
back task and social animations: Shine et al., 2016).
For complex, naturalistic social cognition tasks, network integration as a means of integrating
mechanisms across unique behavioral domains can potentially be a relevant mechanism for
enabling complex social cognition (Shine and Poldrack, 2018). We observe high levels of
network integration (in the sense of co-activation of different networks) especially for the
intermediate cluster, but interestingly also for the affective cluster. While a large part of the
different ROIs’ co-activation maps for the intermediate cluster falls into the DMN, we also
observed large overlap with other social cognition related networks, such as the VAN and the
FPN. Interestingly, we furthermore observed considerable network integration for the co-
activation patterns of our affective task cluster, pointing to a wider range of processes that
enable classic empathic processing. Previously, we reviewed cross-network interactions for
different classes of empathy tasks and found a similar pattern, namely that certain empathy
tasks required interaction of different canonical brain networks (Schurz et al., 2020). Greater
co-activation of visual and sensorimotor networks points to the relevance of lower-level
sensory processing for some classical empathy tasks, while for tasks from the intermediate
cluster, we observed more involvement of other higher cognitive and social-cognitive
networks in addition to sensory networks.
Apart from simultaneous DMN and VAN activation as a measure of cross-network
interaction, we can furthermore attempt to quantify levels of network integration and
segregation in terms of overlap of co-activation patterns with seed-based functional
connectivity patterns for the corresponding ROI. Here, large overlap would point to lower
levels of network integration, while smaller overlap would point to higher levels of network
integration (as the co-activation patterns in response to a certain task would represent patterns
of activation that go beyond or are even opposite to how that region is connected at rest). We
see largest overlap for ACC and PCC co-activation maps (cognitive: 30.4%, affective: 30.6%,
intermediate: 44.2%; cognitive: 50.6%, affective: 47.1%, intermediate: 35.7%; respectively)
and lowest for insula co-activation maps (cognitive: 3.3%, affective: 15.2%, intermediate:
9.1%). This could suggest that in the context of social cognition tasks, the TPJ and insula take
over hub roles, where patterns of co-activation can flexibly re-configure across a wide range
of other networks.
A considerable number of neural regions have been associated with the neural representation
of empathy and ToM (Fan et al., 2011; Lamm et al., 2011; Schurz et al., 2014; Timmers et al.,
2018). In our own and other previous work, insula and TPJ have been found as key nodes of
the social affect and cognition networks (Schurz et al., 2021), and have been preferentially
linked to empathy and ToM, respectively (Kanske et al., 2015). Our results provide evidence
that relativizes the notion of independent empathy and ToM networks: We show that certain
task characteristics probe the interaction of empathy and ToM networks, namely tasks that
simultaneously process affective and cognitive information. This is in line with previous
findings showing that the interaction of empathy and ToM is crucially dependent on the
specific context in which they are experienced. With more complex contextual demands
placed on empathy and ToM processing, the separation of empathy and ToM becomes blurry
(see e.g., Hillebrandt et al., 2014; Kanske et al., 2016; Schuwerk et al., 2014; Tettamanti et al.,
2017), despite the processes being principally separable (as seen, for example, in selective
impairments or developmental trajectories of empathy and ToM, see Reiter et al., 2017; Stietz
et al., 2019; Winter et al., 2017).
Given their structural integration into whole-brain architecture, TPJ and insula lend
themselves as key network hubs facilitating interaction between networks and functions
necessary to complex social tasks. A plethora of work speaks to the heterogeneity of TPJ and
insula functional profiles: they have been associated with processes such as empathy, ToM,
self-other distinction, attention, and sensorimotor integration (Cauda et al., 2011; Decety and
Lamm, 2007; Dosenbach et al., 2007; Jakobs et al., 2012; Menon and Uddin, 2010). In fact,
functional connectivity, meta-analytic clustering, and MACM studies suggest a bipartite (e.g.,
Cauda et al., 2012; Krall et al., 2015; Numssen et al., 2021) or tripartite (e.g., Bzdok et al.,
2013; Chang et al., 2013; Mars et al., 2012b) subdivision of functional clusters within the
insula and TPJ, including diverse connectivity profiles for each cluster. For example, Chang
et al. (2013) suggests a subdivision of the insula into a dorso-anterior, ventro-anterior, and
posterior cluster based on a resting-state functional connectivity parcellation and large-scale
meta-analysis. Based on the connectivity profiles associated with each insular cluster and
specific functional profile associated with them, the authors name the insula as perfectly
suited to be an integrational interface between feelings, cognition, and action. Furthermore,
the (anterior) insula has been named an integral hub in mediating dynamic interactions
between large-scale networks (Menon and Uddin, 2010; Power et al., 2013; Sridharan et al.,
2008). The TPJ has mainly been associated with attentional and social cognitive processing,
linking processing of internal and external information (Bzdok et al., 2013; Krall et al., 2015).
However, connectivity profiles associated with a three-cluster subdivision arguably could
suggest that TPJ may well be engaged in a wider range of processes (Mars et al., 2012b), and
suggest a critical role in contextual integration (Jakobs et al., 2012). Taken together, it could
be argued that insula and TPJ represent dynamic social affect and cognition hubs that, given
how they are embedded in overall brain network architecture, are integral in facilitation of
cross-network interaction in complex social tasks.
4.3 Limitations
In this meta-analysis, we investigated the nature of social cognition cross-network
interactions, and the conditions that prompt these cross-network interactions. We should note,
however, that our meta-analysis set-up left some limitations that might constrain the
generalizability of our results. First, the data and ROI selection for our analysis might have
introduced some bias into our analysis. Typically in a MACM analysis, widely available
online neuroscience data-repositories such as Neurosynth or BrainMap are employed to
identify studies that report activation at the corresponding ROI (see e.g., Robinson et al.,
2012, 2009). However, since our focus lay on a narrowed field of study (social cognition), we
decided to limit our database in this regard (see also Van Overwalle et al., 2015 for a similar
approach). We furthermore decided to select our ROIs from within our database rather than
select ROIs that have been shown to be involved in different domains of social cognition
(such as the superior temporal sulcus, see e.g., Alcalá-López et al., 2018; Deen et al., 2015).
While it would also have presented advantages to select an “external” ROI, due to the focus of
our study (we wanted to investigate network co-activation of empathy and ToM, exclusively)
and for reasons of feasibility (ensuring sufficient sample size for further analysis), we decided
on a data-driven approach for ROI selection. Note that we did, however, perform the same
analysis with anatomically defined social cognition ROIs (namely bilateral TPJ and anterior
insula), which yielded similar results to the ones reported here (see supplementary tables S7
for results, and section 3 of the supplementary material for an overview of additional analysis
methods and included studies).
Furthermore, we must note the difference in sample sizes of our different sub-analyses. For
reasons of feasibility, we decided to choose those ROIs for our analysis that showed
activation in at least ten studies per task group, which yielded a somewhat un-balanced
sample size both between ROIs and between task groups. However, we did find comparable
results across ROIs and task-groups (especially with those subsets of analysis wherein the
sample size is relatively balanced across task-groups, i.e., the TPJ) and therefore believe our
results to be principally generalizable (see also results of jackknife sensitivity analysis in
Finally, we would like to point out that, while we can assume functional connectivity from
observed patterns of co-activation, we cannot make causal claims as to the nature of this
relationship. Future studies might address these points using appropriate methods of analysis,
as has already been done in several studies (see e.g., Kanske et al., 2016; Regenbogen et al.,
2013; Schuwerk et al., 2017, 2014; Tettamanti et al., 2017).
5. Outlook
Humans are an inherently social species, and processes enabling us to successfully navigate
through our social world are continually attracting more and more research interest. In the
present meta-analysis, we summarize neuroimaging research relating to social affect and
cognition from the past 20 years, putting a special focus on how these two functions jointly
activate and interact in situations where both affective and cognitive information must be
processed simultaneously. We perform meta-analytic connectivity modeling on a sample of
140 studies (including 3201 participants) and show an intricate and complex pattern of social
domain-specific network re-configuration, and cross-network interactions for those social
domains that present affective and cognitive stimulus elements in conjunction.
While co-activation patterns associated with classical empathy and ToM tasks resemble
neural patterns previously termed empathy or ToM-networks (see e.g., Bzdok et al., 2012;
Fan et al., 2011; Lamm et al., 2011; Schurz et al., 2021, 2014), co-activation patterns
associated with our intermediate task cluster show activation in regions associated with both
empathy and ToM. We discuss our findings in the context of brain network organization
(Shine and Poldrack, 2018), and examine network integration as a mechanism required in
complex, naturalistic social situations. Here, multiple sources of (affective and cognitive)
information must be processed simultaneously in order to facilitate social interactions. Taken
together, our findings highlight the importance of a holistic, integrative account of social
information processing at the neural level to understand the full extent of how the social brain
functions, a key question not only in the context of basic research, but also in applied contexts
(e.g., clinical psychology: Lehmann et al., 2019).
Declaration of Interest
Declarations of interest: none.
Acknowledgement
LM was supported by a scholarship of the Friedrich Ebert Foundation. MS was financially
supported by an Erwin Schrödinger Fellowship (FWF-J4009-B27) and a Marie-Skłodowska-
Curie Individual Fellowship (MSCA-IF 844734). The Wellcome Centre for Integrative
Neuroimaging is supported by core funding from the Wellcome Trust (203139/Z/16/Z). PK
was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research within the ASD-
Net (BMBF FKZ 01EE1409A), the German Research Foundation (KA 4412/2-1) and Die
Junge Akademie at the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities and the
German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina. MS and PK were additionally supported
by the German Research Foundation Network ‘Understanding Others’ (SCHN 148/2-1).