CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 1
This manuscript is now published in Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
Judgments of Learning Reveal Conscious Access to Stimulus Memorability
Joseph M. Saito*1, Matthew Kolisnyk*2, & Keisuke Fukuda1,3
1University of Toronto, 2Western University, 3University of Toronto Mississauga
Author Note
* Denotes equal contribution
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (RGPIN-2017-06866)
and the Connaught New Researcher Award.
The data, stimuli, and experimental codes are posted publicly at the Open Science Framework
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this article.
Correspondence concerning this manuscript should be addressed to:
Keisuke Fukuda; keisuke.fukuda@utoronto.ca; (905) 569-4875
Dept. of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Rd, Ontario, L5L 1C6
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 2
Abstract
Despite the massive capacity of visual long-term memory, individuals do not successfully encode
all visual information they wish to remember. This variability in encoding success has been
traditionally ascribed to fluctuations in individuals’ cognitive states (e.g., sustained attention) and
differences in memory encoding processes (e.g., depth of encoding). However, recent work has
shown that a considerable amount of variability in encoding success stems from intrinsic stimulus
properties that determine the ease of encoding across individuals. While researchers have
identified several perceptual and semantic properties that contribute to stimulus memorability,
much remains unknown, including whether individuals are aware of the memorability of stimuli
they encounter. In the present study, we investigated whether individuals have conscious access to
the memorability of real-world stimuli while forming self-referential judgments of learning (JOL)
during explicit memory encoding (Experiments 1A-B) and when asked about the perceived
memorability of a stimulus in the absence of attempted encoding (Experiments 2A-B). We found
that JOLs and perceived memorability estimates (PME) were consistent across individuals and
predictive of memorability, confirming that individuals can access memorability with or without
stimulus encoding. At the same time, access to memorability was not comprehensive. We found
that individuals unexpectedly remembered and forgot consistent sets of stimuli as well. When we
compared access to memorability between JOLs and PMEs, we found that individuals had more
access during JOLs. Thus, our findings demonstrate that individuals have partial access to stimulus
memorability and that explicit encoding increases the amount of access that is available.
Word Count: 247
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 3
Judgments of Learning Reveal Conscious Access to Stimulus Memorability
Visual long-term memory has a massive capacity that allows individuals to store a great deal of
visual information with high levels of precision (Brady et al., 2008; Brady et al., 2013; Standing,
1973). However, individuals do not successfully encode all visual information they encounter in
everyday life. These memory encoding failures have been mainly attributed to moment-to-
moment fluctuations in cognitive states (e.g., Fukuda & Woodman, 2015; Noh et al., 2014;
Wagner et al., 1998) and encoding processes (e.g., Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Bower & Karlin,
1974; Ovalle-Fresa et al., 2021; Sundby et al., 2019; Tozios & Fukuda, 2019) that vary across
individuals and learning episodes. However, more recent work has illustrated that memory
encoding success for a given visual stimulus covaries across individuals and learning episodes
such that some visual stimuli are consistently remembered while others are consistently
forgotten. Such consistency in memory performance has been used to suggest that visual stimuli
possess intrinsic properties that determine their ease of encoding independently of individual-
specific encoding variables (Bainbridge et al., 2013; Isola et al., 2014).
Given the ubiquity of this observed stimulus memorability across different stimuli and tasks
(Bainbridge et al., 2013; Broers et al., 2018; Bylinskii et al., 2015; Isola et al., 2014; Madan,
2021; Madan et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2020), it is critical to identify its determinant factors. While
studies have identified a number of perceptual, social, and semantic factors that contribute to
stimulus memorability, a large portion remains unexplained (Bainbridge et al., 2017; Bainbridge
et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2020). Such unexplained factors demonstrate the
elusiveness of stimulus memorability to scientists, but does this imply that stimulus
memorability is also elusive to individual observers, such that they lack awareness of what
stimuli are memorable? To answer this, Isola and colleagues (2014) presented participants with
sequences of random images and asked them to rate how memorable each image was. When
participants’ memory for these images was assessed with a surprise recognition test afterwards,
the perceived memorability estimates (PMEs) reported by participants initially did not reliably
predict the veridical memorability established by the subsequent recognition test. Based on this
finding, Isola et al. (2014) argued that stimulus memorability may not be consciously accessible
to individual observers.
Limited individual awareness of stimulus memorability appears at odds with related lines of
research demonstrating that individuals can competently assess their memory encoding success.
More precisely, self-referential judgments of learning (JOL) made at the time of memory
encoding reliably differentiate between subsequently remembered and forgotten stimuli (Fleming
& Dolan, 2012; Koriat, 1997; Nelson & Dunlosky, 1991; Rhodes, 2016; Schwartz & Metcalfe,
2017). One plausible explanation for this discrepancy between JOLs and PMEs is the manner in
which individuals access the memorability of a given stimulus. In contrast to Isola et al. (2014),
where participants reported PMEs in the absence of explicit encoding demands, JOLs are made
as participants attempt to encode stimuli in anticipation of later testing. This leaves open the
possibility that stimulus memorability can only be accessed when individuals engage in
intentional memory encoding.
However, stimulus memorability is not the only variable that participants have available when
forming JOLs. JOLs can also be based on metacognitive assessments that are made about the
quality of individual-specific encoding processes for a given stimulus. For example, not only is it
the case that attentional fluctuations at encoding predict memory encoding success
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 4
(deBettencourt et al., 2017; deBettencourt et al., 2020), but individuals have some awareness of
these fluctuations (Adam & Vogel, 2017; McVay et al., 2009; Smallwood et al., 2004;
Smallwood et al., 2003). Therefore, the predictive relationship between JOLs and subsequent
memory performance may be exclusively dependent on these dynamic, individual-specific
encoding variables and not on more stable properties of the stimuli themselves. If so, even when
JOLs made by a given individual are predictive of subsequent memory performance, JOLs may
be inconsistent across individuals and unable to predict inter-individual consistency in memory
performance that results from stimulus memorability.
Here, we conducted a series of experiments to test whether individuals have conscious access to
stimulus memorability and whether this potential access depends on encoding demands. Young
adults reported JOLs while encoding images of real-world objects (Experiment 1A) or human
faces (Experiment 1B) in anticipation of a later recognition memory test. If participants can
consciously access stimulus memorability when forming JOLs, then JOLs for a given stimulus
should be consistent across participants and able to predict inter-individual consistency in
recognition memory performance (i.e., stimulus memorability). To preview the results, we found
that JOLs were indeed consistent across participants and predictive of stimulus memorability.
Critically, however, this access to stimulus memorability during JOLs was not comprehensive.
We found inter-individual consistency in instances of unanticipated remembering and forgetting,
when JOLs underestimated and overestimated stimulus memorability, respectively.
To test whether this partial access to stimulus memorability was dependent on encoding
demands, we conducted Experiments 2A-B, in which participants reported PMEs of stimuli
without any explicit demands for memory encoding. Here again, PMEs were consistent across
participants and predictive of stimulus memorability. When we compared the access to
memorability between JOLs and PMEs, we found that individuals accessed the same properties
during both types of judgments, but individuals accessed additional properties during JOLs that
were not accessed during PMEs. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that individuals
have partial access to stimulus memorability and that this access is greater when individuals
explicitly encode stimuli into memory.
Experiment 1
Method
Participants
For each experiment, we recruited 120 young adults through Prolific who resided in the U.S. or
Canada at the time of the experiment (Experiment 1A: 18-31 years old, M = 24.19, SD = 3.97,
age
n = 61; Experiment 1B: 18-30 years old, M = 24.66, SD = 3.69, n = 53). This sample
female age female
size was determined to have each of 600 stimuli rated by 30 participants (see Stimuli and
Procedure for details). Each participant provided electronic informed consent in accordance with
the protocol approved by the Research Ethics Boards of the University of Toronto and received
monetary compensation for their participation (7.50 £/hour). All participants reported fluency in
English, normal or corrected-to-normal vision, no color blindness, no history of head injury, no
history of mental illness/condition, and no cognitive impairment/Dementia. All participants had
successfully completed 90% or more of the studies that they had participated in previously on
Prolific (i.e., approval rate > 90%).
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 5
Experimental Schematics
Are you going to remember the
picture you just saw?
Encoding
Task
Def. Prob. Maybe Maybe Prob. Def.
Yes Yes Yes No No No
1 2 3 4 5 6
500ms 1000ms Until Response
Did you see this picture during
the encoding task?
Recognition
Task
Def. Prob. Maybe Maybe Prob. Def.
Yes Yes Yes No No No
1 2 3 4 5 6
Until Response 600ms
Would an average person
remember the picture
you just saw?
Memorability
Judgment +
Task
Def. Prob. Maybe Maybe Prob. Def.
Yes Yes Yes No No No
1 2 3 4 5 6
500ms 1000ms Until Response
Note. (A) Experiment 1A schematic. The top row shows the trial procedure for the Encoding Task, and the
bottom row shows the trial procedure for the Recognition Task. (B) Experiment 2A schematic. Experiments 1B
and 2B used identical procedures to 1A and 2A, respectively, with images of human faces in place of real-world
objects.
Stimuli
For Experiment 1A, we selected a set of 600 images of real-world objects from an existing
database (Brady et al., 2008). This set was split into four sets of 150 images. For Experiment 1B,
we selected a set of 600 face images from a different database (Bainbridge et al., 2013). This set
was also split into four sets of 150 images. Each stimulus set was counterbalanced across
participants in each experiment such that each image was studied or presented as a novel foil to
an identical number (= 30) of participants.
Procedure
In Experiments 1A-B, participants performed an encoding task followed by an item recognition
Encoding Task. Every trial began with the presentation of a fixation cross at the center of the
screen for 500 ms. The fixation cross was then replaced by a to-be-remembered image at the
center of the screen for 1000 ms (Experiment 1A: real-world object; Experiment 1B: human
face). Since we could not control the size or resolution of the computer monitors that participants
used in our online experimental procedure, the to-be-remembered stimulus was fit to a square
whose size was fixed proportionately to the vertical axis of the monitor (12% and 20% for
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 6
Experiments 1A and 1B, respectively). Five hundred milliseconds after the offset of the to-be-
remembered image, a question and 6-point Likert scale were presented simultaneously. The
question read: “Are you going to remember the picture you just saw?” Participants then
completed a JOL by indicating how likely they were to remember the just-seen stimulus during a
subsequent recognition task by clicking on one of the following buttons: 1 = Definitely yes, 2 =
Probably yes, 3 = Maybe yes, 4 = Maybe no, 5 = Probably no, 6 = Definitely no. The Likert
scale remained on the screen until a response was provided. Each participant completed 150
trials to encode 150 different memory stimuli. The presentation order of the stimuli was
randomized across participants.
Recognition Task. In every trial, participants were presented a test stimulus at the center of the
screen. A question was presented above the stimulus that read: “Did you see this picture during
the encoding task?” with a corresponding 6-point Likert scale presented below the stimulus. The
size of the test stimulus was identical to the memory stimulus in the Encoding Task. Participants
completed a recognition judgment on the test stimulus by clicking one of the following buttons:
1 = Definitely yes, 2 = Probably yes, 3 = Maybe yes, 4 = Maybe no, 5 = Probably no, 6 =
Definitely no. After each recognition judgment, the screen turned blank for a 600-ms inter-trial
interval. Participants saw 150 old images and 150 new images in a pseudo-random order.
Analyses
Memorability Scores
To assess participants’ access to stimulus memorability, we tested whether JOLs were consistent
across observers and predictive of consistency in recognition responses. However, stimulus
memorability is not the only stimulus property that can produce consistent JOLs and recognition
responses. For example, the typicality of an image can produce feelings of familiarity that are
independent of encoding (e.g., Bartlett et al., 1984; Light et al., 1979). Therefore, when groups of
individuals successfully recognize the same image as being old, these recognition responses can
be driven by properties that determined the ease of initial encoding across individuals (i.e.,
stimulus memorability) or by how typical the image appeared to the individuals during
recognition (i.e., general stimulus familiarity). As such, it is difficult, if not impossible, to
disentangle the effect of general stimulus familiarity from stimulus memorability within
responses that are made to studied images. Critically, however, recognition responses that are
made to unstudied foils can be influenced by general stimulus familiarity, but not by stimulus
memorability, since there was no initial encoding of the foils that took place. Thus, in order to
remove the effect of general stimulus familiarity from recognition responses and isolate the
effect of stimulus memorability, we computed memorability scores by subtracting recognition
responses that were made when the image was new (= general familiarity) from recognition
responses that were made when the image was old (= stimulus memorability + general
familiarity). This procedure is analogous to calculating corrected hit rates that account for the
role of guessing in recognition memory paradigms.
Split-half Correlation Analysis for Inter-individual Consistency
To test the inter-individual consistency in our measures of interest (e.g., recognition response,
JOL), we performed a conventional split-half analysis. First, we randomly split participants into
two groups and computed the average response of interest for each stimulus in each group. Then,
we computed the correlation for the average response of interest between the two groups. We
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 7
repeated this process 1000 times to estimate the distribution of split-half correlation coefficients.
To establish the null distribution, we repeated the same procedure, but in each iteration, we
shuffled the stimulus labels in one of the groups.
Residual Regression Analysis
To test whether participants relied on both stimulus memorability and individual-specific
encoding variables (e.g., fluctuating cognitive states) when forming JOLs, and whether these
distinct factors influenced recognition performance, we employed residual regression analyses
based on the following logic:
(1) Assume Information A (e.g., stimulus memorability) and B (e.g., individual-specific
cognitive state) both contribute to Performance C (e.g., memory encoding)
(2) Assume individuals use Information A and B to form predictions about Performance C (=
C’, e.g., JOL)
(3) If (1) and (2) are true, the residual C’ after regressing out A should still predict
Performance C because individuals are aware of the contribution of B to C.
(4) On the other hand, if B does not contribute uniquely to C’, then the residual C’ after
regressing out A should no longer predict C.
Stimulus Memorability in Experiments 1A-B
Note. (A) Schematic depiction of the research question addressed by the accompanying figures. (B) Inter-
individual consistency in recognition responses in Experiments 1A (top) and 1B (bottom) when images were old
(left) and new (right). (C) Inter-individual consistency in corrected recognition responses (i.e., memorability
scores) in Experiments 1A (top) and 1B (bottom). Black lines show the mean recognition responses for Group 1
from the lowest to highest scoring images. Red, blue, and magenta lines show the mean recognition responses
for corresponding images in Group 2. The gray lines show the mean recognition responses for corresponding
images in Group 2 when image indices were shuffled (i.e., null distribution).
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 8
Results
Validating Stimulus Memorability
2A). Split-half correlation analyses revealed that recognition responses were consistent across
t(1998) = 3.46x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 15.44; Experiment 1B: mean r = 0.41, t(1998) =
mean r = 0.44, t(1998) = 1.64x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 7.38; Experiment 1B: mean r = 0.40,
t(1998) = 1.48x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 6.63). The observed consistency in recognition
responses to unstudied images demonstrated a need to disentangle the effect of general stimulus
familiarity from stimulus memorability in participants’ recognition responses (see Analyses). To
do this, we calculated memorability scores that isolated the effect of stimulus memorability in
participants’ recognition responses and subjected these corrected measures to split-half analysis.
Experiment 1A: mean r = 0.65, t(1998) = 3.58x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 16.01; Experiment
1B: mean r = 0.46, t(1998) = 2.17x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 9.85; see Supplementary
Individuals Incorporate Stimulus Memorability into JOLs
Note. (A) Schematic depiction of the research question addressed by the accompanying figures. JOLs =
Judgments of Learning (B) Inter-individual consistency in JOLs in Experiments 1A (top) and 1B (bottom).
Black lines show the mean JOLs for Group 1, with images sorted from the lowest to highest mean response.
Green lines show the mean JOLs for corresponding images in Group 2. The gray lines show the mean JOLs for
corresponding images in Group 2 when image indices were shuffled (i.e., null distribution). (C) Scatterplots
illustrating the relationship between average JOLs (i.e., JOL-ability) and average recognition responses when
images were old and new. (D) Scatterplots illustrating the relationship between average JOLs (i.e., JOL-ability)
and average corrected recognition responses (i.e., memorability score).
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 9
Information for t(1998) = 2.17x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 9.85; see Supplementary
Information for corroborating results in individual-differences and permutation-based analyses).
These findings confirm that some images in our stimulus set were more intrinsically memorable
than others.
Access to stimulus memorability during JOLs is reliable, but imperfect
If participants were consciously aware of an image’s memorability while forming JOLs, then we
should find that JOLs for a given stimulus were consistent across participants (i.e., JOL-ability;
participants predicted the average JOLs for the remaining half, confirming access to a common
set of stimulus properties during JOL formation (Experiment 1A: mean r = 0.81, t(1998) =
5.10x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 22.82; Experiment 1B: mean r = 0.46, t(1998) = 1.51x102, p <
0.001, Cohen’s d = 6.74). This JOL-ability was found to predict average recognition responses
R2 = 0.50, p < 0.001; Experiment 1B: r(598)= 0.51, R2 = 0.26, p < 0.001) and when it was a new
Access to Stimulus Memorability during JOLs is Not Comprehensive
Note. (A) Schematic depiction of the research question addressed by the accompanying figures. JOLs =
Judgments of Learning (B) Inter-individual consistency in average residual recognition responses after regressing
out individual JOLs (i.e., residual memory scores) in Experiments 1A (top) and 1B (bottom). Black lines show
the mean residual recognition responses for Group 1, with images sorted from the lowest to highest mean
response. Magenta lines show the mean residual recognition responses for corresponding images in Group 2. The
gray lines show the mean residual recognition responses for corresponding images in Group 2 when image
indices were shuffled (i.e., null distribution). (C) Scatterplots illustrating the relationship between residual
memory scores and average corrected recognition responses (i.e., memorability scores).
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 10
p < 0.001). More importantly, memorability scores were reliably predicted by JOL-ability
R2 = 0.36, p < 0.001; see Supplementary Information for corroborating results in individual-
differences and permutation-based analyses), suggesting that participants were aware of stimulus
memorability during JOL formation and used those properties to predict subsequent recognition
performance.
We then sought to determine the extent of participants’ conscious access to stimulus
capture the variability in memorability between stimuli. In other words, any deviations in an
individual’s recognition response from their respective JOL should reflect an idiosyncratic
fluctuation in cognitive state or stimulus processing at the time of encoding that was not
consistent across individuals. To test this possibility, for each participant, we regressed JOLs out
of recognition responses for old images and then computed the residual memory score for each
stimulus. When we subjected these residual memory scores to split-half analyses, we found that
t(1998) = 3.30x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 14.76; Experiment 1B: mean r = 0.35, t(1998) =
2.31x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 10.34; see Supplementary Information for corroborating
results in individual-differences and permutation-based analyses), meaning that participants
unexpectedly remembered and forgot consistent sets of stimuli. We then correlated residual
memory scores with memorability scores to see if the observed consistency in residual memory
was attributable to properties of memorability that were not incorporated into JOLs. We found
r(598)= 0.81, R2 = 0.65, p < 0.001; Experiment 1B: r(598)= 0.72, R2 = 0.52, p < 0.001),
demonstrating that participants’ access to stimulus memorability was not perfect and that some
of these properties went undetected.
JOLs incorporate stimulus memorability and idiosyncratic fluctuations in encoding success
In our split-half correlational analyses, we found that inter-individual consistency in JOLs
predicted inter-individual consistency in recognition performance, demonstrating conscious
access to stimulus memorability. From here, we conducted an individual differences analysis to
investigate whether participants also incorporated individual-specific encoding variables, such as
stimulus memorability and general stimulus familiarity from individuals’ JOLs and recognition
responses and tested whether they were still predictive of one another. Specifically, we computed
residual JOLs by regressing out JOL-ability and computed residual recognition responses to old
images by regressing out the inter-individual consistency in responses to old images. When we
correlated residual JOLs with residual recognition performance, we found that there was indeed a
r = 0.17, t(119) = 1.34x10, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.23; Experiment 1B: mean r = 0.14, t(119) =
1.52x10, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.39; see Supplementary Information for corroborating results
in permutation-based analyses). Thus, JOLs were multi-faceted, incorporating intrinsic stimulus
memorability and individual-specific encoding variables, such as fluctuating cognitive states and
stimulus processing.
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 11
Experiment 2
Individuals Incorporate Idiosyncratic Variables into JOLs
The results of Experiment 1
suggest that individuals are
aware of stimulus memorability
when encoding visual
information into memory.
However, it is unclear whether
explicit encoding is required to
access stimulus memorability. If
so, PMEs made in the absence of
attempted encoding should not
predict stimulus memorability
even if PMEs are consistent
across individuals. Conversely, if
individuals can access stimulus
memorability regardless of
encoding, PMEs should be
consistent across individuals
(i.e., PME-ability) and predictive
of stimulus memorability. In
fact, PME-ability should be even
Note. (A) Schematic depiction of the research question addressed by
more consistent than JOL-ability,
the accompanying figures. JOLs = Judgments of Learning (B)
since individuals do not need to
Correlations between the residuals in individual JOLs after regressing
out average JOLs across participants (i.e., JOL-ability) and the incorporate individual-specific
residuals in individual recognition responses for old pictures after
encoding variables that can
regressing out average recognition responses to old pictures (i.e., Old
conflict with stimulus-intrinsic
Consistency) in Experiment 1A (top) and Experiment 1B (bottom).
properties. To test this question
Filled colored dots with short black error bars show the mean
in Experiment 2, we removed all
correlation coefficient with the standard error of the mean.
encoding demands and asked
participants to report how likely an average person would be to remember a given stimulus.
Method
Participants
For each experiment, we recruited 120 young adults through Prolific who resided in the U.S. or
Canada at the time of the experiment (Experiment 2A: 18-30 years old, M = 22.68, SD = 3.13,
age
n = 91; Experiment 2B: 18-33 years old, M = 22.90, SD = 3.57, n = 90). This sample
female age female
size was determined to have each of 600 stimuli rated by 30 participants. Each participant
provided electronic informed consent in accordance with the protocol approved by the Research
Ethics Boards of the University of Toronto and received monetary compensation for their
participation (7.50 £/hour). All participants were screened using the same criteria as Experiment
1.
Stimuli
The stimulus sets were identical to those used in Experiment 1.
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 12
Consistent and Predictive Estimates of Stimulus Memorability without Encoding
Note. (A) Schematic depiction of the research question addressed by the accompanying figures. JOLs =
Judgments of Learning, PMEs = Perceived Memorability Estimates (B) Inter-individual consistency in PMEs in
Experiments 2A (top) and 2B (bottom). Black lines show the mean memorability estimates for Group 1 with
images sorted from the lowest to highest mean response. Teal lines show the mean memorability estimates for
corresponding images in Group 2. The gray lines show the mean memorability estimates for corresponding
images in Group 2 when image indices were shuffled (i.e., null distribution). (C) Scatterplots illustrating the
relationship between average memorability estimates (i.e., PME-ability) and average recognition responses when
images were old and new. (D) Scatterplots illustrating the relationship between average memorability estimates
(i.e., PME-ability) and average corrected recognition responses (i.e., memorability scores).
Procedure
Memorability Judgment Task. This task was identical to the Encoding task used in Experiment
1 with the following exceptions. Instead of providing a JOL for each presented stimulus,
participants reported the perceived memorability of the stimulus by answering the following
question: “Would an average person remember the picture you just saw?” Participants were not
provided any instruction to remember the stimuli, and there was no recognition test that
followed.
Results
Accessing stimulus memorability does not require encoding, but encoding increases access
To test whether access to memorability was dependent on encoding demands, we measured inter-
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 13
6B, our split-half analyses found
Higher Prediction Consistency in the Absence of Encoding
reliable inter-individual
consistency in PMEs
(Experiment 2A: mean r = 0.88,
t(1998) = 6.02x102, p < 0.001,
Cohen’s d = 26.93; Experiment
2B: mean r = 0.66, t(1998) =
3.59x102, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d =
16.04). These consistent PMEs
successfully predicted the
recognition responses made in
Experiment 1 when the stimuli
Experiment 2A: r(598)= 0.62, R2
= 0.38, p < 0.001; Experiment
2B: r(598) = 0.48, R2 = 0.23, p <
0.001) and when they were new
2A: r(598)= -0.29, R2 = 0.08, p <
0.001; Experiment 2B: r(598)= -
0.34, R2 = 0.12, p < 0.001). More
Note. (A) Schematic depiction of the research question addressed by
importantly, PMEs predicted
the accompanying figures. JOLs = Judgments of Learning, PMEs =
memorability scores observed in
Perceived Memorability Estimates (B) Distributions of 1000 split-half
correlation coefficients for JOLs in Experiment 1 and PMEs in
Experiment 2A: r(598)= 0.60, R2
Experiment 2.
= 0.36, p < 0.001; Experiment
2B: r(598)= 0.55, R2 = 0.30, p < 0.001). These findings appear to suggest that individuals had
access to stimulus memorability without needing to encode stimuli.
However, it is possible that participants continued to encode stimuli as a strategy to complete
PMEs, by extrapolating their own encoding success to that of the average observer. If so,
participants’ PMEs should be influenced by individual-specific encoding variables just like JOLs
encode stimuli when computing PMEs, then PMEs should be more consistent across individuals
than JOLs (Experiment 2A: t(1998) = 6.57x10, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 2.94; Experiment 2B:
t(1998) = 6.59x10, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 2.95), confirming that the removal of encoding
demands eliminated the incorporation of individual-specific encoding variables by participants.
Given that encoding does not appear to be necessary for accessing memorability, we tested
whether participants accessed the same properties of memorability during JOLs and PMEs. We
regressed JOL-ability out of PME-ability (and vice versa) for every image and measured whether
residual PME-ability still predicted memorability. We found that PMEs no longer predicted
= 0.954; Experiment 2B: r(598)= 0.09, R2 < 0.01, p = 0.009), but JOLs continued to predict
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 14
Asymmetric Access to Stimulus Memorability During JOLs and PMEs
Note. (A) Schematic depiction of the research question addressed by the accompanying figures. JOLs =
Judgments of Learning, PMEs = Perceived Memorability Estimates (B) Scatterplots illustrating the
relationship between average corrected recognition responses (i.e., memorability scores) and residual PME-
ability or residual JOL-ability, respectively. Each residual measure (e.g., residual PME-ability) was
computed by regressing inter-individual consistency in one judgment (e.g., JOL-ability) out of the inter-
individual consistency in the other respective judgment (e.g., PME-ability).
< 0.001; Experiment 2B: r(598)= 0.33, R2 = 0.11, p < 0.001). These findings suggest that
individuals accessed a common set of memorability properties regardless of encoding, but that
there were additional properties that were only accessed when individuals encoded stimuli into
memory.
Discussion
Are individuals aware of how memorable a given stimulus is? Across two experiments, we
demonstrated that individuals have conscious access to stimulus memorability when computing
JOLs during memory encoding and when computing PMEs in the absence of encoding demands.
However, we also found that encoding grants individuals additional access to stimulus
memory performance.
The predictive relationship between subjective memorability judgments and stimulus
memorability appears to directly contradict previous work showing that PMEs do not predict
subsequent memory performance (Isola et al., 2014). One possible explanation for this
discrepancy is the inconsistency in stimuli that were used in each study. In the present study,
stimuli were comprised of single objects or faces that were superimposed on a white background.
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 15
Mapping Between Predictive Judgments of Remembering and Veridical Memory Performance
Note. Recognition memory performance reflects the composite influence of intrinsic stimulus properties that
determine the ease of encoding across individuals (i.e., stimulus memorability) and cognitive states and encoding
processes that fluctuate from moment-to-moment (i.e., individual-specific encoding variables). Individuals are
able to access both of these sources of encoding variability and incorporate them into self-referential judgments
of learning (JOL) that predict future recognition performance. However, both sources are only partially accessed;
individuals fail to detect consistent aspects of memorability and can experience metacognitive failures during
encoding. When individuals form perceived memorability estimates (PME) about stimuli in the absence of
explicit encoding, access to memorability is preserved but more constrained than the access achieved during
JOLs. Thus, encoding is not necessary for individuals to access stimulus memorability and predict recognition
performance, but it does increase the amount of access that is available.
These minimal stimulus configurations encouraged participants to focus on a single, consistent
item when evaluating stimulus memorability. However, in Isola et al. (2014), participants
evaluated stimuli that were comprised of multiple objects embedded in naturalistic backgrounds.
This increased stimulus complexity may have resulted in different participants focusing on
different aspects of a given stimulus, including aspects that were not predictive of stimulus
memorability. There are also naturally-occurring differences in the dimensionality of scene
images compared to object images (e.g., Torralba & Oliva, 2003) that may have challenged
observers’ ability to estimate stimulus memorability. Such hypotheses are consistent with our
observation that individuals lack comprehensive access to stimulus memorability and may not be
able to guide their conscious processing of stimuli based purely on these intrinsic properties.
Future work should also determine whether the consciously-accessible properties of stimulus
memorability are also consciously explicable by observers. One of the tantalizing difficulties in
stimulus memorability research has been parsing memorability into its elementary components
(Bainbridge et al., 2017; Bainbridge et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2020). To this end,
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 16
computational approaches have demonstrated some success in predicting memorability (e.g.,
Celikkale et al., 2015; Squalli-Houssaini et al., 2018; Basavaraju et al., 2018; Lukavský and
Děchtěrenko, 2017). For example, in a study by Khosla et al. (2015), neural network predictions
showed a 0.64 rank correlation with objective memory performance, which is approximate to the
correlations achieved here by human predictions. Yet, neither humans nor computers have
provided an exhaustive profile of the properties that define stimulus memorability. One
interesting route towards closing this gap may be to simply ask observers to report the rationale
behind their predictive judgments. Such qualitative data may help to uncover unidentified
memorability components and narrow the pool of known components that observers might not
have access to.
While beyond the scope of the present study, we speculate here about the stimulus properties that
were not accessible to observers. One possibility is that observers estimate stimulus
memorability based exclusively on semantic properties while leaving out non-semantic visual
properties. Previous work has shown that a sizable proportion of memorability for faces (e.g.,
Bainbridge et al., 2013) and scenes (e.g., Isola et al., 2014) can be attributed to semantic
properties that are commonly perceived. Critically, however, two images depicting comparable
semantic properties can show different patterns of memorability (e.g., Bylisnkii et al., 2015),
implying a unique contribution by non-semantic properties. Indeed, Lin et al. (2021)
demonstrated that removing semantic information from images through phase scrambling did not
eliminate stimulus memorability. Future work should address whether partial access to
memorability can be explained by an exclusive reliance on semantic properties that sometimes
belie variability in lower-level visual properties.
Finally, our results demonstrated that JOLs stemmed from two dissociable factors, namely,
stimulus-intrinsic memorability and individual-specific encoding variables. These distinct
variables map nicely onto a classic theory of JOLs which posits that individuals integrate
intrinsic and extrinsic factors when predicting future stimulus remembering (Koriat, 1997).
Moreover, these dissociable cognitive variables may explain the overlapping, but dissociable,
neural activities that separate JOL computations from objective memory encoding (Do Lam et
al., 2012; Fleming & Dolan, 2012; Kao et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2015). Specifically, JOL
computations rely on unique contributions by the dorsolateral and medial prefrontal cortex that
are not observed during memory encoding alone. Future work should investigate whether
stimulus-intrinsic memorability and individual-specific encoding variables provide fitting
cognitive analogues for these dissociable neural processes.
CONSCIOUS ACCESS TO MEMORABILITY 17