Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 1
Preprint Version 2
Cross-cultural validation of an expanded Exercise Addiction
Inventory: A preliminary protocol report
Umberto Granziol1, Mark D. Griffiths2, Mike Trott3, Takayuki Akimoto4, Mia Beck Lichtenstein5, Nikolina
Bjegovic1, Abril Cantú-Berrueto6, Brian Cook7, Ricardo de la Vega Marcos8, Zsolt Demetrovics9,10, Laura Di
Lodovico11, Nataliya Dmytrenko1, Alexei Egorov12,13, Olga V. Felsendorff14, Ruth Jiménez Castuera15, Elena
Khvatova16, Emilio Landolfi17, Angelica Larios Delgado18, Marta Leyton Román19, Anthony Maher20, Liudmyla
Mova21, Robert Portman21, Antonio Rosado23, Dahiana Salazar Gonzále24, Melanie Schipfer25, Marco Solmi26,
Oliver Stoll25, Paula Teixeira Fernandes27, Peiying Yang28, Liye Zou28, * Attila Szabo9,29*a
Funding: No financial support was received for this study. ZD’s and AS’ contribution was supported by the
Hungarian National Research, Development and Innovation Office (KKP126835, K134807).
Conflict of interest: The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
Ethics: The procedure described in this study protocol will be carried out in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki. All participants provide informed consent for study participation. An umbrella protocol obtained formal
authorization by one of the European Institutional Review Board (IRB). Co-authors outside the EU asked approval,
when necessary, to their IRB. Participants will not be reimbursed for their participation.
Acknowledgments: The present work has been carried out in line with the aims of the research program
“Dipartimenti di Eccellenza” from MIUR to the Department of General Psychology, University of Padua, Italy
* Corresponding author: Prof. Dr. Attila Szabo, Institute of Health Promotion and Sport Sciences, ELTE Eötvös
Loránd University, 1225 Budapest, Prielle Kornélia Street 47, 3rd Floor, Hungary, Email: szabo.attila@ppk.elte.hu
aAuthors’ affiliations and contact mail:
1. Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Italy Email: umberto.granziol@unipd.it;
nataliya.dmytrenko@gmail.com; nikolina.bjegovic@studenti.unipd.it; 2. Psychology Department, Nottingham Trent University, UK. Email:
mark.griffiths@ntu.ac.uk; 3. Vision and Eye Research Institute, Faculty of Health, Education, Medicine, and Social Care, Anglia Ruskin University, United
Kingdom. Email: mike.trott@aru.ac.uk; 4. Faculty of Sport Sciences, Waseda University, Japan. Email:axi@waseda.jp; 5. Department of Clinical
Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. Email:mlichtenstein@health.sdu.dk; 6. University Autonomous of Nuevo León (UANL),
France. Email:abrilcantubrr@uanl.edu.mx; 7. Private practice. Email: BrianCookPhd@gmail.com 8. Department of Physical Education, Sport & Human
Movement, Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain. Email:delavegaricardo@hotmail.com; 9. Institute of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest, Hungary. Email: demetrovics.zsolt@ppk.elte.hu; 10. Centre of Excellence in Responsible Gaming, University of Gibraltar, Gibraltar, Gibraltar.
Email: zsolt.demetrovics@unigib.edu.gi; 11. Clinique des Maladies Mentales et de l'Encéphale, Hôpital Sainte-Anne, GHU Paris Psychiatrie et
Neurosciences, Paris, France; Université de Paris, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris (IPNP), INSERM U1266, Paris, France.
laura.dilodovico@yahoo.com; 12. Department of Psychiatry and Addictions, St. Petersburg State University, Russia. Email:draegorov@mail.ru; 13.
Laboratory of Behavior Neurophysiology and Pathology, I.M. Secenov Institute of Evolutionary Physiology and Biochemistry, St. Petersburg, Russia; 14.
Faculty of Psychology, St. Petersburg University, Russia Email: olga.felsendorff@gmail.com; 15. Sport Sciences Faculty. University of Extremadura,
Spain. Email: ruthji@unex.es; 16. Department of Psychology, Lesgaft Sport University, St. Petersburg, Russia. Email: elenakhvatskaya@mail.ru; 17.
Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Kinesiology, University of the Fraser Valley, Canada. Email:Emilio.Landolfi@ufv.ca; 18. Asociación de Esgrima,
National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM). Mexico. Email:angelicalarios13@gmail.com; 19. Rey Juan Carlos University, Spain.
Email:marta.leyton@urjc.es; 20. Carnegie School of Education, Leeds Beckett University, United Kingdom. Email: anthony.maher@leedsbeckett.ac.uk;
21. Department of Modern Choreography, National University of Ukraine on Physical Education and Sport, Ukraine. Email: maluma@ua.fm; 22.
Teesside University. Middlesborough, United Kingdom. Email:R.Portman@tees.ac.uk; 23. Faculty of Human Motricity, Lisbon University, Portugal.
Email:arosado@fmh.ulisboa.pt; 24. Universidad Autónoma De Nuevo León, France. Email: dsalazargzz@hotmail.com; 25. Department of Sport
Psychology and Sport Pedagogy, Institute of Sport Science, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany. Email: melanie.schipfer@gmail.com;
oliver.stoll@sport.uni-halle.de; 26. Department of Psychiatry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Email: marco.solmi83@gmail.com; 27.
Faculty of Physical Education, Department of Sports Science, Universidade Estadual de Campinas-UNICAMP, Brasil. Email: paula@fef.unicamp.br; 28.
Body-Brain-Mind Laboratory, School of Psychology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. Email: skyleryang40@gmail.com;
liyezou123@gmail.com 29. Institute of Health Promotion and Sport Sciences, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary. Email:
szabo.attila@ppk.elte.hu
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 2
ABSTRACT
Background and aims. In the last 30 years, the continuously increasing number of studies
investigating exercise addiction (EA) stimulated interest in developing instruments assessing the risk
of exercise addiction (REA). One widely used tool is the Exercise Addiction Inventory (EAI) because
it is a brief, easy-to-use, time-saving, and psychometrically validated tool. However, its items based
on the ‘components model of addiction’ still lack some consistently reported reoccurring symptoms
associated with exercise addiction. This protocol report outlines the methods of developing and
validating an expanded version of the EAI (EAI-3) utilizing a large international sample.
Methods. The EAI-3 will be administered to over 5000 regular adult exercisers in 16 languages
through an online survey. The survey will also include questions from the Exercise Dependence
Scale-Revised, the Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised, the SCOFF questionnaire assessing
susceptibility for eating disorders, and the Ten Item Personality Inventory (TIPI). The online study
will investigate the factorial structure of the EAI-3 through exploratory and confirmatory factor
analysis. Moreover, the study will test EAI-3’s measurement invariance across languages and
gender. Finally, the study aims to find a standard cutoff point for at-risk exercisers.
Expected results. The study is expected to obtain a good fit of the EAI-3 structure and general
measurement invariance. In addition, associations are expected with another EA measure and the
other measures of mental health assessed in the study helping to establish concurrent and divergent
validity of the EAI-3. Preliminary results suggest good internal reliability for the EAI-3.
Discussion and conclusions. It is expected that the results will support an assessment tool useful in
assessing the REA with accuracy and exhibiting reliability across gender and language (culture).
Consequently, researchers will be able to assess the risk of exercise addiction more accurately.
Keywords: behavioral addictions; cultural differences; exercise dependence; measurement invariance; physical activity;
questionnaire; validity
INTRODUCTION
Background and rationale
Since its first conceptualization (Baekeland, 1970), exercise addiction (EA) has become a growing
interest among researchers, clinicians and physical health practitioners. Although not listed among
behavioral addictions in diagnostic manuals, EA represents a physical and mental health concern
among a minority of individuals. There are cases reported which show that EA can harm an
individual’s physical, mental, and social functioning (Hausenblas et al., 2017; Juwono & Szabo,
2020), and it may even occur among regular sports practitioners (Lejoyeux et al., 2008), and young
exercisers (Lichtenstein et al., 2018). Szabo (1995) suggested that EA is similar to other addictions.
It can bias cognitive appraisals of events and decision-making processes, such as the attitude to
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 3
continue practicing sport against medical advice (Granziol et al., 2021). Consequently, the need to
better conceptualize its risk assessment and diagnosis is increasing.
Several psychometric scales have been developed to screen for the risk of exercise addiction
(REA). The most widely used are the Exercise Dependence Scale-Revised (EDS-R; Hausenblas &
Symons Downs, 2002a, 2002b) and the Exercise Addiction Inventory (Terry et al., 2004). Both tools
have good psychometric properties in several languages (Griffiths et al., 2015). The original EAI
(Terry et al., 2004) has been validated in several languages, and it has been revised to obtain more
valid scores (Szabo et al., 2019; Szabo, 2021). Still, some further refinements are needed; the EAI
evaluates six components of addiction, namely salience, mood modification, tolerance, withdrawal
symptoms, conflict, and relapse (Griffiths et al., 2005). However, EA is also strongly associated with
feelings of guilt (Alcaraz-Ibañez et al., 2021), the perseverance of potentially harmful exercise
despite pain and injury (Griffiths, 1997; Granziol et al., 2021), and the negative consequences of
addiction (Aidman & Woollard, 2003; Juwono & Szabo, 2020; Sicilia et al., 2020). The last is
considered the cutoff criterion for establishing addiction (Juwono & Szabo, 2020). Therefore,
evaluating these behavioral aspects during the assessment could yield more accurate estimates of
the REA. Moreover, assuming that an expanded model is practical in assessing the REA, it is essential
to evaluate its structural invariance across gender and different languages/cultures.
Primary study aims
The present protocol describes the research plan aimed at evaluating:
a. The reliability and the factor structure of a new expanded version of the EAI named EAI-3.
b. The cross-culturally validity of and EAI-3 by testing its structural invariance across gender
different languages/cultures.
c. The general cutoff point to screen individuals at high risk of EA and to examine whether this
value is the same across gender and language.
METHODS
Participants and sample size
The present study includes experts from several international research groups working in: Brazil,
Canada, China, Croatia, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Portugal, Russia,
Serbia, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America (the involvement of
researchers from Turkey is currently under way). The EAI-3 will be validated in 16 languages. Each
country recruits approximately 400 participants, creating a total approximate sample consisting of
5,000 – 8,000 individuals aged 18 years and over. To a priori estimate the sample size we estimated
each subsample (for each statistical analysis) by using dedicated packages of the R environment (R
core team, 2020) before adding up such sub-samples (see the “Statistical analysis section”).
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 4
Participants must be aged ≥ 18 years. Aged < 18 years.
Participants must exercise at least three hours Participants exercise less than three hours per
per week. week.
Participants must exercise for a minimum total Participants exercise for less than a total of 150
of 150 minutes every week. minutes every week.
Participants must exercise for at least six Participants exercise for less than six months
months before participating in the study. before participating in the study.
Participants must be healthy (not reporting any Participants reported chronic illness.
chronic illness).
Participants answered all the questions related Participants do not answer all the questions
to exercise addiction. related to exercise addiction.
Recruitment
Participants are recruited online through calls on social media platforms (i.e., Facebook, Instagram,
and Twitter). The recruitment targets online groups where sport or exercise performance is likely to
be high. The snowball method (Kirchherr & Charles, 2018) is also used to increase the potential pool
of participants. The Qualtrics research platform2 (Qualtrics, 2021) is adopted for the study. Data
collection is anonymous. The study is expected to end in the summer of 2022, but data collection
will continue until the required sample size is obtained.
Measures
Participants will be asked to provide the following general information: gender; age; level of
education; the level of competition/participation (i.e., regional national or international); years of
practicing; hours of weekly practice; kind of sport practiced; the presence of neurological or mental
health issues diagnosed by an expert, if and how the sports routine has changed due to the
pandemic. Moreover, the following scales will be administered:
• Expanded Exercise Addiction Inventory (EAI-3): The EAI-3 items are evaluated on a 6-point Likert
scale. In addition, to the original set of items on the EAI (Terry et al., 2004), three new items are
added: “feelings of guilt,” “training in case of injury,” and “insight on negative consequences”
et al., 2021; Griffiths, 1997; Granziol et al., 2021; Juwono & Szabo, 2020).
The last three items that expand the original EAI into EAI-3 are in italics. Each item will be rated
on a 6-point agreement-disagreement scale.
EAI-3 Text
Items
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 5
Item 1 Exercise is the most important thing in my life.
Item 2 Concerns have arisen between me and my family and/or my partner about the
amount of exercise I do.
Item 3 I use exercise as a way of changing my mood (e.g., to get a buzz, to escape, etc.).
Item 4 Over time I have increased the amount of exercise I do in a day.
Item 5 If I have to miss an exercise session, I feel moody and irritable.
Item 6 If I cut down the amount of exercise I do and then start again, I always end up
exercising as often as I did before.
Item 7 I feel guilty if I miss planned training or if my training does not go as well as planned.
Item 8 I am inclined to train when (or before completely recovered from) illness or injury.
Item 9 I have had physical, psychological and/or other issues due to my exercise regime.
• Exercise Dependence Scale-Revised (EDS-R; Hausenblas & Downs, 2002a, 2002b). The EDS-
R comprises 21 questions rated on a 6-point Likert response scale. It has seven sub-scales:
withdrawal, continuance, tolerance, control loss, a decrease of other activities, time, and
effect of intention. This scale is used as a ‘gold standard’ to test the criterion validity of the
EAI-3, since many studies showed its stability in investigating REA (Di Lodovico et al., 2017;
Granziol et al., 2021).
• SCOFF (Morgan et al., 1999): The SCOFF is a dichotomous five-item scale used to screen
people for the risk of developing an eating disorder. It has the advantage of being very short
and with an explicit cutoff (total score ≥ 2, interpreted as at-risk). This measure was included
because eating disorders are often comorbid or primary to exercise addiction (Alcaraz-
Ibáñez et al., 2020; Trott et al., 2020).
• Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised (OCI-R; Abramowitz & Deacon, 2006): The OCI-R
comprises 18 items rated on a 5-point Likert scale. It assesses the tendency toward
obsessions and compulsive behaviors, and comprises six factors: washing, obsessing,
hoarding, ordering, checking, and mental neutralizing. This measure was included because
of its relationship with EA (Gulker et al., 2020).
• The Ten-Item Personality Inventory (TIPI; Gosling et al., 2003): The TIPI comprises 10 items
rated on a 7-point Likert scale. It assesses the big five personality domains: extroversion,
agreeableness, openness to experience, conscientiousness, and emotional stability. This tool
is used because personality factors have been associated with EA (Bircher et al., 2017).
Procedure
After obtaining consent, participants generate a personal alphanumeric code associated with their
responses and use it to eliminate duplicate responses. Then, they answer blocks of questions in
random order both within and between blocks. However, the first block of the online study,
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 6
containing sociodemographic questions, is not randomized. The completion of the survey takes, on
the average, 10 minutes. Too short completion times will be deleted from the data-analyses.
Statistical analysis
All the statistical analyses are based on the R environment. For each sample size estimation, an α =
.05 and a power of .80 is assumed. The SPSS software will also be used in various analyses.
Cultural adaptation
The new questions of the EAI-3 will be translated and back-translated by each collaborating group
in 15 nations. The same procedure applies to all other dependent measures that are not validated
in the participating nations.
Factor structure
After the recruitment ends, a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) will then be performed on the nine
items of the EAI-3. Both single and bifactor models will be tested. Depending on the item skewness,
the appropriate estimator will be used. In accord with the general practice, the following goodness-
of-fit statistics have been selected: Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Root Mean Square Error of
Approximation’s (RMSEA), and Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR). By considering a
model with 27 degrees of freedom, to obtain an RMSEA ≤ .04, 547 responses are needed (~37
respondents per language). To understand if the new item changes the factorial structure of the
EAI-3, an additional sample of 547 responses will be used also to perform, preliminary to CFA, an
exploratory factor analysis. In case more than one factor will emerge, the models will be compared
in terms of fit to data.
Cross-cultural validation
To cross-culturally validate the model, measurement invariance will be tested on the EAI-3 items’
score, which will show whether participants' responses change as a function of their gender and
language (i.e., 2 X 15 = 30 groups). Configural, metric, and scalar invariances will be focused upon.
Whenever measurement non-invariance is found, partial invariance will also be tested.
Approximately 1500 responses will be necessary (~50 respondents per language) to examine
invariance. Samples size for factor structure and measurement invariance will be estimated with the
semPower package (Moshagen & Erdfelder, 2016).
Reliability and cutoff
The reliability will be tested using the Cronbach Alpha (applying ordinal items’ adjustments, if
necessary) and McDonald’s Omega (McDonal, 1999). Composite reliability ( Netemeyer et al., 2003)
will also be tested. Both the specificity and sensitivity of EAI-R will be tested through the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Finally, the study will use the score obtained at EDS-R as an
external criterion for determining the optimal EAI-3 cutoff. Considering that the prevalence of the
REA in previous studies using EAI with regular exercisers is approximately 3.4% (Marques et al.,
2019), and setting an area under the curve equal to .80, the minimum sample size for each
language/culture would be 147 respondents. This size was estimated using the easyROC shiny app
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 7
(Goksuluk et al., 2016). Therefore, a total subsample of 2205 respondents is needed to estimate the
optimal cutoff. It will be used also to estimate the reliability coefficients.
Concurrent and convergent validity
The study will test the correlations between the EAI-3 and EDS-R OCI-R, SCOFF, and TIPI scores using
the Spearman correlation coefficient (unless the obtained data will be normally distributed). To
obtain a correlation coefficient of at least .50, the study estimated 435 respondents (29 respondents
per language or culture) through the pwr package (Champely, 2020). Therefore, the required
subsample is 1740 respondents (i.e., 435 X 4). Apart from EAI-3 validation, several other hypotheses
Research Question Type of Hypothesis
study
Are the team and competitive exercises more CS Individual exercisers will exhibit more
closely connected to EA-linked eating disorder eating disorders in the context of the
symptoms than individual and non-competitive REA
exercisers?
Is there a cross-cultural difference in EA, its CS Cultural differences will exist in the type
prevalence, and related dysfunctions based on and strength of the relationships.
SCOFF and OCI-R?
Is there a difference in EA and associated CS Differences related to personality will
personality measures in different sports and be expected based on past research
exercises (for example, team/individual, (i.e., team sports athletes are more
competitive /non-competitive)? extroverted)
Are eating disorders, obsessive-compulsive CS Cross-cultural differences will exist in
symptomatology, and personality traits similarly the relationship between EA and the
associated with EA across cultures? other dependent measures.
Which kind of personality structure is more prone CS High traits of openness to experience
to EA? Is the finding consistent across the nations? and low emotional stability will be
related to REA.
Did the pandemic reduce the amount of sport in a CS A significant reduction will be expected
different way between at-risk and non-at-risk of in the high REA groups only.
EA?
Is the EA independent of the reason for exercise CS Health-oriented exercisers will exhibit
(i.e., health skill, social), and do the findings agree higher EA across the 15 nations.
in 15 nations?
Which is the most central component of EA? Network Salience could be the most central
study component.
The relationship among EA, Eating disorders, and Network Yes, with a central role of EA.
OCD. Can it be modeled as a network? study
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 8
Is the EAI-3 valid and invariant in team/individual CS The structure of EAI-3 will be invariant
sports and competing/non-competing exercisers? across the type of sport (team vs.
individual) or exercisers competing and
competing.
Is EAI-3 cutoff the same across the form of exercise CS The cutoff will be the same.
(team/individual) and level of exercise
involvement (competitive/non-competitive)?
CS: Cross-sectional; EA: Exercise addiction; EAI: Exercise Addiction Inventory
Ethics
The procedure described in this study protocol will be carried out in accord with the Declaration of
Helsinki. Participants have to provide their informed consent for participation. An umbrella protocol
obtained formal authorization by one of the European Institutional Review Board (IRB). Co-authors
outside the EU ask for approval from their IRB. Participants will not be paid for their participation.
RESULTS
Expected outcomes
A single-factor structure of the EAI-3 is expected. In terms of cross-cultural validity, it is expected
that the structure will obtain a good to excellent fit for each translated version and overall
measurement invariance. Good reliability (e.g., α ≥ .75) is expected as well as a cutoff reflecting an
adequate sensitivity-specificity balance. Finally, meaningful and positive correlations are expected
2021)
Measures Data
Number of responses on December 25, 2021 736
Gender distribution Male: 386; Female: 349; Other: 1
Mean (M) age ± standard deviation (SD), range M = 36.6 (SD = 14.1), range 18 – 75 years
Weekly frequency of exercise M = 4.4, SD = 1.8, range 3 – 15 occasions
Duration of an average exercise session M = 81.1, SD = 35.5, range 10 – 400 minutes
Exercise history (years) M = 18.0, SD = 12.8, range .83 – 60 years
Reason for exercise Health = 503; Skill = 155; Social = 50; Miss. = 28
Form of exercise: competitive/non-competitive Competitive = 420 ; Non-competitive = 316
Form of exercise: aerobic, anaerobic, both aerobic = 168; anaerobic = 38; both = 510
Form of exercise: individual, team, both individual = 435; team = 140; both = 161
Form of exercise: organized, self-scheduled organized = 304; self-scheduled = 432
Most responses to date (country) Italy = 380; Spain = 109; Germany = 77; United
Kingdom = 48; Hungary = 38
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 9
Reliability of the 9-item EAI-3 (Cronbach’s α) .81
Reliability of the original 6-item EAI .74
Measures Data
Number of responses on December 25, 2021 1203
Gender distribution Male: 593; Female: 607; Other: 3
Weekly exercise frequency M = 4.49 (SD = 2.13)
Exercise history (years) M = 15.37 (SD = 12.48)
Main reason for exercise Health = 787, Skill = 290, Social = 78
Form of exercise Aerobic = 266, Anaerobic = 92, Mixed = 835
Competition status None = 332, Amateur = 583, Athlete = 277
Competition level Regional = 365, National = 227, Int’l = 101
Known illness Yes = 188, No = 1005
Organized exercise/sport Yes = 468, Self-organized = 722
Mean (M) age ± standard deviation (SD), range M = 33.75 (SD = 14.31), range 18 – 99 years
Prevalence of EA risk based on EAI original 7.97%
Prevalence of EA risk based on EAI-3 top 20% 5.6% (this value will be different once a cut-off
scores (tentative scoring based on original EAI) point is calculated for the new EAI-3
Sex differences (male, female) in EAI and EAI-3 None (F(1, 1138) = .18 and .02; NS)
EA differences based on competition status None (F(2, 661) = 1.57 and 1.69; NS)
Correlation between exercise history and EA EAI r = .052, NS; EAI-3 = .101, p < .001
Correlation between weekly exercise and EA EAI r = .152, p < .001; EAI-3 = .177, p < .001
Reliability of the original 6-item EAI .73
Reliability of the 9-item EAI-3 (Cronbach’s α) .80
Preliminary Principal Components Analysis (PCA)
A preliminary scan-PCA supported the unidimensional (one component) nature of the nine EAI-3
items (KMO = .856, χ = 1615. 01, p <.001), accounting for 40% of the variance. The scree plot also
(36)
confirmed the one-factor solution.
Data reporting and dissemination
This study protocol will be followed until the necessary sample size is obtained. Several publications
exhaustive because numerous mediatory roles, such as age and gender, and the volume of exercise
could be examined if the primary analyses warrant it. Publications will be aimed at sports science
and psychology journals.
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 10
DISCUSSION
The increase of EA observed in different countries and studies (Juwono and Szabo, 2020, Marques
et al., 2019) suggests that EA may be a clinical condition with an occurrence higher than expected
that must be assessed in a cross-cultural perspective. Furthermore, more reliable research is needed
for establishing its clinical diagnosis criteria. The present study protocol tries to reach this goal by
describing the details to perform a cross-cultural validation of the EAI-3. In addition, the current
protocol is presented as a preprint to share with the scientific community the ongoing work of an
international team consisting of nearly 30 scholars. Finally, there is a desire to illustrate how the
study could simultaneously address several independent hypotheses, the results of which will be
Challenges and limitations
The study accounts for some challenges that could become severe limitations. For example, Juwono
and Szabo (2020) suggested that EA appears to be more frequent among female exercisers due to
their higher propensity and willingness to speak about the problem. Another issue could be the
participant recruitment. Nowadays, there are too many competing online studies. Furthermore, the
self-report responses will make it difficult to distinguish whether negative consequences resulting
from high levels of EA are representative of maladaptive unintentional behavior or (in elite athletes)
deliberate athletic training. Finally, cause-and-effect relationships cannot be determined in any of
the hypothesis tests performed in the present study.
Impact
The study will try to generate a standard assessment model and a more sensitive tool through a new
brief instrument that could be used independently of language, culture, and gender in exercisers
aged 18 years or older. Hopefully, the results will yield a psychometric instrument that could, in
future studies, differentiate the REA in the context of various exercise characteristics, such as
team/individual sports, organized/self-scheduled sports, and competitive/non-competitive sports.
Moreover, the EAI-3 will also consider symptoms related to EA but ignored in many studies to date.
These symptoms include the sense of guilt, training when injured, and the perception of negative
consequences of exercisers’ training regimen.
Granziol et al. (February 2022) - Page 11