RUNNING HEAD: Voluntary Choice and Choice-outcome Causation
Belief in Control: Voluntary Choice Enhances Subsequent Task Performance
under Undefeated Choice-Outcome Causation
a, b, 1, * c, d, e, 1 a, b, f, *
Xiaoxiao Luo , Lihui Wang , Xiaolin Zhou
a Shanghai Key Laboratory of Mental Health and Psychological Crisis Intervention, School of
Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
b Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, School of Psychological and Cognitive
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
c Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China
d Institute of Psychology and Behavioral Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
e Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, China
f PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Peking University, Beijing, China
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
* Corresponding author at:
School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University, 3663 N. Zhongshan Rd.,
Shanghai 200062, China. Email: xxluo@psy.ecnu.edu.cn (X. Luo).
School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University, No.5 Yiheyuan Road, Haidian
District, Beijing 100871, China. Email: xz104@pku.edu.cn (X. Zhou).
Abstract
Humans have volition through which they act upon and change the external environment. As
an exercise of volition, making a voluntary choice facilitates subsequent behavioral
performance relative to making a forced choice. However, it is unclear how this facilitation is
constrained by the perceived relationship between a choice and its outcome. In a series of
experiments, participants were free or forced to choose one of two presented pictures. The
outcome of the choice was then revealed, which could be: always the chosen picture or
always the unchosen picture (i.e., confirmed choice-outcome causation), a blank screen with
no picture at all (i.e., unrevealed choice-outcome relation), the chosen or unchosen picture
with equal probability (i.e., defeated choice-outcome causation), or a third picture different
from the two preceding options (again, defeated choice-outcome causation). Participants then
complete a visual search task with the task-irrelevant picture (or the blank screen) serving as a
background. Results showed that search performance was improved after a voluntary choice
under both confirmed causation and unrevealed relation, but not under defeated causation.
Over individuals, the improved performance due to voluntary choice under confirmed
causation positively correlated with the improved performance under unrevealed relation, and
with reported belief in controlling the outcome of the choice. Our findings suggest that the
exercise of volition motivates subsequent behavior, and this motivation is restricted to
“undefeated” choice-outcome causation which affords a belief in controlling the outcome by
exerting volition.
Keywords
voluntary choice; volition; choice-outcome relation; control belief; visual search
1. Introduction
Every day we make choices, ranging from choosing which shirt to wear to choosing
which public policy to vote for. It is believed that choice is a psychological and biological
necessity (Leotti, Iyengar, & Ochsner, 2010) and that even not choosing is still a choice. A
voluntary choice can express human volition. By making voluntary choices (i.e., freely
choosing an option among alternatives) versus forced choices (i.e., being forced to choose a
predefined option), we exercise control over the environment and gain a sense of agency and
self-efficacy (Bandura & Wood, 1989; Haggard, 2017, 2019).
1.1. Making voluntary choices facilitates subsequent task performance
In a choice-task paradigm where participants are asked to make a choice before
completing a task, it has been shown that relative to making a forced choice, making a
voluntary choice improves subsequent performance in a broad range of tasks (e.g.,
Lewthwaite, Chiviacowsky, Drews, & Wulf, 2015; Murayama, Matsumoto, Izuma, Sugiura,
Ryan, & Deci et al., 2015; Murty, DuBrow, & Davachi, 2015; Patall, Cooper, & Robinson,
2008; Sanli, Patterson, Bray, & Lee, 2013). For example, students performed better on
classroom tests when they could freely choose one of different homework before the test
compared to when they had no choice (Patall, Cooper, & Wynn, 2010); in motor learning
tasks, learners who could freely choose a practice context (e.g., the number of practice
repetitions, the repetition order during multi-task learning, etc.) learned faster than learners
whose practice context was predefined (Sanli et al., 2013)
Moreover, the improved performance after a voluntary choice was observed even when
making a choice “irrelevant” to the subsequent task (Lewthwaite et al., 2015; Murayama et
al., 2015; Murty et al., 2015). For example, in a golf putting task, participants who could
freely choose the color of golf balls performed better than those who were forced to choose
the predefined color (Lewthwaite et al., 2015); in a time estimation task, participants
performed better when they could freely choose the appearance of the stopwatch used in the
task compared to when they were forced to choose the predefined appearance (Murayama et
al., 2015).
1.2. The explanation of the facilitatory effect of making voluntary choices
Despite the evidence for a facilitatory effect, it is yet unclear why a voluntary choice can
facilitate subsequent task performance. A frequently discussed account is that making a
voluntary choice is valuable and rewarding, which satisfies the need for control or autonomy,
and hence, enhances motivation in the subsequent task (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Leotti et al.,
2010; Leotti & Delgado, 2011, 2014; Murayama, Izuma, Aoki, & Matsumoto, 2016; Patall,
2019; Reber, Canning, & Harackiewicz, 2018). Considering the fact that even making a task-
irrelevant voluntary choice could facilitate subsequent task performance (Lewthwaite et al.,
2015; Murayama et al., 2015; Murty et al., 2015), we may come to the notion that the
opportunity or the mere action of choosing voluntarily is sufficient to motivate subsequent
behavior (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Reber et al., 2018).
This notion emphasizes the act of making a voluntary choice, but little attention is paid
to the role of the outcome of the choice, which is at odds with real-world situations where
most actions are undertaken to achieve specific outcomes. One of the core features of human
volition is teleology – a voluntary action is made for the reason of achieving or advancing a
goal state through that action (Haggard, 2019). It has been shown that the selection of a
voluntary action depends critically on the associations between the action and the outcome
(Chambon, Théro, Vidal, Vandendriessche, Haggard, & Palminteri, 2020; Elsner & Hommel,
2004; Soon, Brass, Heinze, & Haynes, 2008). Humans are inclined to build up a causal
relation between a voluntary action and the appearance of a certain outcome following that
action (Desantis, Roussel, & Waszak, 2011; Dogge, Schaap, Custers, Wegner, & Aarts, 2012;
Moore & Haggard, 2008). A strong belief in this causal relation results in a strong
engagement of behavioral efforts (Bandura & Wood, 1989), and undermining this belief
attenuates the motivation to act (Huys & Dayan, 2009; Rigoni, Kühn, Sartori, & Brass, 2011).
Similarly, individuals’ motivation to perform can be enhanced when actions have even trivial
and constant perceptual effects (Eitam, Kennedy, & Higgins, 2013; Karsh, Eitam, Mark, &
Higgins, 2016; Karsh & Eitam, 2015). It is possible that whether a voluntary choice motivates
subsequent behaviors depends crucially on the extent to which the outcome of the choice is
believed to be controlled by the choice, rather than the mere act of choosing.
In previous studies which showed that voluntary choices facilitated subsequent
behaviors, the outcome of the choice always turned out to be the chosen option. For instance,
choosing a homework option in the classroom was followed by doing the chosen homework
after school (Patall et al., 2010); choosing the color of a golf ball was followed by the
inclusion of the golf ball with the chosen color in the subsequent putting task (Lewthwaite et
al., 2015). Given the constant linkage between the choice and its outcome, a causal relation
could be built up in the way that the choice causes the outcome to appear despite the fact that
the relation between the choice and its outcome can be manipulated. By manipulating this
choice-outcome relation, here we investigate how the facilitatory effect of voluntary choice
could be constrained; and the extent to which these constraints can help facilitate the effect of
voluntary choice, revealing the mechanism underlying the facilitatory effect.
1.3. The present study
In this study, we investigate how performance in a simple cognitive task, namely visual
search (Theeuwes, 1991; Wolfe, 1994), is affected by a preceding voluntary (vs. forced)
action of choosing between two alternative pictures which could serve as a task-irrelevant
background picture in the search task. Crucially, the relation between the act of making a
choice (i.e., choosing a picture) and its outcome (i.e., the display of a picture after the choice)
phases: cue phase, choice phase, and task phase. In the cue phase, a colored dot was presented
to signal the choice type in the current trial. In the choice phase of the voluntary and forced
choice conditions, two pictures were presented and participants were free (voluntary choice)
or forced (forced choice) to choose one via a button press. Note that the screen lasting for
T in the forced choice condition was to balance exposure time between conditions (for
interval
details see Pilot Experiment in Supplementary Materials). Specifically, in Experiment 4, an
additional “no choice” condition was included, in which only one picture was presented and
participants were asked to indicate the location (left vs. right) of the picture. Then in the task
phase, participants were asked to complete a visual search task in which the search target was
a unique shape among distractors. Crucially, there was a task-irrelevant background for the
visual search task, which could be: (A) always the chosen picture (i.e., confirmed choice-
outcome causation) in Experiments 1A and 4, (B) always a blank screen where no picture was
presented at all (i.e., unrevealed choice-outcome relation) in Experiment 1B, (C) either the
chosen or the unchosen picture with equal probability (i.e., defeated choice-outcome
causation) in Experiment 1C, (D) always a fixed picture that had never been presented as an
option in the choice phase (i.e., again defeated choice-outcome causation, but the outcome of
choice was predictable) in Experiment 3, and (E) always the unchosen picture (i.e., confirmed
choice-outcome causation, although the previous choice was unfulfilled) in Experiment 5.
Experiment 2 included (A), (B), and (C) in a within-subject design. There were blank screens
causal relation between the choice and its outcome was confirmed by the presentation of the
chosen picture as the background in Experiment 1A (i.e., confirmed choice-outcome
causation where the background could be controlled by the preceding choice), or defeated by
the presentation of either the chosen or unchosen picture with equal probability in Experiment
1C (i.e., defeated choice-outcome causation where the background could not be controlled by
the preceding choice). In Experiment 1B, no picture was presented after choices, and hence
the causal relation was neither confirmed nor defeated, namely unrevealed choice-outcome
relation. It appears that this “unrevealed relation” is similar to “defeated causation”, since “no
outcome after choices” is seemingly equivalent to “the outcome cannot be controlled by the
choice”. However, there is evidence that making a voluntary action and anticipating a
possible outcome is sufficient for the sense of agency, whereas the actual presentation of the
outcome is not necessary (Moore, Lagnado, Deal, & Haggard, 2009; Moore & Haggard,
2008). Thus, it is possible that individuals would (implicitly) anticipate the outcome of a
voluntary choice before an outcome was actually revealed, and still hold the (implicit) belief
that the outcome could be controlled by the choice.
Therefore, both confirmed causation and unrevealed relation may afford a belief in
controlling the outcome by making a voluntary choice, whereas defeated causation may
weaken or eliminate this belief. That is, this belief in control might be held as long as choice-
outcome causation is “undefeated”. Here the term “undefeated choice-outcome causation”,
referring to the opposite of “defeated choice-outcome causation”, covers confirmed causation
and unrevealed relation in the present study. We predicted that visual search performance
would be enhanced after making a voluntary (vs. forced) choice under undefeated causation
(e.g., confirmed causation and unrevealed relation), but not under defeated causation.
While the three different choice-outcome relations in Experiment 1 were conducted on
different groups of individuals, Experiment 2 tested the reliability of the results with a within-
subject design. Moreover, if there is a similar component (e.g., belief in control) underlying
“undefeated” choice-outcome causation, the effect of voluntary choice under confirmed
causation would correlate with the effect under unrevealed relation. The within-subject design
allowed us to test this correlation.
effect of voluntary choice was due to the high predictability of the outcome of the choice,
rather than choice-outcome causation. To test this account, we fixed the outcome of the
choice by always presenting one constant picture as the background such that the outcome
(i.e., the background picture) was fully predictable but unrelated to the choice (i.e., could not
be controlled by the preceding choice, forming defeated choice-outcome causation). We
predicted that the facilitatory effect of voluntary choice would still be observed if this effect
could be explained by the predictability account.
In Experiment 4, we added a baseline (no choice) condition in which participants
search. This localization task did not involve any explicit choice-making but just a button
press. The baseline condition would allow us to adjudicate whether a voluntary choice
improves (i.e., motivates) or a forced choice impairs (i.e., demotivates) subsequent task
performance.
leading to an undesired situation where the actual choice was unfulfilled. However,
participants could mitigate this situation and maintain choice-outcome causation by choosing
the unwanted option. This arrangement would discriminate whether the facilitatory effect of
voluntary choice was more due to the fulfilled voluntary choice or the controllable outcome
by making a voluntary choice. We predicted that the facilitated performance would still be
observed because choice-outcome causation still held. To provide collaborative evidence, we
also collected post-experiment data concerning participants’ subjective feelings (e.g., control
belief) under the voluntary and forced choice conditions to evaluate if the observed
facilitatory effect correlated with these characteristics.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants
Seventy-two university students participated in Experiment 1 (42 females, 18-28 years
old, M = 21.1, SD = 2.4). They were randomly divided into three groups of the same size (n =
24), with one group assigned to Experiment 1A (14 females, 18-26 years old, M = 21.1, SD =
2.4), another group to Experiment 1B (13 females, 18-28 years old, M = 21.5, SD = 2.7), and
the third group to Experiment 1C (15 females, 18-28 years old, M = 20.6, SD = 2.6). The
sample size (n = 24) in each experiment was determined by a prior power analysis for paired
t-test (two-tailed, α = 0.05, power = 80%, and d = 0.61) using G*Power 3.1 (Faul, Erdfelder,
Lang, & Buchner, 2007). The effect size (d = 0.61) was obtained from a pilot experiment (see
Pilot Experiment in Supplementary Materials). Another group of 27 university students
participated in Experiment 2 (19 females, 18-25 years old, M = 20.9, SD = 1.9). We recruited
more participants for this experiment out of fear that some participants would withdraw from
the study due to longer testing time. A new group of 24 university students took part in
Experiment 3, one participant was excluded from data analysis due to low accuracy (< 3SD
below the group mean), thus, 23 participants (11 females, 18-26 years old, M = 21.9, SD =
2.4) were included. A new group of 24 university students took part in Experiment 4 (18
females, 18-28 years old, M = 21.5, SD = 3.0). At last, a new group of 36 university students
took part in Experiment 5 (20 females, 18-26 years old, M = 20.7, SD = 2.3). We recruited
more participants for Experiment 5 because we planned to conduct correlation analyses and
more participants would be desirable.
All participants were right-handed and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and
normal color vision. None of them reported a history of neurological or psychiatric disorders.
This study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved
by the Committee on Human Research Protection, East China Normal University, and by the
Committee for Protecting Human and Animal Subjects, School of Psychological and
Cognitive Sciences, Peking University. Informed consent was obtained from each of the
participants before the experiment. All participants received monetary compensation for
taking part in the experiment.
2.2. Stimuli and procedure
Participants were seated 70 cm away from a monitor (44 × 33 cm, refresh rate: 100 Hz,
resolution: 1024 × 768 pixels) connected to a PC with their head positioned on a chin-rest in a
dimly-lighted and sound-attenuated room. Experiments were run with Psychophysics Toolbox
1), which will be described later.
2.2.1. Experiment 1: Confirmed (1A), unrevealed (1B), and defeated (1C) choice-outcome
causation
Each trial consisted of three successive phases: cue phase, choice phase, and task phase.
In the cue phase, a small white dot (0.7°×0.7°) was presented on the black screen as the
central fixation for 0.8–1.2 s. Then a central dot (1.6°×1.6°) either in cyan or yellow was
presented for 1 s to indicate whether the upcoming choice was voluntary or forced. The
association between different colors (cyan or yellow) and different types of choice (voluntary
or forced) was counterbalanced across participants.
In the choice phase, after the central fixation presented for 0.5–0.8 s, a pair of two
pictures (each 5.3°×5.3°) was presented 4.9° left and right to the center of the screen, waiting
for a button press of choosing. In the voluntary choice condition, participants could freely
choose a picture by pressing “D” (left picture) or “F” (right picture) using the middle or index
finger on the left hand. The chosen picture was then marked with a grey frame after the button
press. In the forced choice condition, however, one of the two pictures was randomly selected
and marked with a grey frame, and participants had to choose the marked picture via a button
press. Note that the two pictures would be first presented for a pre-defined varying time
interval (T ) until one of the two pictures was marked by the frame. This was to balance
interval
the exposure times to the picture options between the voluntary and forced choice conditions
(for details see Pilot Experiment in Supplementary Materials). After the button press, the two
pictures were presented together with the grey frame for another 1 s in both conditions.
The cue phase and the choice phase were kept the same for Experiment 1A, 1B, and 1C.
These three experiments differed only in the task phase. For Experiment 1A, after the central
fixation lasted for 0.5–0.8 s, the chosen picture (11.4°×11.4°) was presented at the center of
the screen for 1 s. For Experiment 1B, no picture was presented, and the central fixation was
presented for 1 s. For Experiment 1C, either the chosen or unchosen picture was presented
with equal probability (i.e., 50%) for 1 s after the 0.5–0.8 s central fixation (these settings
were explicitly told to participants). Then a visual search array consisting of six grey items
(one diamond among five circles or one circle among five diamonds, each 2.5°×2.5°) was
presented equidistantly along an imaginary circle (4.9° radius). A white line segment (length
1.6°, either horizontal or vertical) was presented inside of each item. This search array was
presented on the top of the background picture (or the blank screen) and remained on the
screen for 1.5 s until a button press was given. Participants were asked to find the unique
shape and indicate the orientation of the line segment inside that shape by pressing “J” or “K”
using the index or middle finger on the right hand. The mapping between the keys (“J” or
“K”) and the two orientations (horizontal or vertical) was counterbalanced across participants.
Participants were informed to respond within the 1.5 s as quickly and accurately as possible.
Feedback, “Too slow!”, was presented for 0.5 s if no response was given within the 1.5 s.
In each experiment in Experiment 1, there were 120 trials for each of the two choice
conditions (voluntary vs. forced), resulting in 240 trials in total, which were intermixed and
divided into 5 blocks (48 trials each). The two conditions were distributed with equal
probability in each block. Before the formal experiment, participants were provided with 48
practice trials which only included the task phase where no background picture was presented.
Participants were required to repeat the practice trials if the accuracy was below 75%. Then
participants were provided with 10 example trials with all three phases.
A total of 250 pictures of outdoor houses or indoor furnishings in black and white were
used as the choice options, with 240 pictures for the formal experiment and 10 pictures for the
example trials. For each participant, the 240 pictures were randomly divided into 120 pairs
without repetition. The same 120 pairs were presented as options in the choice phase of both
conditions, with each pair appearing only once in each condition.
2.2.2. Experiment 2: Confirmed, unrevealed, and defeated choice-outcome causation in a
within-subject design
The stimuli and procedure of Experiment 2 were the same as Experiment 1, except that
Experiment 2 had a within-subject design. All participants in Experiment 2 completed the
three experiments in Experiment 1 on three separate days. The order of the three experiments
was counterbalanced across participants.
2.2.3. Experiment 3: Defeated choice-outcome causation with a predictable outcome
The stimuli and procedure of Experiment 3 were the same as Experiment 1A, except that
the background in the task phase during the whole experiment was always the same picture
that had never been presented in the choice phase.
2.2.4. Experiment 4: Confirmed choice-outcome causation with a baseline condition
The stimuli and procedure of Experiment 4 were the same as Experiment 1A with the
following exceptions. We added a third condition (i.e., no choice condition) to the voluntary
and the forced choice conditions. Specifically, in this condition, a dot in a color different from
the other two conditions (e.g., pink) was presented to indicate the no choice condition in the
upcoming trial (the mapping between the three colors and the three choice conditions were
counterbalanced across participants). In the choice phase of the no choice condition, only one
picture with a marked frame was presented left or right to the center of the screen, and
participants were asked to indicate the location of the picture by pressing “D” (if the picture
was on the left) or “F” (if the picture was on the right). The task phase was the same as the
voluntary and forced choice conditions. There were 96 trials for each of the three conditions
(288 trials in total), which were intermixed and divided into 8 blocks (36 trials each). There
were 192 pictures (i.e., 96 pairs) in Experiment 4. All the pictures shown in the no choice
condition were the same as the chosen pictures in the forced choice condition.
2.2.5. Experiment 5: Confirmed choice-outcome causation with unfulfilled choices
The stimuli and procedure of Experiment 5 were the same as Experiment 1A, except that
the background picture in the task phase was the unchosen picture. Moreover, after finishing
the computer task, participants were asked to complete a series of subjective rating questions
(7-points Likert), including (1) Control belief: “To what extent do you feel that the
background of the search task could be controlled by yourself when you/the computer chose a
picture?”. (2) Happiness: “How happy do you feel in the search task when you/the computer
chose a picture?”. (3) Preference: “How much do you like the search task when you/the
computer chose a picture?”. (4) Difficulty: “How difficult do you feel the search task is when
you/the computer chose a picture?”.
2.3. Statistical Analyses
For each participant in each experiment, omissions (i.e., no response was given within
1.5 s after the onset of the search array, which was regarded as “incorrect”), trials with
incorrect response in the visual search task, and trials with RTs (including RTs of visual
search in the task phase and RTs of choice in the choice phase) below 100 ms or beyond 3SD
above or below the mean RT in each condition were excluded from RT analysis. The mean
RT was then calculated based on the remaining trials for the visual search task in each
condition. Accuracy was calculated as the proportion of correct trials in all trials. Statistical
analysis was performed on both RTs and the accuracies of the visual search task. In the case
where a null hypothesis was accepted under a non-significant effect of the t-test, we
calculated the Bayesian Factor, BF (Wagenmakers, Marsman, Jamil, Ly, Verhagen, & Love
et al., 2018), using JASP (Wagenmakers, Love, Marsman, Jamil, Ly, & Verhagen et al., 2018)
to quantify the extent to which the null hypothesis was supported.
3. Results
accuracy in visual search, which showed no effect of experimental manipulation, are shown in
search, with standard deviations in parentheses
RTs in visual search (ms)
Choice-
Background of
Experiment outcome
Voluntary choice Forced choice No choice Facilitatory effect
visual search
relation
condition condition condition of voluntary choice
Experiment 1A Chosen picture Confirmed 880 (81) 903 (83) / 23 (20)***
Experiment 1B None Unrevealed 869 (104) 893 (100) / 24 (20)***
Experiment 1C Either chosen or Defeated 907 (88) 906 (91) / -1 (24)
unchosen picture
Experiment 2 1. Chosen picture Confirmed 809 (89) 815 (83) / 6 (15)*
2. None Unrevealed 805 (105) 819 (105) / 14 (21)**
3. Either chosen or Defeated 831 (90) 832 (90) / 1 (24)
unchosen picture
Experiment 3 A fixed picture Defeated 887 (105) 893 (105) / 6 (25)
different from
options
Experiment 4 Chosen picture Confirmed 862 (98) 876 (96) 879 (99) 14 (25)*
Experiment 5 Unchosen picture Confirmed 868 (113) 879 (114) / 11 (25)*
Note: The facilitatory effect of voluntary choice was calculated by subtracting the RT in the voluntary
choice condition from the RT in the forced choice condition. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001.
3.1. Experiment 1: Confirmed (1A), unrevealed (1B), and defeated (1C) choice-
outcome causation
In Experiment 1A where the background of the visual search task was always the chosen
1), t (23) = 5.69, p < .001, d = 1.16, demonstrating improved performance after a voluntary
choice when choice-outcome causation is confirmed. Moreover, we provided the same pairs
of pictures in the two conditions and sorted trials according to whether the chosen pictures
proportions). The 2 (Choice Type: voluntary vs. forced) × 2 (Chosen Picture: same vs.
different) repeated-measures ANOVA on RTs of the search task showed that neither the main
effect of Chosen Picture, F (1, 23) = 1.50, p = .233, η = .06, nor the interaction, F (1, 23) =
0.33, p = .574, η = .01, reached significance, that is, the improved performance after a
voluntary choice was observed regardless of whether the chosen pictures in the voluntary
choice condition was the same as or different from the chosen pictures in the forced choice
difference in background pictures between the two conditions.
function of Choice Type and Chosen Picture in Experiment 1A. The improved search
performance in the voluntary choice condition was observed regardless of whether the chosen
pictures in the voluntary choice condition were the same as or different from the chosen
pictures in the forced choice condition. (B) The RT of visual search as a function of Choice
Type and Chosen Picture in Experiment 1B. The same pattern as Experiment 1A was
observed in Experiment 1B. (C) The RT of visual search as a function of Choice Type and
Background Picture in Experiment 1C. The search performance did not differ between the
voluntary and forced choice conditions regardless of whether the background of the visual
search was the chosen or unchosen picture. (D) The RT differences between the voluntary
choice condition and the forced choice condition in Experiment 1A (confirmed causation), 1B
(unrevealed relation), and 1C (defeated causation). **p < .01, ***p < .001. These raincloud
plots combine the illustration of individual data, boxplot, mean with SEM, and data
In Experiment 1B where no picture was presented as the search background (i.e., no
suggesting improved performance after a voluntary choice even when the choice-outcome
relation was unrevealed. As in Experiment 1A, the improved search performance after a
voluntary choice could not be due to the difference in chosen pictures between conditions
the interaction, F (1, 23) = 1.04, p = .318, η = .04, reached significance).
In Experiment 1C where the background picture could be either the chosen or unchosen
0.09, p = .930. This null effect was confirmed by the BF = 4.64, suggesting that the null
hypothesis was 4.64 times more likely to be true than the alternative hypothesis. Moreover, to
examine if the improved search performance occurred only when the chosen picture was
presented as the background, a 2 (Choice Type: voluntary vs. forced) × 2 (Background
Picture: chosen vs. unchosen) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the RTs, which
showed that neither the main effect of the Background Picture, F (1, 23) = 1.67, p = .209, η
= .07, nor the interaction, F (1, 23) = 0.12, p = .736, η = .01, reached significance, that is,
the lack of improved performance was robust, regardless of whether the displayed
when the outcome turned out to be unrelated to the choice (i.e., choice-outcome causation is
defeated), making a voluntary choice has no impact on the following performance compared
to making a forced choice.
It is clear from the above results that whether a voluntary choice facilitates subsequent
performance depends crucially on the choice-outcome relation. To further verify this pattern,
we compared the RT difference between the voluntary and forced choice conditions across
10.12, p < .001, η = .28. Further pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction showed
that the facilitatory effects of voluntary choice under confirmed causation (Experiment 1A)
and unrevealed relation (Experiment 1B) were larger than the effect under defeated causation
(Experiment 1C), all ps < .001, whereas there was no difference between the former two
experiments, p > .999. Thus, Experiment 1 suggested that making a voluntary choice may
improve performance as long as choice-outcome causation is “undefeated”.
3.2. Experiment 2: Confirmed, unrevealed, and defeated choice-outcome causation in a
within-subject design
In Experiment 2 where we aimed to replicate Experiment 1 with a within-subject design,
the 2 (Choice Type: voluntary vs. forced) × 3 (Choice-outcome Relation: confirmed,
unrevealed vs. defeated) repeated-measures ANOVA showed a main effect of Choice Type, F
(1, 26) = 7.20, p = .013, η = .22, with RTs of visual search being generally faster for the
voluntary choice condition than for the forced choice condition. The main effect of Choice-
outcome Relation was not significant, F (2, 52) = 0.89, p = .419, η = .03. Importantly, there
test on simple effects showed that participants responded faster after a voluntary choice than
after a forced choice under confirmed causation, t (26) = 2.13, p = .043, d = 0.41, and
unrevealed relation, t (26) = 3.31, p = .003, d = 0.64, but not under defeated causation, t (26)
= 0.26, p = .795, d = 0.05. The later null effect was also confirmed by the BF = 4.75. Thus,
of Choice Type and Choice-outcome Relation. (B) The RT difference between the voluntary
and forced choice conditions under confirmed causation positively correlated with the RT
difference under unrevealed relation. *p < .05, **p < .01, n.s., p > .05. This raincloud plot
combines the illustration of individual data, boxplot, mean with SEM, and data distribution
A further analysis was conducted to examine the extent to which the facilitatory effect of
voluntary choice under confirmed causation correlated, over individuals, with the effect under
voluntary choice under these two different choice-outcome relations might share a common
component, which affords a belief in controlling the outcome by making voluntary choices.
In addition, to exclude the possible influence of differences in chosen pictures between
conditions, we also conducted control analyses similar to those in Experiment 1 for
Experiments 2 – 5 (see Additional Control Analyses in Supplementary Materials).
3.3. Experiment 3: Defeated choice-outcome causation with a predictable outcome
In Experiment 3 where the background picture was a constant picture different from the
options (i.e., a predictable but uncontrollable outcome, choice-outcome causation was again
the predictability account (see also Buehner & Humphreys, 2009).
3.4. Experiment 4: Confirmed choice-outcome causation with a baseline condition
In Experiment 4 where a no choice condition was added to serve as a baseline condition
choice, forced choice, vs. no choice) showed a significant main effect, F (2, 46) = 6.47, p
= .003, η = .22. Further pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction showed that
participants responded faster in the voluntary choice condition than in the forced choice
did not differ between the forced and no choice conditions, p > .999. Therefore, the observed
facilitatory effects of voluntary choice cannot be explained by demotivated performance after
a forced choice but by motivated performance after a voluntary choice.
3.5. Experiment 5: Confirmed choice-outcome causation with unfulfilled choices
In Experiment 5 where the background picture was always the unchosen picture (i.e., the
we again found that participants responded faster in the search task after a voluntary choice
choice condition, participants reported stronger belief in controlling the outcome of choice
(5.1 vs. 2.6), t (35) = 9.41, p < .001, d = 1.56, as well as higher happiness (4.8 vs. 3.9), t (35)
= 3.33, p = .002, d = 0.56, and preference (4.8 vs. 4.1), t (35) = 2.68, p = .011, d = 0.45, for
the visual search task, although they did not report a difference in task difficulty between
conditions (3.1 vs. 2.9), t (35) = 0.83, p = .414, d = 0.12, BF = 4.07.
including the belief in controlling the outcome of the choice, happiness during the task, the
preference for the task, and task difficulty) as a function of Choice Type. (B) The RT
difference between the voluntary and forced choice conditions positively correlated with the
rating difference of control belief between the two conditions. *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p
< .001, n.s., p > .05. Error bars denote SEM. Dots denote individual data (jittered for
illustration).
Moreover, the RT difference between the voluntary and forced choice conditions
= .038, but not with the rating difference in happiness, r = -.070, p = .687, or preference, r
2 3
= .010, p = .952. Direct comparisons between the correlation coefficients (Diedenhofen &
Rosenthal, & Rubin, 1992) showed that r was significantly larger than r , z = 2.25, p = .025,
1 2
and was marginally larger than r , z = 1.71, p = .087. Taken together, these results
demonstrated again the importance of undefeated choice-outcome causation which affords a
belief in controlling the outcome of the choice in enhancing behavioral performance.
3.6. RTs in each block across experiments
To explore the dynamic change of the facilitatory effect by voluntary choice during
experiments, we compared RTs between the voluntary and forced choice conditions in each
experimental block. To ensure statistical power, we collapsed data from Experiments 1A, 1B,
2, and 5 (n = 111) in which a voluntary choice facilitated performance. Note that RTs of
Experiment 2 across the condition of confirmed causation and the condition of unrevealed
relation were averaged. Experiment 4 was not included because there were 8 blocks in total
and a no choice condition was mixed with the other two conditions.
Results showed that the facilitatory effect of voluntary choice increased over
experimental blocks, evidenced by the marginally significant interaction between Choice
Type (voluntary vs. forced) and Experimental Block (1, 2, 3, 4, vs. 5), F (4, 440) = 2.18, p
over Experiment 1A, 1B, 2, and 5. (A) The reaction times (RTs) of visual search as a function
of Choice Type (voluntary, forced) and Experimental Block (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). (B) The RT
difference between the voluntary and forced choice conditions as a function of Experimental
3.7. EZ-diffusion model across experiments
To explore the possible mechanism underlying the facilitatory effect of voluntary choice,
we applied the EZ-diffusion model (Wagenmakers, van der Maas, & Grasman, 2007), which
is a variant of the drift-diffusion model (Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff & McKoon, 2008), to obtain
the speed of information accumulation (i.e., drift rate, v), response criterion (i.e., boundary
separation, a), and the time spent on processes that are not directly involved in discriminating
between response alternatives, such as motor execution (i.e., non-decision time, T ), during
er
visual search. The advantage of using the EZ-diffusion model is that it can be applied to data-
sparse situations but still holds power to detect experimental effects (van Ravenzwaaij,
Donkin, & Vandekerckhove, 2017; Wagenmakers et al., 2007).
Specifically, for each participant, the mean reaction time of correct responses (i.e.,
MRT), the variance of correct responses (i.e., VRT), and the proportion of correct responses
(i.e., P ) in the visual search task were calculated as the input for the EZ-diffusion model. As
the output, the model generates values of v, a, and T without the complicated parameter-
er
fitting exercise (Wagenmakers et al., 2007, the codes of the current study can be accessed at
choice conditions.
Again, to ensure statistical power, we collapsed data from Experiments 1A, 1B, (part of)
2, and 5 (i.e., confirmed/unrevealed choice-outcome relation, n = 111) where the facilitatory
effect by voluntary choice was observed (as described above) and collapsed data from
Experiment 1C, (part of) 2, and 3 (i.e., defeated choice-outcome causation, n = 74) where the
facilitatory effect was not observed.
Experiment Group. (A) Drift rate v. (B) boundary separation a. (C) Nondecision time T . **p
er
< .01, n.s., p > .05. These raincloud plots combine the illustration of individual data, boxplot,
mean with SEM, and data distribution (Allen et al., 2018,
(Experiment Group: confirmed/unrevealed vs. defeated) mixed-measures ANOVA showed no
significant main effect or interaction, all Fs (1, 183) < 1, ps > .436.
no significant main effect, all Fs (1, 183) < 1, ps > .449, but a significant interaction between
Choice Type and Experiment Group, F (1, 183) = 8.37, p = .004, η = .04. Planned t tests on
simple effects showed that in the experiments with confirmed/unrevealed relations, the a was
significantly lower in the voluntary choice condition than in the forced choice condition
(0.1114 vs. 0.1145), t (110) = 2.77, p = .007, d = 0.26; whereas in the experiments with
defeated causation, the difference was not significant (0.1128 vs. 0.1110), t (73) = 1.47, p
= .145, d = 0.17, BF = 2.72.
er
only a significant main effect of Choice Type, F (1, 183) = 12.88, p < .001, η = .07,
indicating that the T was generally shorter in the voluntary choice condition than in the
er
forced choice condition (0.6394 s vs. 0.6460 s). The main effect of Experiment Group and the
interaction were not significant, all Fs (1, 183) < 1, ps > .420.
4. Discussion
In a series of experiments, we demonstrated that relative to making a forced choice,
making a voluntary choice between two pictures improved subsequent visual search
performance (shorter RT). This effect, however, was present only when choice-outcome
causation was confirmed (Experiments 1A, 2, 4, and 5), or at least not undermined (i.e.,
unrevealed choice-outcome relation, Experiments 1B and 2), but was absent when choice-
outcome causation was defeated (Experiments 1C, 2 and 3). These findings demonstrated that
making a (task-irrelevant) voluntary choice motivates subsequent behavior, and this effect is
restricted to undefeated choice-outcome causation.
Moreover, individuals who showed a larger improvement through voluntary choice
under confirmed causation also showed a larger improvement under unrevealed relation
(Experiment 2); they also reported a higher belief in controlling the background picture of the
visual search (Experiment 5). These results suggested that the facilitatory effect of voluntary
choice on different situations may be related to a common component – the belief in
controlling the outcome of the voluntary choice, which is afforded by undefeated choice-
outcome causation. The fact that the magnitude of improvement through voluntary choice
increased as a function of visual search blocks could be construed as a consequence of the
build-up overtime of the belief in controlling the choice outcome.
Furthermore, we tested alternative accounts in explaining the facilitatory effect. First, we
excluded the predictability of the outcome as an explanation by showing that the facilitatory
effect was absent when the outcome of the choice is predictable but uncontrollable by the
choice (i.e., defeated choice-outcome causation, Experiment 3). Second, we demonstrated that
the performance difference was due to improved performance through voluntary choice, but
not impaired performance through forced choice (Experiment 4).
At last, relying on the EZ-diffusion model, we examined the mechanism underlying the
facilitatory effect. The response criterion in the visual search task was more liberal (lower
boundary separation a) after a voluntary choice than after a forced choice when choice-
outcome causation was undefeated, but this effect was absent when choice-outcome causation
was defeated. On the other hand, the execution of response in the visual search task was
generally faster (shorter non-decision time T ) after a voluntary choice than a forced choice,
er
regardless of the choice-outcome relation.
4.1. The facilitatory effect of voluntary choice and belief in control
The facilitatory effect of a task-irrelevant voluntary choice on subsequent task
performance may reflect an improvement in motivation caused by making a voluntary choice
(i.e., a pure expression of volition) regardless of the options. This is in line with the view that
voluntarily making choices is a basic psychological need (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Leotti et al.,
2010). It has been shown that providing opportunities to make voluntary choices improves
intrinsic motivation (Patall et al., 2008), and the anticipation of a voluntary choice activates
reward-related brain areas (e.g., striatum) (Leotti & Delgado, 2011, 2014; Murayama et al.,
2015; Murty et al., 2015). Making a voluntary choice may be an inherent reward in the human
brain (Leotti & Delgado, 2011), facilitating behavioral performance within a certain temporal
window, which may be a performance-enhancing effect of phasic dopamine associated with
instrumental actions (Redgrave, Prescott, & Gurney, 1999).
Importantly, this motivated performance through voluntary choice was restricted to
“undefeated” choice-outcome causation scenarios, that is, the performance-enhancing benefit
is confined to conditions where the voluntary choice is believed to make a difference to the
unfolding of subsequent events, demonstrating the importance of the belief in controlling the
environment by making a voluntary choice. This belief may be strengthened due to repeated
confirmation of choice-outcome causation, leading to increased magnitude of the
improvement by voluntary choice over time. Our findings are reminiscent of studies on the
sense of agency which refers to the experience of controlling one’s own action and the course
of events in the outside world (Haggard, 2017, 2019). It has been shown that the sense of
agency is stronger when the action is voluntary than when it is forced (Barlas, Hockley, &
Obhi, 2018; Caspar, Christensen, Cleeremans, & Haggard, 2016). Crucially, the strength of
the sense of agency depends on the extent to which the outcome is believed to be caused by
the action (Desantis et al., 2011; Dogge et al., 2012). Our findings are also consistent with the
control-based response selection framework which proposes that control-relevant information
modulates individuals’ motivation by determining whether a perceptual event is an outcome
of one’s actions or not (Eitam et al., 2013; Karsh et al., 2016; Karsh & Eitam, 2015).
Moreover, the feeling of determining the outcome by taking voluntary actions may be
interpreted as the experience of “free will” (Baumeister, 2008), and inducing disbelief in free
will attenuate motor responses to a voluntary action (Rigoni et al., 2011) and reduce
behavioral adjustments after a performance error (Rigoni, Wilquin, Brass, & Burle, 2013).
The converging evidence suggests that the belief in control serves as a building block of
human volition (Wegner & Wheatley, 1999).
4.2. Unrevealed and defeated choice-outcome relation and belief in control
On the surface, a voluntary choice that is not followed by an immediate outcome (e.g.,
the “no background picture” situation in Experiment 1B, which we termed as “unrevealed
choice-outcome relation”) is quite similar to a voluntary choice that is followed by a
predictable, but uncontrollable outcome (e.g., a constant picture that was different from
preceding optional pictures in Experiment 3, which we termed as “defeated choice-outcome
causation”). However, the subsequent task performance is facilitated by the voluntary choice
in the former situation, not in the latter. The key difference between these two situations is
whether an immediate outcome related to the preceding choice is explicitly provided (i.e.,
whether a picture is displayed after choosing between pictures).
The facilitated performance by voluntary choices under unrevealed relation might occur
as a result of the illusion of control which refers to the fact that individuals tend to believe that
their voluntary actions always have an intended influence on the outcome, despite the
uncontrollable nature of the situation (Langer, 1975; Thompson, Armstrong, & Thomas,
1998). Similarly, individuals could still experience a sense of agency even when a voluntary
action was not followed by an effect (Moore et al., 2009; Moore & Haggard, 2008). The
improved performance by a voluntary choice in the absence of outcome was also observed in
another study where the cost of switching between different trials (relative to repeated trials)
was lower when the target of visual search could be freely chosen from two alternatives than
when the search target was imposed (Ort, Fahrenfort, & Olivers, 2017). It is possible that the
belief in control can be (implicitly) present even when the outcome of the choice is not seen,
reflecting a default assumption that one’s choice makes a difference to external events, i.e.,
agency, which is the normal experience of healthy adults (Haggard, 2017). In real life, people
often make a choice while expecting the potential outcome in a “deterministic” way – they
tend to believe that there is a causal relation between their choice and the desired outcome.
When individuals have made a choice, they will explicitly or implicitly “seek” the outcome of
that choice and behave in a motivated way as if they can control the unseen outcome, which
might be an important evolutionary surviving strategy for humans in a world full of
uncertainties.
The explicitly shown outcome (e.g., a background picture), which is closely related to
the preceding choice (e.g., choosing a picture), may lead individuals to build a causal relation
between the choice and that outcome (Desantis et al., 2011; Dogge et al., 2012; Moore &
Haggard, 2008). If this outcome, however, is constant and different from preceding options
(Experiment 3), or randomly presented (Experiment 1C), the assumed casual relation between
the choice and the outcome would be defeated, leading to disbelief in controlling the outcome
through the choice, and hence, the absence of enhanced performance through voluntary
choice. It should be noted that in Experiment 1C where the chosen or unchosen picture was
randomly presented, the attempt at choice in a specific trial could be either successful (i.e., the
chosen picture was displayed) or failed (i.e., the unchosen picture was displayed). However,
the term “defeated” was not used to describe the failed choice, but the failed belief of “fully
controlling the outcome by making a choice”. In the case of a defeated belief, the
improvement by voluntary choice was absent regardless of whether the choice in a single trial
was successful or failed. This evidence, together with the case of Experiment 5 (i.e., the
attempt at choice was always failed, but the improvement by voluntary choice was observed),
again highlights the importance of believed choice-outcome causation (i.e., belief in control)
in the facilitatory effect by voluntary choice. Once the outcome is believed to have nothing to
do with the choice (i.e., choice-outcome causation is defeated), it is inadequate in motivating
behavior even when the outcome may be “occasionally” consistent with the choice.
These findings were consistent with models of maladaptive behaviors such as learned
helplessness and depression (Huys & Dayan, 2009; Mineka & Hendersen, 1985). Individuals
with a history of exposure to uncontrollable aversive events display feelings of helplessness
and a lack of motivation to take action in a new environment (Mineka & Hendersen, 1985).
Similarly, negative emotional states (e.g., fear and anger) associated with loss of control
would decrease the sense of agency (Christensen, Di Costa, Beck, & Haggard, 2019).
Computational modeling suggests that the action-outcome contingencies are derived to
predict the extent to which the environment can be controlled, and depressive behaviors result
from a mismatch between the derived prediction and the new environment’s contingencies
(Huys & Dayan, 2009). On this ground, a voluntary choice that cannot control the outcome
may lead to a “transient learned helplessness or depression” that makes individuals feel a loss
of control. In other words, making voluntary choices to achieve yearning outcomes enables a
feeling of control and healthy functioning.
4.3. Two possible routes to the facilitatory effect of voluntary choice
According to the EZ-diffusion modeling, the facilitatory effect of voluntary choice may
arise out of two possible routes – the facilitation of the belief in control, and the facilitation of
the act of making a voluntary choice itself. On the one hand, making a voluntary choice that is
believed to control the (unrevealed) outcome may lead to a more liberal response criterion
(lower boundary separation a) in the subsequent task compared to making a forced choice;
however, making a voluntary choice that could not control the outcome did not change the
response criterion. These results are reminiscent of findings that a voluntary choice may act as
an inherent reward (Leotti & Delgado, 2011, 2014; Murayama et al., 2015; Murty et al., 2015)
and reward-related incentives may lead to a more liberal response criterion than non-reward
incentives (Bowen, Marchesi, & Kensinger, 2020; Luo, Kang, Guo, Yu, & Zhou, 2020).
Depressive individuals did not show this reward-related change of response criterion
(Henriques & Glowacki, 1994) but showed a less liberal response criterion compared to non-
depressive individuals (Lawlor, Webb, Wiecki, Frank, Trivedi, & Pizzagalli et al., 2020),
supporting our suggestion that a “transient learned helplessness or depression” occurred when
the outcome could not be controlled by a voluntary choice. It is possible that undefeated
choice-outcome causation ensures a belief in controlling the outside environment and renders
the voluntary choice equivalent to a “reward” (i.e., gaining control) (see also Eitam et al.,
2013; Karsh et al., 2016). This reward-like motivation is carried over into the subsequent
cognitive task, biasing the response criterion.
On the other hand, the act of making a voluntary choice may generally facilitate the
subsequent action execution regardless of the outcome, as indicated by the generally shorter
non-decision time after a voluntary choice than a forced choice. This general facilitation in
action execution is often overlooked in previous studies, which may be related to the stronger
activation of the motor system in the brain (e.g., the supplementary motor area) by the self-
generated action (e.g., a voluntary choice) compared with the stimulus-guided action (e.g., a
forced choice) (Cunnington, Windischberger, Deecke, & Moser, 2002; Deiber, Honda,
Ibañez, Sadato, & Hallett, 1999). As a result, the activation of the motor system after making
a voluntary choice is carried over into the subsequent cognitive task, facilitating the
processing of response execution.
4.4. Implications of the current study
Using the visual search task as an example, the current study closely investigated the
conditions where performance is influenced by (even task-irrelevant) voluntary choices. In
real-world scenarios, making a voluntary choice is an easy way to gain control and improve
performance in the subsequent task, such as having students voluntarily choose their
homework to facilitate academic performance (Patall et al., 2010), and having motor learners
freely choose the practice context to benefit their motor learning (Sanli et al., 2013). This
facilitatory effect of voluntary choice becomes especially valuable and promising since even
making a task-irrelevant voluntary choice matters (e.g., the present study, see also Lewthwaite
et al., 2015; Murayama et al., 2015). Individuals’ performance may be improved even when
they are nudged through a subtle, irrelevant voluntary choice. The current findings further
suggest that the facilitation is conditional – the belief in controlling the outcome of the choice
has to be (either explicitly or implicitly) held, and an uncontrollable outcome after the choice
should be avoided.
Apart from the broad implications for designing task structures to motivate people and
enhance task performance in real life, our findings may be inspiring for a reconciliation of the
philosophical debate concerning free will and causal determinism – free will only matters in
causally deterministic scenarios. Humans need free will (e.g., to make a voluntary choice
based on their own will) to ensure the well-functioning of motivation and mental health, and
humans also need at least local causal determinism (e.g., a causal relation between their
choice and the outcome of their choice) to ensure the successful functioning of the
psychological apparatus of volition itself. It is possible that belief in free will reflects a
functionally successful, and therefore positively-selected, performance-enhancing by-product
of endogenous choice.
4.5. Limitations of the current study
To test how the motivational effects are affected by the controllability of the outcome,
here we restricted the experimental design to a neutral, task-irrelevant choice such that the
observed effects could be attributed to the relation between the choice and the outcome. In
real life, however, choices are often made for a specific purpose (e.g., gaining more monetary
rewards). That is, in a more ecological situation, a voluntary choice may be motivated by a
combination of internal (e.g., the motivation to make a voluntary choice) and external (e.g.,
the motivation to gain reward) factors. It has been shown that making a choice decision is not
only driven by its rewarding outcome, but also by the value of the voluntary choice itself
(Chambon et al., 2020; Cockburn, Collins, & Frank, 2014; Peterson, Lotz, Halgren,
Sejnowski, & Poizner, 2011). Moreover, it has been suggested that making voluntary choices
may act as an inherent reward in the human brain (Leotti & Delgado, 2011). It is for future
studies to investigate how the “inherent reward” (e.g., voluntary choice) and the “external
reward” (e.g., gaining money) are combined to motivate behavior in a voluntary action that
can lead directly to a rewarding outcome.
The choice-outcome relation was fixed throughout a specific experiment in the current
study. In the ecological world, however, the choice-outcome relation often changes and has to
be updated based on the action-outcome contingency (Chambon et al., 2020; Cockburn et al.,
2014; Peterson et al., 2011). Thus, the belief in controlling the outcome by making choices
may emerge or be strengthened/weakened over a learning process. This was evidenced by our
results that the magnitude of the facilitatory effect increased along with the increasing of
blocks. It is worthy to examine how a changeable choice-outcome relation affects subsequent
performance and how the belief in control is dynamically formed.
4.6. Conclusion
The present study revealed that making a (task-irrelevant) voluntary choice facilitates
subsequent behavioral performance. This facilitation is restricted to undefeated choice-
outcome causation which affords a belief in controlling the outcome of the choice. Our
findings demonstrate the scope of the impact of human volition and suggest that only
providing the opportunity of free choice or just making an act of free choice is insufficient to
motivate subsequent behavior. Humans not only need to exercise volition to get motivated
and ensure mental health but also need their volition to have causally determining effects on
the outcome events to ensure the successful functioning of the psychological apparatus of
volition itself.
Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Patrick Haggard and Dr. Yiwen Zhan for their constructive comments
and suggestions. We also thank Ziyun Wu for help in collecting the data of Experiment 1B,
and Yihong Bao for help in proofreading.
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(31861133012) and by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020M681216). L.W. is
supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (32000779) and the Shanghai
Sailing Program (20YF1422100).
Author Contributions
Xiaoxiao Luo: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal Analysis,
Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Visualization; Lihui Wang: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing - Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing;
Xiaolin Zhou: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – Review & Editing, Resources,
Supervision.
Declaration of Competing Interest
None.
Data availability