Who is worthy of help?
Constructing the stereotype of the “ideal victim” of child
sexual abuse
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
The stereotype of the “ideal victim” often determines who is considered deserving
of victim status, especially in sexual violence cases. In this chapter, we explore how
the so-called “ideal victim” stereotype is constructed and what are the elements
necessary for the perception of “ideal victimhood”. We use empirical data from an
unmoderated anonymous Estonian online forum that hosts various topic threads
from children and young people, including posts about personally experienced
sexual violence (N = 28) and replies to these posts (N = 361). The data was
analyzed by combining a discursive psychological approach with qualitative thema­
tic analysis. Results reveal and illustrate how the stereotype is constructed from
various elements and characteristics of social scripts, perceived gender roles, and
misconceptions about sexuality. We unveil how these social constructions a ffect
responses and attitudes towards sexual abuse victims to provide input for designing
prevention efforts that support disclosure and help-seeking.
Keywords: child sexual abuse, online communication, sexual violence, stereotypes,
victim-blaming
Every year, millions of children around the world suffer due to sexual
abuse (UNICEF, 2020). In Estonia, where our study is located, nearly 90 %
of reported sexual violence victims are minors, averaging at 12 years, with
the youngest victim less than a year old (Ahven et al., 2018). There is
an enormous gap between sexual abuse victimization and reported cases
(Priebe & Svedin, 2008; Ullman, 2002), and statistics do not even tell
us half of the story. Disclosure and help-seeking are dialogical processes
(Reitsema & Grietens, 2016) where society and others play a pivotal part
in victims’ access to help and justice. Unfortunately, societal and cultural
framing of sexual violence and victims’ experiences often prevents dialogue
(Hershkowitz et al., 2007; McElvaney et al., 2014). To that end, Internet
may offer more suitable or safer ways to share concerns and offer or seek
help while maintaining the own identity private (Friesen 2017). However,
online communities are not excluded from, or immune to, wider socie­
tal attitudes toward sexual violence; thus, others’ reactions, even when
anonymous, may still define or redefine victims’ experiences (Eelmaa &
Murumaa-Mengel, 2020). If the world deems you unworthy of help, would
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
you still seek it? The notion of some sexual abuse victims being more deser­
ving of victim status than others – and therefore worthy of compassion
and support – is the focus of this chapter.
To be clear, we are fully aware that the term “ideal victim” carries
linguistic connotations we do not want to enforce; thus, we take extra care
when framing our results with this theoretical concept. By “ideal victim”
we mean that victim status is socially constructed (Daly, 2014, p. 378),
and so is the ideal victim concept – it is always determined by society
or others. Society gives structure and meaning to everyday life, and collec­
tively (re)told stories that surround us make up the “rules and resources
recursively implicated in the production of social systems” (Giddens, 1984,
p. 377). Even when victims define or redefine themselves, they do it based
on socially constructed understandings of the so-called “ideal victim” that
is built on and from rape myths (Adolfsson, 2018), gender stereotypes
(Lips, 2017), and sexual scripts (Sun et al. 2016). Criminologist Sarah
Jankowitz (2018, p. 70) argued that “encountering victimhood as socially
constructed enables an analysis of wider socio-structural processes which
define the ‘victim,’ who has the power to do the defining and how the la­
bel of victim produces certain realities, beliefs, and knowledge.” Here, we
construct the archetype of the ideal victim of child sexual abuse (CSA) and
investigate the implications of the categorization. In other words, we aim
to define or find those specific elements and reconstruct the stereotype by
following the reactions of the audience to online forum posts describing
personally experienced CSA incidents. For that, we seek answers to the
following research questions: How is the ideal victim stereotype construc­
ted, and what are the following observable implications to victims?
Finally, as we focus on stereotype construction and meaning-making
of a controversial term, the victim-survivor dichotomy and the rationale
for our approach should be reflected. As this is mainly a victimology
study focusing on a phenomenon addressed with the phrase “victims”, we
decided to use it throughout the study. We recognize the term carries
some negative connotations and may have stigmatizing consequences. On
the other hand, the phrase “victim” is linked to criminal law and therefore
conserves some critical nuances. For one, the phrase has juridical value;
victim status comes with legal implications such as specific rights during
criminal proceedings, rights for a civil claim, or access to victim assistance
services. Secondly, the phrase is used in the context of criminal acts and,
in most cases, connects an offender to the equation, which brings attention
to the one culpable for the incident. Moreover, avoiding a term due to
its potential adversarial connotations, while extensively used and relevant
at least in judicial settings, would only further stigmatize victimhood.
Who is worthy of help?
Nevertheless, in interactional settings, we advocate respecting language
preferred by victims/survivors.
Theoretical framework
We are mostly rooted in the social constructivism paradigm with its core
idea that the world and its meanings are constructed by constant social
interaction. It means reality is plastic, shared, collaborative by nature,
kept “real” by people’s thoughts and actions (c.f. Berger & Luckmann,
1966; Giddens, 1984). Social interaction can take place as one-to-one or
many-to-many (Castells, 2009), face-to-face or computer-mediated commu­
nication, in-depth conversations, or small acts of engagement (Picone
et al., 2019); it can be mediatized and mediated (Couldry & Hepp, 2018)
or experiential. Combined, all these interactions form grand narratives
and specific stereotypes on various aspects of social life. In this study, we
are investigating the construction of the “ideal victim” stereotype in the
context of child sexual abuse in online environments.
Though the “categorization” of the victim is relevant in legal contexts
as it provides grounds for certain rights, social categorization often over­
rides the legal aspects. For instance, social categorization may work to
revoke victim status or undermine victims’ access to justice. Walklate
(2007) described the process of becoming a victim as something to be
achieved; victim status is negotiated during personal acknowledgment of
victimization through social and institutional recognition. Construction of
the victim label mirrors the societal awareness and beliefs about victims,
offenders, and different crimes, yet often it reinforces stereotypical judg­
ment of victims (Jankowitz, 2018). Holstein and Miller (1990) argue that
producing the meaning of victimhood is interactional; that is to say, vic­
timhood does not inherently lie in someone or come as an invariable axi­
om but instead is interpreted, constructed, and understood through social
interactions. Norwegian criminologist Nils Christie (1986) introduced a
conceptual hierarchy between victims, claiming some are considered more
legitimate or real. His theory of the “ideal victim” has made an immense
contribution to the field of criminology. Christie (1986, p. 18) believed
the ideal victim is “a person or category of individuals, who, when hit by
crime, most readily are given the complete and legitimate status of being
a victim.” When introducing the concept, Christie relied on polarizing
examples of two different victims to illustrate the point: a vulnerable old
lady who was robbed in the middle of the day on the street by a big scary
man on one side, a man at a pub who got into a drunken altercation
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
with an acquaintance on the other side (Christie, 1986). The ideal victim
has to be vulnerable and blameless, whereas at the same time the ideal
offender has to be deviant. The ideal victim stereotype is influenced by
individual victim-related aspects, the victim-offender relationship, the level
of physical violence, induced injuries, and victim’s lifestyle (Stewart et al.,
1996). According to Susan Estrich (1987), the proximity of sexual violence
to the archetype of “real rape” is the resolving factor of how severe and
genuine someone’s experiences are deemed.
Discourses surrounding sexual violence are burdened by several stereo­
types, myths, and beliefs about how “real” crime or “true” victim or offen-
der is supposed to be. The tacit question of who is “worthy” of victim
status (Christie, 1984), often operating on a subconscious level, leads to
the construction of “ideal” cases and victims. Myths are the grand narrati­
ves that shape social structures of life and serve as tools for meaning-ma­
king. The values, power dynamics, and conflicts interwoven into these
myths are presented as natural, thus hiding the socially constructed nature
and socioculturally situated historical development of these myths (Fiske,
2010). In other words, we view myths as collectively built and maintained
overarching stories we (re)tell ourselves to make sense of social structures
and reinforce them. Stereotypes can be viewed as sentences within these
stories, smaller entities that bolster the grand narrative. To give an instan­
ce, our research has to consider rape myths (Adolfsson, 2018), narratives
that do not view rape as an act of violence (but as a sexual one), the
image of the rapist as an aggressor (someone who is unable to control
sexual urges), and a tendency to assign blame to the victim (Manoussaki
& Veitch, 2015). These myths comprise stereotypes and misconceptions
about gender, sexuality, power dynamics, and roles in violence (Anderson
& Doherty, 2007; Lips, 2017; Sun et al. 2016). Pickering (2007) has empha­
sized that most stereotyping uses a distancing mechanism, reducing the
stereotype into an idiosyncratic attribute and separating those stereotyped
from those among whom the stereotypes are reproduced. Children are
incredibly perceptive to recurring stereotypes in their surrounding (Sher­
man et al., 2013). Additionally, broader societal values are a factor of the
discourses of “ideal victims”, as conservative and authoritarian ideologies
and acceptance of traditional gender roles predict the derogation of gender
violence victims (Spaccatini et al., 2019) and the acceptance of rape myths
(Manoussaki & Veitch, 2015).
Disclosing sexual abuse is a sensitive process. Face-to-face synchronous
communication can be immensely stressful for victims, especially when
victim-blaming is widely accepted and internalized by children and young
people as a “natural” response to such crimes. Screen-mediated online
Who is worthy of help?
communication that structurally supports anonymity and asynchronous
interactions, providing a sense of control over the communicative situati­
on (Friesen, 2017), can offer opportunities for help-seeking, sharing, and
support. On the other hand, written communication of anonymous online
forums echoes and reinforces harmful stereotypes and myths related to
sexual violence. In fact, “media’s intrusive ubiquity” (Silverstone, 2005,
p. 190) is influencing micro-level individual experiences and perception of
different societal phenomena, whether we are talking about screen-media­
ted communication or media representations being perceived as accurate
replicas of reality (which itself is problematic in the context of social con­
structivist thought). As media devices and media services are increasingly
omnipresent “at home and at school, during training and in leisure time”
(Paus-Hasebrink et al., 2019), it comes as no surprise that help-seeking pro­
cesses become mediated and mediatized as well, and although our study
does not focus on the technological mediation, nor screen-mediated com­
munication, it is an important contextual factor that shapes our results.
Methods
This study is based on 28 individual forum posts about personally experi­
enced sexual violence (described to happen in between ages 5 and 17) and
361 answers to these posts. The data was collected in late 2019 from an
unmoderated Estonian online forum where children and young people
can anonymously discuss various topics such as relationships, health, hob­
bies and interests, sexuality, risk behavior, violence, etc. The specific forum
had over 330 posts under the sexual violence sub-thread. For in-depth
qualitative analysis, we narrowed down the posts using the following crite­
ria: 1) The post entailed a clear assertion of personally experienced sexual
violence or threat of it; 2) an indication that the victim was a minor during
the incident; 3) an indication that the author of the post was a minor when
creating the post; 4) at least two verbal reactions from different people
to the post. The empirical data consists of 20 descriptions of rape cases
(three of which fit the definition of multiple perpetrator rape), while eight
cases either refer to an attempted rape, sexual harassment, threatening with
rape, or other sexual violence (e.g., child sexual exploitation or online
sexual abuse). The cases included in our study were published on the
forum between 2007 to 2018.
To analyze these texts, we relied on qualitative thematic analysis and
discursive psychological approach. As we worked with a large data set
(for a qualitative study), thematic qualitative text analysis was helpful for
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
identifying “what is common to the way a topic is talked or written about
and of making sense of those commonalities” (Braun & Clarke, 2012,
p. 57). Thematic coding helped to organize the data set by allowing us
to systematize it according to common themes. Firstly, to identify who
was deemed an ideal victim, we followed the reactions of the audience.
We were seeking compassionate, encouraging, and supportive reactions
towards victims. Of 28 cases, solely four of such were found. In all other
cases, adverse reactions such as victim-blaming, shaming, and non-belie­
ving were present. Thus, the initial themes were: negative reactions, positi­
ve reactions, and victims’ subsequent reactions. This helped identify the
markers for the stereotype construction and what observable implications
such stereotyping has on victims. The stereotype markers were categorized
into three themes: victim-related elements, situation-related elements, and
offender-related elements.
In the second phase of the analysis, we followed the way audience
negotiated different characteristics or elements to explain how exactly
these stereotypes are constructed. For that, we employed the discursive
psychology approach, a form of discourse analysis, which means the key
is to look in depth of the text and scrutinize the text in a context. Discur­
sive psychology essentially aims to find psychological themes from the
language people use, understand how psychological notions are utilized
in a discourse (Potter, 1998), and see how language is used as a social
activity (Potter & Wetherell, 1987). We identified patterns (e.g., if the
offender is a peer, the abuse is more often justified; reporting to police is
usually recommended when the incident is recent) and rhetorical devices
(e.g., the sociolinguistic construction of blame and justifications), which
are shaped by sociocultural determinants. We illustrate our analysis by
using representative quotes and interpret those in a broader context of the
conversation.
To protect the privacy of people involved in this highly sensitive re­
search topic, we used ethical fabrication (Markham, 2012) by reconstruc­
ting texts as examples of dominant discourses and repertoires within. The
paraphrasing was done with careful consideration of not changing the
meaning but merely ensuring the exact sentence would not be directly
recognizable. This was done by translating from Estonian to English,
grammar correction, replacing jargon and abbreviations with more formal
language, and using terms or passages equivalent in denotation to replace
some distinctive or idiosyncratic language. On a final note, throughout the
study the phrases “stereotypical” or “stereotype” refer to the “ideal victim”
stereotype and the phrase “non-stereotypical victim” to those deemed not
to fit the stereotype. For clarity, these are not objective classifications or
Who is worthy of help?
our personal convictions but constructions of online forum participants’
views.
Results
The stereotype of the “ideal victim” of child sexual abuse
Discerning the audience, particularly their reactions to victims’ help-see­
king, we identified six victim-related markers and four situation/offender-
related markers that circumscribe the social categorization of the victim,
commencing below with the former six.
The central victim-related element of the stereotype is vulnerability –
the ideal victim ought to be weak and defenseless. Vulnerability as a trait
itself insinuates victim’s age, meaning “ideal victims” are young children
who cannot fight back due to their age or inability to recognize abuse. In
this study, all stereotypical victims were under the age of 14; the youngest
was five to six years old when the abuse happened. Forum participants
were quick to emphasize age and agency in their responses:
“It is not your fault; you were just a child ...”
Here, the message reflects the paradigmatic construction of an innocent
child and the perception, not expressed but intended, that children are
not responsible for their safety. However, when one is not considered
a child anymore but becoming an adult, one should be able to protect
oneself. Accordingly, others (e.g., Back & Lips, 1998) have found older
victims of CSA attributed to greater responsibility than younger victims.
The responses evidenced that children over the age of 10 are expected
to protect themselves from sexual abuse or at least comprehend abuse.
This proposes that the ideal victim is below the age of 10; yet, if other
characteristics of the stereotype are present, children between the ages of
10 and 13 may still fit it. A common assertion was that children above 14
should have sufficient physical strength to resist abuse:
“I agree; this story does sound a bit hard to believe. Your writing
implies you are a teenager; you should be faster and stronger than your
grandfather ...”
Similar patterns were present in other discussions in our data. Case in
point, a 14-year-old girl described being raped by a classmate in the school
lavatory, and the reactions were comparable; the victim was predicted to
be “old enough” and physically able to counter abuse. Here, perhaps the
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
specific cultural and sociolegal context may offer some sense to this – for
example, the legal age of sexual consent is 14 in Estonia, and sexual inter­
course between a 14-year-old child and an adult is not a crime. The diffe-
rence in expectations between children below 14 and below 10 is also iden­
tical to our current criminal law. Estonian Penal Code § 145 criminalizes
sexual intercourse or other act of sexual nature with a child less than
14 years of age. The actus reus does not require violence or threats; the law­
maker has relied on the premise that obtaining consent from a child under
that age always assumes exploitation. However, § 147 declares a child be­
low the age of 10 legally incapable of giving sexual consent. Consequently,
sexual intercourse or other act of sexual nature with a child below the age
of 10 always constitutes rape. The age of consent is a negotiation between
biological, legal, and sociocultural foundations that promulgates the ex­
pected level of maturity, responsibility, and capacity legally required to gi­
ve consent (Moore & Reynolds, 2018). These assertions insinuate that
childhood innocence and child sexuality are juxtaposed as antithetic con­
cepts with exclusionary effect. Following the data, the fixation on child­
ren’s agency to resist abuse was relentless:
“How could you let him rape yourself? He couldn’t be that much
bigger and stronger than you; I think you actually wanted it.”
The above quote manifests a widely prevalent victim-blaming praxis: If
victims do not actively resist or fight their abusers, “they must want it.” A
fundamental problem with such contention is that it is based on the “no
means no” concept, not affirmative consent (“yes means yes”). The respon­
ses reveal a concerning approach towards sexual consent, meaning consent
is inferred from the fact the other person is not actively resisting sexual ac­
tivities. Yet a conviction supposing that resistance is the test of whether so­
meone consented or not obscures the line between voluntary and criminal
sexual activities. Regrettably, this sentiment has a long sociolegal history,
as many jurisdictions have situated their acknowledgment of non-consent
in the “utmost resistance” (Estrich, 1987; Little, 2005).
Resisting abuse was “required” from victims over the age of ten; even
more so, it was a prerequisite for the act to be considered violence:
„Wait, but if you didn’t resist, is it actually rape? Maybe this guy
thought you were just inexperienced and didn’t understand you don’t
want to have sex.”
The language again reflects how rape and sex are perceived so alike that
differentiating one from the other may easily confuse people. As the
anterior segment already discussed the issue, we now move on to the
Who is worthy of help?
third marker for the ideal victim stereotype: suffering a violent attack
with visible injuries. The level of resistance needed to fit the stereotype
was bound to the physical violence level present in the attack. Likewise,
Little (2005) outlined that physical injuries legitimize victim status and
serve as evidence. Relating this to our study, having evidence and being
able to prove that violence happened was an essential factor for others to
believe the victim. Besides physical injuries, respondents sometimes asked
for other plausible evidence such as messages, videos, or photos to prove
the abuse.
Victims’ gender is another significant marker for victim categorization.
The central argument here was that boys are strong enough to resist and
escape violence, though it appeared to pertain only to adolescents. This
line of reasoning reflects the general societal discourse towards male sexual
abuse victims and, at the same time, conforms to the heteronormative
expectations of “weak and vulnerable women” and “strong men”. Previous
studies have found sexual scripts to exclude males as possible victims of
sexual violence (Javaid, 2018) or consider male victims of rape by women
as “lucky”. Such discourses may hinder prevention activities aimed at boys
but also impede boys’ willingness to disclose abuse (O’Leary & Barber,
2008).
The fifth marker was victim’s appearance, primarily concerning clot­
hing along with hair color, make-up, and body shape. It has been pre­
viously identified that victims’ attire and the amount of revealed skin is
perceived as an imperative part of ideal victim construction – short skirts
and revealing cleavages deny women of victim status (Spaccatini et al.,
2019). As per our data, those who wear “provocative” or “sexually-suggesti­
ve” clothes are more inclined to be assaulted.
“For the most part, sexual violence is dependent on a woman’s clot­
hing – the more provocative, the greater the chance of being raped.”
This statement alleges that women can choose to become a victim, and
the recurrence of sexual violence in their life is under their control. Ano­
ther problematic sentiment with such an assertion is the gender implica­
tion: Women’s victimization is reliant on clothing or behavior. Equally
important is how language is used as a rhetorical tool: A euphemistic
reconceptualization of children and underage girls to young women was
a common way of diminishing the severity of violence and shifting focus
to victims’ responsibility. In addition, such mode of expression adds to
the practice of premature sexualization of children. And not only clothes
matter; merely by having a body, women are often perceived to violate
gendered territoriality and treated not as persons but as bodies (Fairchild
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
& Rudman, 2008) – a dehumanizing innuendo of female shape “inviting”
advances and aggressions.
The sixth marker was victim’s behavior in the aftermath of abuse.
The “ideal victim” had to be visibly traumatized and notably emotional,
and victims were expected to display their emotional state. Victims who
did not explicitly express their fear, anxiety, or other emotions were not
taken seriously. The psychological discourse of harm depicts the victim as
ipso facto traumatized and permanently damaged (O’Dell, 2003). This nar­
ration creates a frame and a script for expectations on victims’ mental and
emotional state, behavior, and feelings. Besides being traumatized, another
aftermath behavior evaluated was disclosure. The later victims are seeking
help, the less likely they are believed. Alongside the timing of disclosure,
the frequency of abuse added to the stereotype construction. Following the
responses, sexual abuse had to be isolated, not a recurring circumstance.
The reasoning was that younger children would at least accidentally tell
someone and older children would not let someone repeatedly assault
or abuse them (unless “they wanted it”). The reactions reflected a belief
that “real” victims would report CSA immediately, not months or years
later.
“It is hard to believe a child could keep a secret like that for that
long ...”
Unfortunately this is another widely accepted misconception, as most
children do not disclose abuse immediately (Hershkowitz et al., 2007; Prie­
be & Svedin, 2008; Ullman, 2002), and even when children do disclose,
the abuse is rarely reported to the authorities or other professionals (Priebe
& Svedin, 2008). The assumption about the unlikelihood of ongoing abuse
may be influenced by both the selective media reporting of isolated stran­
ger rape cases (Marhia, 2008) and general misconceptions about the com­
plexity and dynamics of CSA. The main reason children refrain from dis­
closing is being afraid of blaming and shaming and feeling scared (Hersh­
kowitz et al., 2007; McElvaney et al., 2014). A 2007 study in Israel revealed
that 63 % of parents were unsupportive (i.e., angry and accusatory) when
children disclosed sexual abuse, above all when the perpetrator was known
to the child (Hershkowitz et al., 2007). Ergo, children are justifiably scared
to disclose CSA, as negative reactions and harmful attitudes are common
in disclosure.
The underlying doctrine of situation-related elements of the stereoty­
pe appears to lie in the unavoidability of the attack. In other words, sexual
violence has to be unforeseeable and inevitable to count as “real”. A vio­
lent and unexpected sexual assault by a stranger in a dark alley is the “real
Who is worthy of help?
rape” archetype (Estrich, 1987); hence the more resemblant an incident
is to the archetype, the more likely it is taken seriously. The majority of
victims in our study were raped at a party or in their own home. In some
cases, the unavoidability was met with victim-related elements, such as
being unable to resist or avoid abuse due to specific vulnerabilities such
as victim’s age. In two cases when the victim was over the age of ten, the
unavoidability of violence was situation-related. By way of explanation, an
example of a “stereotypical” case in our sample was the rape of a 13-year-
old girl walking home from practice in the evening; she was suddenly and
violently attacked and then raped by an intoxicated stranger. In most cases,
being sexually assaulted at home was not perceived as unavoidable.
Predominantly, the elements associated with the non-ideal victim ste­
reotype were non-negotiable. One of these non-negotiable elements was
alcohol. If victims were under the influence of alcohol or in a situation
where people consume alcohol (e.g., at a party), the reactions towards
them were always negative:
“It is your own fault that you got yourself so irresponsibly drunk and
let someone take advantage of you.”
Being intoxicated decreases the perceived victimhood, and, according to
common perception, women who consume alcohol are considered at least
partially responsible for what was done to them (Reynolds, 2017).
Moving on to the victim-offender relationship, we see dynamics that
function either as legitimizing or depreciating the victim. Following ear­
lier studies (Gravelin et al., 2019; Reynolds, 2017), the closer the relation­
ship with the offender, the more likely was the victim regarded as not
fitting the ideal victim stereotype and the grand narrative of “real” rape.
Our empirical data has evidence of an “ideal offender” profile that would,
in turn, legitimize victim status. The “ideal offender” is antisocial, extre­
mely violent, ideally a stranger, and always a male. But most importantly,
the offender must be somehow deviant and different from the norm; the
landmark works of this field confirm the requirement of the “big bad”
offender (Christie, 1986).
Around two-thirds of our sample were acquaintance rape cases. Only
two of these cases met the ideal victim stereotype; however, for an acquain­
tance rape victim to be categorized as an ideal victim, the assault had to be
unavoidable, unforeseeable, and carried out with extreme violence. Hence,
as most victims were formerly familiar with their assailant, the assault was
not taken seriously, and victims received less support and were more likely
to be blamed. From previous research, we know that children assaulted
by a perpetrator known to them are more likely to avoid reporting or
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
disclosing abuse (Hershkowitz et al., 2007). The same tendency was again
present in our study. What is more, when victims were assaulted at their
home, in general it was by their partners, usually their boyfriends. Howe­
ver, none such cases were categorized as fitting the stereotype. In fact,
precisely the contrary – intimate partner rape by a peer, even when the
victim is a minor, was not regarded as a crime but instead morally wrong
and, at times, delineated to a mere misunderstanding.
“Of course, it wasn’t nice of him to take advantage of you like that,
but as I understood, he was also drunk and didn’t quite realize what he
was doing.”
Firstly, the above quote demonstrates a widespread hypocritical paradox:
For victims alcohol is an aggravating marker, whereas for perpetrators it is
a mitigating determinant. Secondly, peer sexual abuse here is framed as an
immoral or impolite act, not as a violent or criminal one. Studies show vic­
tims as more likely to disclose sexual abuse perpetrated by an adult than a
peer: 34 % would not tell when being victimized by an adult, compared to
82 % when the offender was a peer (Radford et al., 2011). However, peer-
on-peer sexual violence makes up one third to half of CSA cases (Vizard
et al., 2007).
For some reason, victims of multiple perpetrator rape were rarely belie­
ved and never deemed to fit the ideal victim stereotype. Similarly, studies
have found that multiple perpetrator rape victims are not believed and
lead to greater degrees of victim-blaming (Adolfsson, 2018). This suggests
that the “facts” of sexual violence are subordinate to personal beliefs and
perceived stereotypes, serving as rhetorical means rather than contempla­
ted reasons.
To sum up, attitudes observed in reactions CSA victims received bla­
tantly epitomize common rape myths (Larcombe, 2002) present in social
interactions and popular media formats. Media is a common source of
information on CSA (Pullins & Jones, 2006), but it is also the reason
why a discrepant image of victims and offenders persist in society (DiBen­
nardo, 2018). Media still maintains narratives framing female victims as
responsible for sexual violence and constructing perpetrators as primarily
violent, antisocial, and predatory, oftentimes in connection to kidnappings
and murders (DiBennardo, 2018). Research confirms that media is dispro­
portionately representing the most violent and aggravating stranger rapes
when reporting sex crimes (Marhia, 2008). Given the media’s power in
shaping beliefs, it is problematic that most perpetrators have little in
common with media representations: If the perpetrator differs from the
Who is worthy of help?
stereotype, is less “other”, the young might not regard the harmful actions
and abuse as such, to begin with.
The observable implications of victim stereotypes
The “ideal victim” stereotype played a pivotal part in others’ reactions and
the observable outcome for the victim. In our study, four cases out of 28
matched the ideal victim stereotype. The only children receiving the help
they sought from the forum were children categorized as “ideal victims”.
Hence the only ones receiving help were the ones whose experience was
legitimized, who were supported and guided to further action. According
to available data, those who did not fit the stereotype did not receive the
help they expected. Instead, their attempts were met with doubt, an “if it is
true ... it is your own fault” trope.
These reactions do not include only blaming and shaming but also
redefining the experience and victim status. Rape was often reduced to
something less, sometimes even to the extent of the act being normalized
as if it was somehow inevitable or a routine feature of sexual interactions,
at most “sex gone wrong”. Sexual aggression was portrayed as a normal
part of male masculinity and female victims as naive and stupid, but at the
same time as flirtatious and deviant “gate-keepers” of male sexuality. The
non-stereotypical victims were rarely guided any further. When victims of
sexual violence fit the profile of the ideal victim, they are more likely to
get help and compassionate responses (Krahé et al. 2008), as they “did not
deserve what happened to them.”
Research shows that negative reactions when children disclose sexual
abuse are not rare (Hershkowitz et al., 2007; Hlavka, 2019). When child­
ren do disclose, others’ reactions are critical determinants of whether the
child gets help, treatment, and support (Reitsema & Grietens, 2016) or
child’s endeavors to seek help are impeded (Ahrens, 2006) and the victim
is silenced. Seeking help from police or mental health specialists is rare
in sexual violence cases (Wolitzky-Taylor et al., 2011). Moreover, when
victims seek help, the above-described stereotypes and discourses reinforce
victims’ stigmatization, eminently in formal contexts such as courts or the
police (Greeson et al., 2016). Underage victims of sexual violence do not
use communicative coping strategies (talk to an adult, seek help), because
they carry a deeply rooted fear of not being believed (McElvaney et al.,
2014) – precisely what we witnessed in our study.
Besides establishing empathy, supportive attitudes, and guidance being
crucial in the help-seeking process, it is noteworthy that specific guidance
Simone Eelmaa & Maria Murumaa-Mengel
given to children can, too, be consequential. The victim of the stranger
rape case was instructed to report the abuse to authorities, and later, when
expressing gratitude for the support from others, she also reported contac­
ting the police. In parallel, a victim of a violent sexual assault by a peer
was primarily guided to tell her mother and seek psychological counseling.
When later expressing gratitude for the support and guidance, she announ­
ced telling her mother and receiving psychological counseling. However,
some recommendations may have detrimental consequences for victims,
as was the case of one (“stereotypical”) victim from our sample who was
encouraged to retaliate. Again, later she expressed feeling empowered and
grateful for the support and confirmed success in retaliation. Thus, it is not
merely the apt approach to support victims that affect victims’ help-seeking
but correspondingly what exactly is recommended to them. Our results
suggest that victims are more inclined to choose more comprehensively
described recommendations.
Conclusions
In this study, we sought to establish how the stereotype of the ideal victim
of CSA is constructed and what implications the stereotype has on victims.
Such “ideal victims” are young children, primarily girls, who are supposed
to be traumatized by what happened, displaying (semi)performative signs
of distress, and seek help or engage in communicative coping strategies
soon after the incident. In the center of all is the stereotype of an innocent
and vulnerable child, as opposed to sexualized, pathologized, and demoni­
zed “child-seductresses” who are not deserving of victim status. After all,
myths and misconceptions are the primary way CSA is conceptualized,
and for most victims the ideal victim archetype seems to act as a barrier to
help.
As the study relied on self-reported accounts of sexual violence and the
following reactions, we were only able to examine the implications visible
in the discussions. Thus, the results must be interpreted with caution.
Another important limitation is that the sample included only girls; a
thorough insight into online help-seeking of boys and non-binary people
should be subject to further investigation.
On a final note, findings presented in this chapter provide insight into
the struggles children face when seeking help. Reducing the critical gap
between the realities of sexual abuse victimization and reporting could
be supported by tailoring intervention efforts that specifically address
such barriers. Defining sexual acts clearly and normalizing the use of
Who is worthy of help?
specific terminology in public discussions and sexual health education
is crucial in providing language tools for prevention and help-seeking
strategies. Teaching affirmative consent to children helps to create a cle­
ar line between consensual sexual activities and sex crimes. Along with
that, the message “it is not your fault” seems fundamental to validate
victims’ experiences and empower them. Furthermore, as demonstrated,
the recommendations children receive are focal to the outcome. Adequate
information should be made available and easily accessible to all children.
Step-by-step guidance on how to seek help or disclose abuse is advisable.
Our concluding message is aimed at owners and moderators of various
online platforms: Ensuring that necessary support is available for children
seeking help may prevent other adverse effects. No child should feel un­
worthy of help.