Running Head: PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEAHVIOR
Neural Underpinnings underlying the Influence of Peer Competition on Risk-Taking Behavior
among Adolescent Girls: An Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) Study
Ming-Chen Zhang
Research Center of Adolescent Psychology and Behavior, School of Education, Guangzhou
University, Guangzhou China
Jian-Bin Li
Department of Early Childhood Education, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region
Kai Dou
Research Center of Adolescent Psychology and Behavior, School of Education, Guangzhou
University, Guangzhou China
⁎Corresponding author: Kai Dou
E-mail address: psydk@gzhu.edu.cn (Kai Dou)
Phone: +86-18819349858
Address: Guangzhou University, Guangzhou Higher Education Mega Center, 230, Waihuan Road
West, Panyu District, Guangzhou, China 510006
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 2
Abstract
Peer plays an important role in adolescent risk-taking. The existing studies have
examined the effects of peer competition, an intensive form of peer influence, on adolescent
risk-taking behavior, but the temporal neural underpinnings underlying this effect remain
unclear. To fill this gap, the current study used Event related potentials (ERPs) technique in a
2 (condition: single vs. peer competition) × 2 (feedback: gain vs. loss) within-subject
experiment to investigate the effects of peer competition on adolescent risk-taking behaviors
and its neural process. Twenty-four late adolescent girls (M = 19.83 years, SD = 1.49)
age
completed the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) under the single and peer competition
conditions with gain and loss feedbacks. ERPs were used to record the neural process when
participants were working on the BART. Behavioral results revealed that participants showed
more risk aversion in the peer competition condition than in the single condition. ERPs
results found that during the decision-making phase, N2 component was elicited more
negatively in the peer competition condition than in the single condition. During the feedback
evaluation phase, a larger P300 was observed in the single condition than in the peer
competition condition, while a higher amplitude of feedback-related negativity (FRN)
difference wave was observed in the peer competition condition than in the single condition.
This study contributes to the literature of adolescent risk-taking by identifying the effect of
peer competition and its nuanced neural underpinnings.
Key words: peer competition; risk-taking; N2 component, feedback-related negativity;
P300; youth
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 3
Neural Underpinnings underlying the Influence of Peer Competition on Risk-Taking
Behavior among Adolescent Girls: An Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) Study
Risk-taking behaviors are a commonplace in adolescents (Arnett, 1992; Sherman et
al., 2018). It refers to those behaviors that involve voluntary choices for behaviors where
outcomes remain uncertain (Aklin et al., 2005; Crone et al., 2016). The negative forms of
risk-taking behaviors (e.g., smoking, substance use, and crime) during adolescents may
cascade into other poor outcomes in later life stages (Ben-Zur & Zeidner, 2009; Feeney et al.,
2018). Identifying the etiological sources of adolescent risk-taking behavior is helpful in
designing tailor-made strategies to mitigate negative risk-taking. Among other sources, peers
play a critical role in adolescent risk-taking behaviors (Gardner & Steinberg, 2005; Smith et
al., 2015). Hitherto, a number of studies have examined the effect of the gentle form of peer
influence (e.g., peer presence, peer information) on adolescent risk-taking behavior (Chein et
al., 2011; Kessler et al., 2016), but comparatively much less research has examined the effect
of the intensive form of peer influence (e.g., peer competition) and its the underlying
temporal neural underpinnings. Given the exceptional time resolution of event-related
potentials (ERPs), the current study aims to adopt ERPs to disclose the precise timing of
neural processes underlying the effect of peer competition on adolescent risk-taking
behaviors.
Peer Influence on Risk-Taking Behaviors among Adolescents
Peers Influence during Adolescence
During adolescence, young people gradually spend less time with the family and
invest more time with peers, which reflects adolescents’ desire for autonomy and their
development of social relationships (Collins & Laursen, 2004; Larson et al., 1996). Peers
play an essential role in adolescents’ many developmental outcomes, including externalizing,
internalizing and academic problems (Giletta et al., 2021), and of course risk-taking behavior
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 4
(Liu et al., 2017). A main explanation of the high propensity of adolescents’ risk-taking
behaviors is the pursuit of potentially rewarding stimuli and the increasing social
reinforcement (Forbes & Dahl, 2010). Studies have found that peers may strengthen
adolescents’ sensitivity to social rewards and therefore peer factors may predict their risk-
taking behavior (Lorenz & Kray, 2022; Reiter et al., 2021; van Hoorn et al., 2016).
According to the dual systems model, the socio-emotional system develops rapidly during
adolescence whereas the cognitive control system develops relatively slowly (Shulman et al.,
2016; Steinberg, 2008). The imbalance between the socioemotional and cognitive control
systems may contribute to the increase in risk-taking behaviors (Burani et al., 2019; Duell et
al., 2018). Furthermore, the dual systems model also highlights that the influence of peers
may “prime” a reward-sensitive motivational state that frequently outweighs adolescents’
immature inhibitory control capacity, thereby causing a higher propensity for risk-taking
behavior (Albert & Steinberg, 2011; Freeman et al., 2020). It is worthwhile to note that peer
influences may take different forms, and previous research has suggested two forms of peer
influence, namely gentle and intensive forms of peer influence (Laursen & Veenstra, 2021).
These two forms of peer influences play different role in adolescent risk-taking behavior.
Gentle Peer Influence Plays an “Social Facilitation” Role in Risk-Taking Behavior
The gentle form of peer influence refers to the enhancement or impairment of
performance engendered by the mere presence of others (Allport, 1927; Tricoche et al.,
2020). This form of peer influence implies that adolescents are preoccupied to view the actual
or imaginary presence of peer as “social facilitation”. From this perspective, gentle peer
influence serves as a specific social cue which provides adolescents with a strong sense of
belonging and acceptance (Albert et al., 2013). Under gentle peer influence, adolescents
prefer risky choices with short-term benefits rather than the safe choices with long-term value
(O’Brien et al., 2011), and adolescents are also more motivated to take risks to show personal
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 5
attributes to gain admiration and popularity from peers (Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Chein et
al., 2011, Knoll et al., 2015). This view is congruent with the studies which found that
adolescents’ risk-taking behavior is sensitive to the gentle form of peer influence, such as
peer presence (Gardner & Steinberg, 2005), peer information (Tomova & Pessoa, 2018), and
peers’ risky choices (Osmont et al., 2021).
A long tradition of neural cognitive research also pointed out that the association
between adolescents’ risk‐taking behaviors and gentle peer influence is particularly
prominent. For instance, Chein et al.’s (2011) study indicated that the ventral striatum (VS)
and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) were activated more greatly under peer presence and higher
engagement in risk-taking behavior occurred in peer presence condition. In event-related
potentials (ERPs) studies, Kessler et al. (2017) used a Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART)
and found that adolescents assigned to the peer presence condition showed greater negative
FRN than those assigned to the single (i.e., peer absence) condition after they received failure
feedback. In a similar vein, Willoughby et al. (2021) suggested that adolescents were
sensitive to peer observation and showed larger loss-feedback neural responses in the peer
observation condition than in the single condition.
Intensive Peer Influence Plays an “Interpersonal Threat” Role in Risk-Taking Behavior
As mentioned above, although significant studies have investigated the effects of
gentler form of peer influence (e.g., peer information, peer presence, peer observation) on
adolescent risk-taking, understanding the influence of a more intensive peer influence
condition (e.g., peer competition) on adolescents’ behaviors would be also necessary. As a
common form of aggressive peer interaction, peer competition refers to one’s mental state
and behavior of attempting to surmount others (Brickley et al., 2000; Garling et al., 2021). In
line with social comparison theory (Festinger, 1954), individuals may evaluate themselves by
comparing with others, which may induce their upward motivations and further promote
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 6
competition with peers. That is, adolescents may react differently to risk-taking behavior due
to consideration of potential social evaluations in competition (Toelch et al., 2014). The high
propensity of adolescents to take risky choices in competition condition is to surpass and
outperform their opponents or acquire a better peer status and approval under competition
(Crocker et al., 2003). Given that risk-taking is commonly viewed as an attractive strategy to
promote individuals’ chances of success (Hangen et al., 2016), adolescents are more likely to
engage in risky behaviors with a high propensity of victory when the conservative decisions
may not help them win the competition, even with a high probability of cost (Mishra et al.,
2014).
Empirical research suggests that adolescent risk-taking behavior may be influenced by
the desire to enhance social status in the competition context (Op de Macks et al., 2017),
while similar conclusions were found in the effect of multiplayer competition context on risk-
taking behaviors (Foo et al., 2017). In addition, Liu et al.’s (2020b) study suggested that male
adolescents are more likely to show risk-taking behavior in peer competition condition when
they are working on the BART. Habib et al.’s (2017) study revealed that the promotive effect
of competition condition on adolescent risk-taking behavior is due to weakened regret under
competition. From neurocognitive perspectives, Vorobyev et al.’s (2015) functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study found that peer competition condition increased the
activation in the right caudate head only for the rewarding outcome. Given that few studies
have examined the temporal neural process underlying the effect of peer competition on
adolescent risk-taking behavior. Filling this gap will contribute to the bigger picture of the
neural underpinnings of why adolescents commit to risk-taking behavior. .
Event-Related Potential Components
As our previous elaborates, although studies involving fMRI have contributed to
identifying brain regions related to adolescents’ responses to peer competition (Fliessbach et
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 7
al., 2007; Luo et al., 2018; Vorobyev et al., 2015), little is known about the temporal
characteristics of decision making and feedback evaluation processing among individuals in
the competition condition. Event-related potentials (ERPs) could reveal important insights
about the precise timing of processes underlying cognitive functions given the measure’s
excellent time resolution. Therefore, we aimed to examine the time characteristics of peer
competition in modulating risk-taking behavior. Specifically, we consider both the decision-
making phase and the feedback evaluation phase in risk-taking behavior. According to Luck
(2005, 2014), difference wave of FRN could be better to describe the conflict degree of
processing of the current feedback in a “gain and loss” dimension and achieve a better
understanding of the specificity of loss processing, because the weaknesses of general FRN is
that it does not accurately represent the underlying source waveforms that are summed
together.
N2 Component in the Decision-Making Phase
The conflict related N2 component has often been used as biomarkers for decision
making phase (Folstein & Van Petten, 2008). The N2 approximately occurs 250-350 ms
following stimulus onset (Hajcak et al., 2006) and it indicates an index conflict detection
during stimuli processing. The potentially conflicting pieces of information should be
associated with N2 amplitude (Dennis et al., 2015). Following this idea, Clayson & Larson.’s
(2011) study suggested that the degree of inconsistency of the experiment may modulate the
N2 amplitudes during decision-making. Similarly, Li et al. (2021) found that decision-making
under different conditions may activate the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex response
correlated with conflict and error monitoring, which can be reflected in different amplitudes
of N2. In a similar vein, Wang et al. (2016) found that a more negative going N2 reflected a
greater cognitive effort to inhibit cognitive conflict elicited by making distrusting decisions.
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 8
Given that there is more conflict information that individuals need to consider under
competition condition, a larger N2 component may be manifested.
Feedback-Related Negativity (FRN) in the Feedback-Evaluation Phase
Apart from N2 in decision-making phase, the FRN at the frontocentral sites is a
commonly computed ERPs component after the onset of feedback (Gehring & Willoughby,
2002), presumably generated in the ACC (e.g., vertex electrode Fz). The FRN is a negative-
going component, whose maximum elicited in approximately 250–350 ms after the onset of
outcome presentation (Gehring & Willoughby, 2002; Walsh & Anderson, 2012). Considering
that FRN is greater in response to negative than positive outcomes, previous research have
commonly linked this component to the monitoring of individuals’ unfavorable events
(Miltner et al., 1997; Sambrook & Goslin, 2015). Previous research has highlighted that FRN
is sensitive to the feedback of risk-taking behavior (Wang et al., 2014; Valt et al., 2019). In
addition, FRN is also modulated by the losses and gains of decision-making feedback in
social comparison condition (Van Meel & Van Heijningen, 2010; Yu et al., 2019).
P300 in the Feedback-Evaluation Phase
Following the FRN, the P300 is a centro-parietal positivity appearing in the 300–600
ms time window (Holroyd & Coles, 2002; San Martín, 2012; Yeung & Sanfey, 2004). On
one hand, P300 is generally considered to reflect attentional resource allocation in outcome
evaluation (Gray et al., 2004). Specifically, P300 encodes the valence and magnitude of an
outcome, marked as a greater amplitude for affectively positive, larger outcomes than for
affectively negative, smaller outcomes (Yeung & Sanfey, 2004; Yeung et al., 2005).
Moreover, P300 reflects allocation of attentional resources and the subjective importance of
the desired outcome (Polich, 2007; Pornpattananangkul et al., 2017). On the other hand, P300
component also is sensitive to social conditions in the outcome evaluation (Cui et al., 2017;
Leue & Beauducel, 2019). For instance, evidence from Zhang et al.’s (2021) study indicated
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 9
that P300 is modulated by peer condition. Participants had stronger motivation to outperform
dislikeable opponents. In addition, Valt et al.’s (2019) research found that P300 is associated
with the feedback processing of social comparison, when participants’ performance was not
as good as the performance of others, a greater P300 component elicited. Also, Barker et al.’s
(2021) research used a non-social and social conditions flanker task and found that female
individuals exhibited a larger P300 in social condition as compared to nonsocial condition.
The Present Study
Although the effect of peer influence on adolescent risk-taking behavior is well
documented, two issues remain unsolved. First, previous studies focused primarily on how
gentle peer influence on adolescent risk-taking behavior, but comparatively less research has
exanimated the effect of intensive peer influence (i.e., peer competition) directly. Second,
despite a small number of studies that have examined the effect of peer competition on
adolescent risk-taking, no ERPs studies have investigated the temporal neural underpinnings.
To address these gaps, the current ERPs study sought to examine the neural correlates for the
effect of peer competition on adolescent risk-taking behavior. BART (Lejuez et al., 2002) is a
classical dynamic sequential risky-taking task under uncertainty. The performance in the
BART task has been examinated to be related to certain risky behaviors (e.g., smoking and
drug use) in reality (Aklin et al., 2012; Lauriola et al., 2014). Here, we combined BART with
electroencephalography (EEG) recording to answer two research questions. First, how does
peer competition influence risk-taking behavior? Second, what is the temporal neural process
for the said effect? For the behavioral outcomes, we hypothesize that individuals in peer
competition condition will engage in more risk-taking behavior compared to those in the
single condition. For the ERPs outcomes, we hypothesize that the N2 may be elicited higher
in peer competition condition rather than in single condition; (2) the difference wave of FRN
(dFRN) amplitude will be greater under the peer competition condition than the single
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 10
condition. (3) P300 is more induced in the peer competition condition, regardless of the gain
and loss feedback participants receive.
Method
Participants
To examine the adequacy of the sample, we conducted a priori power analysis
(G Power 3.1) and suggested that at least 24 participants would be needed to ensure .80
power with an expected effect size (i.e., f) of 0.25 and an alpha level of 0.05 (Faul et al.,
2007). Twenty-nine dextral college students participated in this study. They reported no
history of neurological or psychiatric disorders or head trauma. Data from 3 participants were
excluded due to excessive artifacts in EEG data. The final sample for analysis consisted of 24
female participants (M = 19.83 years, SD = 1.49, age range: 18-23 years). All procedures
age
involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the research ethics committee
of the corresponding author’s institution. Participants provided written consent prior to
participation.
Experimental Design
The experiment conducted a 2 (conditions: Single vs. Competition) × 2 (Feedback:
Gain vs. Loss) within participant factorial design. The order of the conditions was
counterbalanced across participants.
Task and Procedure
In this study, we used the BART (Lejuez et al., 2002) to measure participants’ risk-
taking behavior. This task requires participants to make tradeoffs between low-risk, small-
reward options, and high-risk, large-reward options (Canning et al., 2021). Previous studies
have been confirmed that the risk-taking propensity on the BART is correlated with real-life
risk-taking behavior in adolescents (Qu et al., 2015; Telzer et al., 2015). During the task,
participants were required to pump balloons to get monetary rewards. Each pump not only
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 11
raises the size of the balloon and thus increases the reward, but also increases the explode
propensity for the current balloon. For non-exploded balloons, a monetary reward was
offered. For exploded balloons, participants’ accumulated rewards would be forfeited from
the current balloon as a punishment. The maximum pump of balloons was 128 in the origin
version of BART (Lejuez et al., 2002). Therefore, in the origin BART, the probability that the
balloon would burst after the first pump was 1/127 while the probability climbed to 1/10 after
th
the second pump; and the burst probability of the balloon was 1.00 at the 128 pump. Here,
we used an adapted version of the BART, which was well validated to assess risk-taking
behavior in ERP studies (Xu et al., 2019). We modified the maximum pumps to 12 for each
balloon. In each balloon, participants would win 10 cents for each pump in the balloon as
long as the balloon does not burst. The BART was programmed with E-prime 2.0
Before the experiment, each participant sat comfortably in front of a computer screen
in the laboratory, and all participants were asked to minimize their eye blinks and head
movements while performing the task. The BART included 144 formal trials in each
condition. All participants first saw a fixation for 800ms. After an 800-1200ms random delay
blank, they were instructed to pump each balloon in the counting of 5 seconds. After another
800-1200ms random blank, participant received feedback. To start with, participants were
given clear instructions and a practice block of 10 trials prior to the official test to ensure that
they understood the task and the procedure. Participants completed the BART in two
conditions (i.e., two blocks). For the single condition, participants were told that they would
complete the BART alone and their total rewards would be based on their performance. In the
peer competition condition, participants were told that they would be competing with an age-
matched opponent who was impersonated by the researcher. The opponent was in another
room outside the EEG cabin during the task, and they were competing in real time.
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 12
Participants were told that the final scores determined who would win or lose in the BART.
The winner would get not only her own reward, but also half of the total reward of the loser.
The order of single and competition condition was randomized. The experiment lasted about
20-25 minutes for each condition. All participants were given a 10-minute break between the
two conditions. They received a total reward of roughly 80 Chinese yuan (about 12.5 dollars)
based on their performance in the two conditions.
Manipulation Check and Behavioral Measures
Participants were asked to provide a self-reported manipulation check, which included
(a) emotion under two conditions by using the 10-items positive and negative affective scale
(PNAS; Watson et al., 1988); (b) the intensity of the task (i.e., “How intense you perceived in
the task you just performed”) under two conditions with a 9-point Likert scale ranging from
1(not at all) to 9 (extremely); and (c) the authenticity of the tasks (i.e., “I believe that I was
playing with a real student in the lab next door”) with a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1
(not at all) to 7 (extremely).
We analyzed the following behavioral indices in this study: average pumps and
average pumps after different feedback was given under the two conditions. The average
pumps index refers to averaging all the balloon trials, including the exploded and non-
exploded balloons. We also calculated participants’ average pumps in the current trial after
receiving the gain and loss feedback respectively in the previous trial.
Psychophysiological Recordings
EEG was recorded from 64 scalp sites BrainAmp Standard amplifier and BrainVision
Recorder software (Brain Products, Munich, Germany) at a sampling rate of 500 Hz.
Ag/AgCl electrodes were fitted to an elastic cap according to the International 10-20 system.
Additional electrodes were placed at the FCz for offline reference and at Afz as connection to
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 13
ground. All electrode impedances were kept below 10 kΩ throughout the experiment. Offline
data were processed with BrainVision Analyzer 2 software (Brain Products, Munich,
Germany). EEG channels were re-referenced to an average of the activity at the mastoids, and
data were filtered at cutoffs of 0.01 and 40 Hz. All data were visually inspected and artifacts
(e.g., muscle movement, horizontal eye movement) were removed. Eyeblinks were removed
with the independent component analysis (ICA, Lee et al., 1999; Jung et al., 2000). ERPs
segments ranging from 200 ms before to 800 ms after feedback onset were created, and
baseline correction was performed based on the average signal in the 200 ms directly
preceding feedback. Segments containing maximum amplitudes that exceeded an absolute
value of 100 μV or a voltage step from one sample to the next of 50 μV were excluded by
means of automated artifact rejection.
EEG Analysis
The N2 component was utilized to examine the group differences in the decision-
making phase, while the FRN and P300 components were used to examine the feedback
evaluation phase. Given the overlap of FRN waveform, the current study conducted the peak-
to-average-peak method to compute the general FRN (Osinsky et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2019).
Specifically, this study estimated the largest amplitudes of the negative peak during 250-
350ms following the feedback onset. Furthermore, we detected the most positive going
electrical potential during 150-250ms before negative peak as left largest positive peak
(Wischnewski & Schutter, 2018) and the most positive peak during 350-450ms after negative
peak as right largest positive peak (de Groot & van Strien, 2019). Then, individuals’ mean
amplitudes for the 25ms time windows around these positive and negative peaks were
computed (e.g., Osinsky et al., 2012), and the difference in voltages between the mean
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 14
amplitudes of the most negative feedback and the average of the mean amplitudes of the
preceding and succeeding peaks was used to calculate the general FRN. The N2 and P300
were estimated by peak voltage measurements. To be specific, the P300 was calculated as the
mean waveform (time window: 25ms) of the maximum positive amplitude during 300-450ms
after the presentation of feedback (Polich, 2007), while N2 was also calculated as the mean
waveform (time window: 25ms) of the maximum negative amplitude during 250-350ms after
the decision-making stimuli presented (Folstein & Van Petten, 2008).
Data Analysis Strategies
For the behavioral data, a 2 (condition: single vs. competition) ×2 (feedback : gain vs.
loss) repeated measures ANOVA was conducted on the average pumps in BART. For the
decision-making phase of EEG data, we analyzed the N2 component using single factor two
levels (condition: single vs. competition) repeated measures ANOVA. For the feedback
evaluation phase, we used a 2 (condition: single vs. competition) 2 (feedback: gain vs. loss)
repeated measures ANOVA to analyze the FRN amplitudes during the feedback phase of
EEG data and the mean P300 amplitudes. We employed a Greenhouse-Geisser correction to
account for the violations of the assumption of sphericity when necessary. We utilized
Bonferroni correction for post hoc comparisons, and we also reported the partial eta squared
as a measure of the proportion of variance explained by the independent variable.
Results
Manipulation Check Results
The results of the manipulation check showed that there were no significant differences
in positive or negative emotions between single and competition condition (ps = 0.09~0.54).
However, the paired sample t-tests showed that the intensity of the task was higher for the
competition condition (M = 6.50, SD = 1.75) than for the single condition (M = 4.38, SD =
For the behavioral data, feedback refers to the previous feedback of last trial.
The average pump in BART refers to participants’ average pumps after receiving the
feedback of the previous trial.
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 15
1.93), t = -5.43, p < .001, Hedges’ g = 1.15. In addition, the average score of the participants
on the question of task authenticity was 5.00 (SD = 1.38), which indicated that participants
believed they were in a real competition in general.
Behavioral Results
= 5.36, SD = 1.02) relative to the single condition (M = 5.65, SD = 0.72), F = 7.36, p
(1, 25)
= .012, partial η = 0.242.
To investigate the effect of the previous balloon explosion on the current risk-taking
behavior, we conducted further ANOVA on the average pumps of balloons with the factors
of previous trial feedback (gain or loss) and condition (single or peer competition). As
(1, 25)
6.77, p = .016, partial η = 0.227. Participants pumped more in the single condition than in
the peer competition condition regardless of the feedback of the previous trial. However, we
did not find a significant main effect of feedback (F < 1, p = .341, partial η = 0.039) and
(1, 25)
there was no interaction between condition and feedback (F = 1.45, p = .242, partial η =
(1, 25)
0.059).
ERPs Results
Decision-Making Phase
average ERPs waveforms for positive and negative feedback for the channel Fz across
repeated measure ANOVA revealed a significant and main effect of the condition (single vs.
peer competition), F = 8.36, p = .008, partial η = 0.266. Specifically, a more negative
(1, 25)
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 16
N2 occurred in the competition condition (-5.78 ± 3.89 μV) than in the single condition (-
4.27 ± 3.57 μV).
Feedback Evaluation Phase
Grand average ERPs of FRN and P300 waveforms in feedback evaluation phase are
repeated measure ANOVA revealed a significant and main effect of the feedback (gain vs.
loss), F = 25.15, p < .001, partial η = 0.52. Specifically, a more negative FRN was
(1, 25)
observed after loss feedback (-6.99 ± 4.91μV) than after the gain feedback (-3.96 ± 3.23μV).
However, the results did not observe a significant main effect of condition (F < 1, p
(1, 25)
= .746, partial η = 0.005) or interaction effect between condition and feedback (F =
(1, 25)
2.32，p = .142, partial η = 0.091).
In the current study, the difference wave of FRN was calculated by subtracting the
the two conditions, F = 6.83, p = .016, partial η = 0.229. The difference wave induced in
(1, 25)
the single condition (-4.55 ± 4.33μV) was larger than competition condition (-7.17 ±
4.47μV).
revealed a significant effect of condition (F = 8.387, p = .008, partial η = 0.267), such
(1, 25)
that larger positive peaks were induced in the single condition (12.05 ± 5.07μV) than in the
peer competition condition (9.44 ± 5.75μV). Also, a significant main effect of the feedback
(F = 4.35, p = .048, partial η = 0.159) was observed. The gain feedback (11.53 ±
(1, 25)
5.22μV) elicited larger positive peaks than the loss feedback (9.96 ± 5.36μV). However, the
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 17
interaction effect between condition and feedback (F < 1, p = .422, partial η = 0.028)
(1, 25)
did not reached significance.
Discussion
How gentle peer influence on adolescent risk-taking has been widely examined at
behavioral and neural levels (Chein et al., 2011; Kessler et al., 2016; Tricoche et al., 2020;
van Hoorn et al., 2016). A few studies have also investigated intensive peer influence on
adolescent risk-taking behavior (Liu et al., 2020; Mishra et al., 2014) and adopted fMRI to
examine its underlying neural processes (Op de Macks et al., 2017; Polosan et al., 2011;
Vorobyev et al., 2015). However, little is known about the temporal neural process. To fill
this gap in the literature, the current study used the ERPs technique to analyze the effect of
peer competition situation on adolescent risk-taking behavior in the BART. Our results
indicated that, adolescents were less likely to inflate the balloon in the competition condition
than in single condition. At the decision-making phase, a more negative going of N2
amplitude elicited in the peer competition condition was larger than that in the single
condition. At the feedback evaluation phase, our results revealed the difference wave of FRN
was larger in the peer competition condition than in the single condition while P3 amplitude
was more pronounced in the single condition than in the peer competition condition.
The Influence of Peer-Competition on Risk-Taking Decision at the Behavioral Levels
The behavioral result of the current study has replicated that, participants had a higher
propensity for risk-taking behavior under single condition rather than peer competition
condition. This finding is inconsistent with the previous studies which commonly found that
adolescents may ignore the negative outcomes and engage in more risk-taking behavior to
win the competition so that they could acquire potential social praise and peer recognition
(Liu et al., 2020b; Vorobyev et al., 2015). Of note, our punishment setting was “lose 50
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 18
percent of participants’ reward to their opponent in the competition” while Liu et al.’s
(2020b) setting was “receive nothing if participants lose in the competition”. We speculate
that such inconsistency of reward or punishment judgments in competition may lead to
individuals’ inconsistent behavioral outcomes.
According to the prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), individuals are more
risk-seeking when facing with losses, but they are more risk-aversive when facing rewards.
Liu et al.’s (2020b) setting implies that participants are more willing to make risky choices to
win because they will lose 100 percent of reward if they lose the competition. By contrast, the
manipulation of losing 50% of reward in our study may urge adolescents to use rational
strategies to make conservative decisions, because participants can still obtain 50% of the
reward even if they lose. Another possible explanation is that Liu et al.’s (2020b) study only
found the facilitative effect of peer competition on risk-taking behavior among male
adolescents, whereas our study focused on adolescent girls. The gender differences in risk
preference may help explain the inconsistency. Future research should broaden the scope of
the binary competition outcome of winning or losing by using computational modeling
measures, such as using the drift diffusion model (Ratcliff & McKoon, 2008) from an
information accumulation of decision-making perspective. It may better clarify the
boundaries of changes in risky behavior under competition.
According to the social comparison theory, individuals frequently evaluate
themselves through comparison with others (Buunk et al., 2007). Considering that every loss
feedback represents a negative social appraisal (McCormick et al., 2018), participants may be
more concerned about being adversely assessed by others and choose more cautious decision
options because it represents a better chance of succeeding (Nockur et al., 2021). On the
contrary, participants’ gains and losses are solely borne by themselves in the single condition,
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 19
so they are more willing to take risks to maximize their own benefits without worrying about
the potential negative repercussions of their decision (Jiao et al., 2015).
The Influence of Peer Competition on Risk-Taking Behavior at the Neural Levels
The ERPs results demonstrated that individuals responded differently to risk-taking
behaviors in the BART and revealed the neural underpinnings under different conditions.
Electrophysiologically, the decision-making and outcome evaluation phases perspective
(Wang et al., 2016) provides support for our research and three ERPs components (the N2,
FRN, and P300) revealed group differences in neural processing under risk-taking behavior.
Early-stage of decision-making processing to risky choices was reflected in the N2 while
outcome evaluation processing to different feedback under single and competition conditions
was reflected in the FRN and P300.
As expected, we observed a negative going between 250 and 350ms, which may be
identified as an N2 component (Hajcak et al., 2006). To be specific, participants’ N2 was
modulated by the condition. A larger N2 amplitude occurred in the peer competition
condition. This finding is in line with our hypothesis, which indicates that participants
consider additional factors (e.g., extra punishment) in their decision-making process under
the peer competition condition which increases the level of cognitive conflict in the early
stage of decision-making process (Li et al., 2021). Research has shown that greater N2 is
associated with increased conflict adaption (Clayson & Larson, 2011). Previous evidence also
suggested that N2 is thought to be an index of cognitive control (Enriquez-Geppert et al.,
2010). Combining our behavioral results, we assume that the setup of peer competition is a
contextual social cue. The conflict willingness between receiving an extra reward from
opponents and preventing one’s own reward from being “snatched” by opponents alters the
N2 amplitude, and thus participants engage in more conservative decision-making at the
behavioral level.
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 20
Following the N2, a significantly different general FRN amplitude was found in the
feedback condition, while no significant difference was detected in the single and peer
competition condition. This finding is consistent with reinforcement-learning theory (Holroyd
& Coles, 2002), which predicts greater general FRN amplitudes following negative or
unexpected events compared to positive or predicted outcomes. Regardless of the conditions,
participants’ goal to accomplish BART is to gain benefits. Hence, their expectation violation
would be activated more when perceiving loss feedback and thus a larger general FRN would
be generated. According to Luck (2014), difference wave of FRN could be better to be
described as the conflict degree of processing of the current feedback in a ‘gain and loss’
dimension. In this study, the amplitude of loss minus gain was used to calculate the FRN
difference wave, which may conduct a better understanding of the specificity of loss
processing (Xu et al., 2021). Based on this perspective, we observed a significant difference
in difference waves of FRN between the single and peer competition conditions. Specifically,
the FRN difference waves under the competition condition were larger. The results revealed
that late adolescents seem to have a stronger sensitivity to loss-aversion under the
competition condition rather than those in the single condition. This could also explain why
they behave more conservatively (as measured by lower average pumps) under the social
pressure context (Lin et al., 2021).
Of note, the P300 also represented the processing of feedback evaluation (Wang et al.,
2014; Yeung & Sanfey, 2004). Our results showed that P300 amplitude was modulated by
conditions while no significant effects were found in the feedback. Previous research shared
the premise that the P300 component reflects the perceived relevance of individual attention
resource allocation and expected outcomes, as well as the inhibitory control mechanism and
the engaged motivation (Wischnewski & Schutter, 2018). Compared to the peer competition
condition, a larger P300 was elicited in the single condition, which may indicate that
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 21
individuals took all benefits themselves in the single condition and, as a result, they prefer to
invest more psychological resources in the evaluation of outcomes (Hajcak et al., 2010). Prior
fMRI studies revealed that individuals who reacted to peer condition with a decision response
were associated with reward-based regions of the brain including the ventral striatum (VS),
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and orbitofrontal cortex (Pei et al., 2020; Polosan et
al.,2011; Vorobyev et al., 2015). Therefore, compared with those in the peer competition
condition, the higher inflation pumps appeared more rewarding and desirable for participants
in the single condition because the reward is entirely up to them. This may place greater
subjective importance on such outcomes and provided neurological explanation for the
behavioral result of risk-seeking tendency in the single condition.
Limitations and Future Research
The current study has several limitations. First, this study focuses only on female
adolescents. Yet, according to the male-warrior hypothesis (Vugt et al., 2007), cognitions and
behaviors among males are more responsive to social interaction than females. Such effect
was also confirmed by Liu et al.’s (2020b) study. In addition, evidence showed that males are
more likely to engage in risk-taking behaviors (Lewis et al., 2021; Van Leijenhorst et al.,
2008). Future studies may benefit from recruiting larger samples and investigating the gender
differences in how peer competition predicts risk-taking among adolescents. Second, there
are other factors that require continued empirical inquiries. For instance, our research focused
primarily on how competition modulates risk-taking behavior in monetary-driven condition.
The same effect should be clarified in social-driven condition (e.g., by using the island
getaway task (Kujawa et al., 2014)). Third, the current study did not examine how the size of
reward and the influences of different peers (e.g., strangers vs. friends) on participants’ risk-
taking behavior, future research should aim to uncover the effect of peer competition on risk-
taking with more sophisticated research designs.
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 22
Conclusion
This study contributes to the understanding of the temporal neural process of the
influence of peer competition on adolescent risk-taking. At the behavioral level, adolescents
acted more cautiously when being along than when playing with a peer. At the neural level,
our study indicated that in the decision-making phase, a more negative going of N2 related to
cognitive conflict was observed in the peer competition condition than in the single condition.
In the feedback evaluation phase, a larger difference wave of FRN was elicited in the peer
competition than in the single condition, whereas a more positive P300 amplitude was found
in the single condition rather than in the peer competition condition. In sum, these findings
together suggest that adolescent girls are more likely to make risk-adverse decision under
peer competition context (vs. single context). The results also provide further behavioral and
neural evidence for the intensive peer influence on adolescent risk-taking behavior.
PEER COMPETITION AND RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 23