Redheaded women are more sexually active than other women,
but it is probably due to their suitors
a,* a a a a
Kateřina Sýkorová , Vojtěch Fiala , Jana Hlaváčová , Šárka Kaňková , and Jaroslav Flegr
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, Faculty of Science, Charles University,
Vinicna 7, 128 00, Prague, Czech Republic
Corresponding author at: Department of Philosophy and History of Sciences, Faculty of
Science, Charles University, Vinicna 7, 128 00, Prague, CZ
E-mail address: sykorok6@natur.cuni.cz
Abstract
Women with red hair colour, i.e., 1–9% of female Europeans, tend to be the subject of
various stereotypes about their sexually liberated behaviour. The aim of the present case-
control study was to explore whether a connection between red hair colour and sexual
behaviour really exists using data from 110 women (34% redheaded) and 93 men (22%
redheaded). Redheadedness in women, but not in men, correlated with various traits related to
sexual life, namely with higher sexual desire as measured by Revised Sociosexual
Orientation Inventory, with higher sexual activity and more sexual partners of the preferred
gender over the past year, earlier initiation of sexual life, and higher sexual submissiveness.
Structural equation modelling, however, showed that sexual desire of redheaded women
meditated neither their higher sexual activity nor most of the variability of having more
sexual partners. These results indicate that the apparently more liberated sexual behaviour in
redheaded women could be the consequence of frequent attempts of potential mates to have
sex with redheaded women. Other hypotheses, based on different physiology, faster life
history strategy, or altered self-perception of red-haired women induced by stereotypes about
them, were also tested and discussed.
Keywords: Redheadedness, Sexual desire, Sexual activity, Sexual submissiveness
Introduction
Human redheadedness is determined by the quantity, ratio, and distribution of the two main
types of the pigment melanin: eumelanin and pheomelanin. In European populations, its
expression is controlled mainly by the MC1R gene (Lin & Fisher, 2007; Valverde et al.,
1995). About 1–9% of Europeans have red hair, with the highest prevalence in Great Britain
(Katsara & Nothnagel, 2019). Similar to other minorities, redheaded people are subjected to
various stereotypes (Heckert & Best, 1997). Redheaded women are thought of as being more
temperamental than other women (Heckert & Best, 1997; Swami & Barrett, 2011; Weir &
Fine-Davis, 1989) and, unlike redheaded men, they are often stereotyped as sexy, passionate,
sexually liberated, or promiscuous (Anderson, 2015; O'Regan, 2014). In scientific literature,
however, data regarding any associations between traits related to sexual life and red hair are
nearly absent. There are only studies showing higher self-reported lifelong number of sexual
partners in redheaded women (Frost, Kleisner, & Flegr, 2017), association between
genetically predicted later age at first sexual intercourse and redheadedness in both sexes
(Day et al., 2016), and no connection between self-reported sexual desire and redheadedness
in either gender (Flegr & Sýkorová, 2019). All these papers, however, primarily focused on
different topics. The nature and cause of a possible relation between red hair and sexual
behaviour in women therefore deserves a closer look.
Based on available scientific literature, we propose five principally distinct possible
explanations of the potentially less restrained sexual behaviour in redheaded women. The
hypothetical higher sexual activity of redheaded women could be either the result of their
higher sexual desire or of a higher demand on the part of potential mates who prefer
redheaded women or believe that redheaded women are more sexually permissive. If higher
sexual desire of redheaded women were indeed responsible for their less restrained sexual
behaviour, manifesting for instance in higher sexual activity or early initiation of sexual life,
one would expect redheaded women to exhibit one of the following: (1) a difference in
physiology, e.g. higher oestrogen concentrations; (2) a faster life history strategy, possibly
induced by worse health that would shorten life expectancy and likely reproductive period;
(3) their altered self-perception with internalised belief in stereotypes about redheads. If the
higher sexual activity of redheaded women were the result of higher demand for women with
red hair, it could be either (4) a direct passive response of redheaded women to current
courtship of potential mates, or (5) indirect, partly or fully active, response of redheaded
women to past courtship of potential mates.
The first model supposes that redheaded women have on average higher sexual desire
and sexual activity than non-redheaded women due to some molecular mechanism that
affects both the expression of red hair in women and their sexual behaviour. The most
probable candidate is prenatal oestrogen. Manning and Fink (2008) showed that women with
a high 2D:4D digit ratio, which indicates exposure to a higher level of prenatal oestrogen
(Manning et al., 1998), report higher sex drive and easier attainment of sexual excitement.
Because red hair colour generally seems to occur more frequently in women than in men
(Flegr & Sýkorová, 2019; Frost et al., 2017; Shekar et al., 2008), Frost et al. (2017)
suggested that prenatal oestrogen, which is specific to female development, contributes to the
expression of red hair during prenatal development and might be responsible for the sex
difference in the frequency of redheadedness. Conversely, a study by Voracek, Bagdonas,
and Dressler (2007) found that prenatal oestrogen, as indirectly indicated by 2D:4D digit
ratio, was not associated with lighter hair colours. Still, that study did not examine an
association between estimated prenatal oestrogen and red hair colour specifically, because red
hair colour was treated merely as one of the dark colours of hair. The sex difference in
expression of red hair phenotype is, however, supported by a twin study which showed that in
four of five twin pairs discordant in red hair colour, the females were redheaded and males
non-redheaded (Box et al., 1997).
The second model suggests that higher sexual desire of redheaded women could be
due to their switch from a slow to a faster life strategy, which could occur in response to
poorer health. Redheaded people, especially women, tend to have worse health (Flegr &
Sýkorová, 2019; Frost et al., 2017) and are more likely to suffer from certain diseases
including cancer, endometriosis, and Parkinson’s disease (Bliss et al., 1995; Chen et al.,
2017; Gao et al., 2009; Missmer et al., 2006; Scherer & Kumar, 2010; Tell‐Marti et al., 2015;
Woodworth et al., 1995). It has been described how in reaction to impaired health, which
reduces adult life expectancy and therefore also the length of the reproductive period,
individuals tend to shift to a faster life history strategy, which manifests itself as earlier
reproduction or having a higher number of children (Chua et al., 2017; Waynforth, 2012). A
recent study has moreover shown that poor health is associated not only with an earlier start
of reproduction but also with an earlier initiation of sexual life in women and higher sexual
desire in both women and men (Sýkorová & Flegr, 2021).
The third model proposes that redheaded women have higher sexual desire and are
sexually more permissive because the stereotypes about their sexual behaviour have altered
their self-perception. In this process, an initially incorrect attribution assigned by others can
be internalised by the target person who then changes their self-perception to conform to the
initially erroneous belief (Darley & Fazio, 1980; McNulty & Swann, 1994; Scherr et al.,
2011; Snyder & Swann, 1978). Based on such process of change in self-perception,
redheaded women themselves could be internally convinced of the validity of the
stereotypical social labelling, which would then lead to their actual higher sexual desire.
The fourth model puts potential mates, usually men, in the active role in explaining
the association between women’s redheadedness and their higher sexual activity. If men
preferred redheaded women or, based on prevailing stereotypes, anticipated greater likelihood
of success in their attempts to have sex with women with red hair, they would do so relatively
more frequently. It would automatically lead to a higher sexual activity and a higher number
of sexual partners of redheaded women even if their sexual desire was average or even lower
than average.
The fifth model employs the principle of social feedback hypothesis (Kleisner et al.,
2010) to explain the higher sexual activity in redheaded women. If potential mates tried to
have sex with women with red hair often on the first date or early on in the courtship,
redheaded women could start to consider it a social norm and begin to respond more
positively to such behaviour or even initiate sexual activity themselves. Because redheaded
women would perceive such behaviour as a social norm, they might be more sexually active
even if they did not like it and were unfamiliar with stereotypes about more permissive
redheaded women.
The main purpose of the present case-control study was to explore whether there is an
association between red hair colour and traits related to sexual life. We collected data about
hair colour, sexual behaviour, and sexual preferences from 110 women and 93 men with
various intensity of redheadedness. We analysed the association of redheadedness with sexual
desire, sexual activity, the number of sexual partners, age at first sexual intercourse, sexual
orientation, BDSM preferences, and sexual dominance. In an attempt to test the several
hypotheses explaining mechanism of the observed associations, we searched for a mediating
role of sexual desire and physical disease.
Material and methods
The study consisted of a laboratory investigation which took place at the Faculty of Science
of Charles University in Prague on 17 September – 3 October 2018 and subsequent online
questionnaire survey performed with the same set of participants within the following few
weeks. Information about the experimental design was already described in a study by Flegr
et al. (2020). The project was approved by the institutional review board of the Faculty of
Science, Charles University (No. 2018/30).
Participants
The recruitment of participants was conducted mostly via Facebook. The study was promoted
as a ‘study of health and personality of redheads’ on the timeline of the Facebook page
Labbunnies, an approximately 18,000-strong group of Czech and Slovak nationals willing to
participate in evolutionary psychology experiments. Anyone could share the link to invitation
to the study. Further recruitment of redheaded participants was carried out by invitations on
other Facebook pages, selective invitation of registered members of Labbunnies who reported
having red hair in our earlier questionnaires (scored 4–6 on a 6-point scale of redheadedness),
and by handing out flyers in the streets of Prague to people who looked like natural redheads.
We invited only people who did not have greying hair and had not dyed or bleached their hair
for at least six months. The ratio of redheaded participants to controls was intended to be 1:2.
In the end, we obtained data from 110 women and 93 men who participated in the study. All
provided informed consent. Due to the sensitivity of questions posed to them, participants
took part in the study under assigned anonymised codes and were informed about the
complete anonymisation of the data. Participants received no remuneration, only a
commemorative badge and a haircare gift set (costing 53 CZK, i.e., app. 2.3 USD). The data
collection procedure and experimental design were preregistered prior to the beginning of the
Variables
In the project, redheadedness was determined using several methods: participants’ self-report
in the questionnaire, experimenters’ observer report during the laboratory investigation, and
two methods of measuring hair pigmentation with a spectrophotometer. A previously
published study performed on the same data showed that all the above-mentioned indicators
of redheadedness provide almost identical results (Flegr et al., 2020). In the present study, we
employed only self-reported redheadedness because this way, the acquired results will be
better comparable with past and future studies. Self-reported redheadedness was measured as
a response to assessing current natural redheadedness on a six-point scale anchored with
‘absolutely non-red’ (code 1) and ‘bright red’ (code 6). Correlations between other indicators
show that all methods of determining redheadedness provide highly similar results. It
suggests that the simplest and cheapest method, namely participants’ self-rating using a short
ordinal scale, should be preferred in future studies because it facilitates acquisition of data
from large population samples. Measurement scales and methods of calculating other
indicators of redheadedness, which are presented in the Supplementary materials, are
described in Flegr et al. (2020).
All output variables were obtained from the questionnaire data. Sexual desire was
computed as the sum of Z-scores of three items forming the Desire facet in the Revised
Sociosexual Orientation Inventory (Penke & Asendorpf, 2008), namely the frequency of
having fantasies about having sex with someone the respondent is not in a committed
romantic relationship with, the frequency of experiencing sexual arousal when the respondent
is in contact with someone who they are not in a committed romantic relationship with, and
the frequency of having spontaneous fantasies about having sex with someone the respondent
had just met (each item has been anchored with ‘never’ – code 1, and ‘at least once a day’ –
code 9). Sexual activity was estimated as the average number of sexual intercourse per month
in the past year (eight categories: ‘0’ – code 1, ‘1’ – code 2, ‘2–3’ – code 3, ‘4–6’ – code 4,
‘7–10’ – code 5, ‘11–20’ – code 6, ‘21–30’ – code 7, ‘over 30’ – code 8). Non-
heterosexuality was calculated from two variables that inquired about the intensity of being
attracted to people of the same and the opposite sex (anchored with ‘absolutely not’ – code 0,
and ‘absolutely yes’ – code 100; we intended to exclude any subjects who would respond
with ‘0’ on both scales but no such subject took part in the study). Non-heterosexuality was
treated as a binary variable with 1 corresponding to being sexually attracted to people of the
same sex with the same or higher intensity than to people of the opposite sex. In
heterosexuals, we assessed the number of sexual partners of the preferred sex as the number
of sexual partners of the opposite sex in the past year (nine categories: ‘0’ – code 1, ‘1’ –
code 2, ‘2’ – code 3, ‘3’ – code 4, ‘4’ – code 5, ‘5–6’ – code 6, ‘7–9’ – code 7, ‘10–19’ –
code 8, ‘20 or more’ – code 9). In non-heterosexuals, the number of sexual partners of the
preferred sex was expressed as the higher code of two variables assessing the number of
female and male sexual partners in the past year (on the same scale as above). Age at first
sexual intercourse was determined as age at such activity (restricted from below with ‘12 and
less’ – code 12, and restricted from above with ‘40 and more’ – code 40; ‘I haven’t had sex
yet.’ corresponded to code 0). BDSM index was calculated as the arithmetical mean of Z-
scores of responses to questions concerning sexual preferences, namely the arousal by
violence, own pain, placing oneself in danger, own powerlessness, own humiliation, other’s
pain, being in danger, powerlessness, and humiliation (each item was anchored with
‘absolutely not’ – code 0, and ‘absolutely yes’ – code 100). Index of sexual dominance was
computed as the arithmetical mean of Z-scores of 4 differences between arousal by other’s
and own pain, being in danger, powerlessness, and humiliation.
We also examined a number of potentially confounding variables including sex, age,
size of place of residence (six categories: ‘<1,000 inhabitants’, ‘1,000–5,000’, ‘5,000–
50,000’, ‘50,000–100,000’, ‘100,000–500,000’, ‘Czech or Slovak capital’) and current sexual
partnership status (having a stable sexual partner, binary variable). Physical disease was
calculated as the arithmetical mean of Z-scores of responses to the number of antibiotic
treatments a respondent used in the past year, the number of different kinds of drugs
prescribed by a medical doctor which a respondent uses daily, the number of different kinds
of non-prescription drugs or food supplements a respondent uses on a daily basis, the number
of visits to a general practitioner in the past year, the number of different medical specialists a
respondent visited in the past year (each item had 1–9 scale), and the intensity of physical
health problems (0–100 scale). Similarly, mental disease was computed as the arithmetical
mean of Z-scores of responses to the intensity of suffering from anxieties, depressions,
manias, obsessions, phobias, visual hallucinations, auditory hallucinations, burnout, and
headaches, and the intensity of mental health problems (each item had 0–100 scale). Physical
and mental disease were calculated from variables used for the computation of indices of
physical and mental health problems in several previously published studies (Flegr &
Horáček, 2020; Flegr, Kuba, & Kopecký, 2020). Variables pertaining to current health status
were selected by a general practitioner (Flegr, Hoffmann, & Dammann, 2015).
Statistical analysis
Before statistical analyses, we filtered out records of three subjects who had grey hair, their
scalp was visible in the spot of measurement of hair colour, or who did not provide
information about their age. When a respondent omitted over 20% of questions relevant for
one index (i.e., sexual desire, BDSM index or index of sexual dominance), we did not
compute the index for this subject and excluded their data from particular tests. In case
missing data accounted for under 20% of variables relevant for a particular index, that index
was calculated from the remaining variables.
The age of women and men was compared using the Wilcoxon test. Associations of
all focal variables with sex and age were examined by the nonparametric Kendall corelation
test. Associations of all focal variables with potentially confounding variables (i.e., size of
place of residence, current sexual partnership status, physical disease, mental disease) were
analysed by a partial Kendall correlation test with age as a covariate. We tested associations
between redheadedness and traits related to sexual life using partial Kendall correlation test
with age as a covariate. In the next step, we also used the same test with age and potentially
confounding variables that had a significant effect on the output variables as covariates.
Partial Kendall correlation analysing the effect of redheadedness on the age at first
sexual intercourse excluded 15 subjects who reported not having had their first sexual
intercourse yet. To include the effect of those subjects, we conducted a Cox regression. Each
univariate Cox regression model included the effect of redheadedness and age. Independent
variables were standardised by computing Z-scores prior to the Cox regression. To
investigate the role of potentially mediating variables in the association between
redheadedness and sexual behaviour, we performed path analyses. To assess the strength of
the observed effects, we used the widely accepted borders by Cohen (1977). After
transformation between Tau and d, Taus 0.062, 0.156, and 0.241 correspond to d 0.20 (small
effect), 0.50 (medium effect), and 0.80 (large effect), respectively (Walker, 2003). To address
the issue of multiple testing, we applied the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure with false
discovery rate set at 0.1 to the set of main tests. Statistical analysis was performed with R v.
3.6.3 using the package ‘explorer’ 1.0 (Flegr & Flegr, 2021) for analyses with partial Kendall
correlation test, ‘survival’ 3.2.7 (Therneau, 2020) for computing Cox regression, and ‘lavaan’
0.6-7 (Rosseel, 2012) and ‘semPlot’ 1.1.2 (Epskamp, 2015) for conducting path analysis. The
dataset used in this article can be accessed on Figshare
Results
The final set consisted of 109 women (mean age 27.3, SD 7.5) and 91 men (mean age 31.8,
SD 8.8). The age of women and men differed significantly (W = 3,458, p < 0.001). On a six-
point scale of self-reported redheadedness, 37 (33.9%) women and 20 (22%) men responded
4 and higher. Descriptive statistics for all variables used in this study are presented in
We computed correlations of redheadedness and output variables with sex and
potentially confounding variables (age, size of place of residence, current sexual partnership
status, physical disease, and mental disease). Many focal variables significantly correlated
with sex and age. For instance, women had more intensively red hair than men and
redheadedness correlated negatively with age. Regarding other potential covariates, current
sexual partnership status was significantly associated with four out of seven variables related
to sexual behaviour. Size of place of residence, physical disease, and mental disease did not
exhibit many significant associations with predictors and output variables (see Supplementary
Initially, we analysed the effect of redheadedness on variables related to sexual life
with partial Kendall corelation controlled for age separately for women and men. In women,
redheadedness positively corelated with sexual desire (τ = 0.233, p < 0.001, d = 0.766),
sexual activity (τ = 0.306, p < 0.001, d = 1.045), and the number of sexual partners of the
preferred sex (τ = 0.286, p < 0.001, d = 0.965), while corresponding negatively with age at
first sexual intercourse (τ = -0.145, p = 0.039, d = 0.465) and the index of sexual dominance
(τ = -0.158, p = 0.023, d = 0.506). These results represent strong and medium effects (Cohen,
1977; Walker, 2003, also see Material and methods). Redheadedness in women did not show
a significant correlation with non-heterosexuality (τ = -0.053, p = 0.434, d = 0.166) or with
the BDSM index (τ = 0.102, p = 0.141, d = 0.323).
In men, redheadedness showed no significant correlation with any variable related to
sexual life (sexual desire: τ = 0.066, p = 0.362, d = 0.208; sexual activity: τ = 0.088, p =
0.226. d = 0.278; the number of sexual partners of the preferred sex: τ = 0.102, p =0.197, d =
0.324; age at first sexual intercourse: τ = 0.082; p = 0.273, d = 0.259; non-heterosexuality: τ =
0.063, p = 0.424. d = 0.199; BDSM index: τ = 0.110, p = 0.181, d = 0.349; index of sexual
dominance: τ = 0.035, p = 0.676, d = 0.111). The results for both sexes remained qualitatively
the same after correction by Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.
Current sexual partnership significantly corelated with sexual activity, the number of
sexual partners of the preferred sex, non-heterosexuality, and BDSM index (Supplementary
for age and current sexual partnership. All results for women retained significance (sexual
desire: τ = 0.238, p < 0.001; sexual activity: τ = 0.334, p < 0.001; the number of sexual
partners of the preferred sex: τ = 0.281, p < 0.001; age at first sexual intercourse: τ = -0.146,
p = 0.039; index of sexual dominance: τ = -0.157, p = 0.025). For men, the results remained
nonsignificant.
In our set, ten (9.2%) women and five (5.5%) men reported they had not yet had their
first sexual intercourse. We excluded data from those subjects in the partial Kendall
correlation testing the effect on age at first sexual intercourse, which, in theory, could lead to
biased results. We have thus performed a Cox regression to include the effect of subjects who
had not yet had their first sexual intercourse. In women, redheadedness showed a significant
effect on the likelihood of having first sexual intercourse (HR = 1.255, p = 0.033) suggesting
this likelihood increases with women’s redheadedness. In men, the likelihood of having first
sexual intercourse was independent of redheadedness (HR = 1.146, p = 0.232). The results of
Cox regression therefore correspond to the results of partial Kendall correlation for both
women and men.
The higher sexual activity of redheaded women could either result from their own
higher sexual desire or be the consequence of a higher demand of potential mates for
redheaded women (who are believed to be more sexually permissive). If the former is true,
redheaded women’s higher sexual activity should be mediated by their higher sexual desire,
while if the latter is true, sexual desire will not play a mediating role and the intensity of
sexual activity in redheaded women will not be associated with a higher intensity of sexual
desire on their part. To discriminate between these two possibilities, we studied the effect of
redheadedness on sexual activity and the number of sexual partners of the preferred sex using
path analyses with sexual desire as a potentially mediating variable. In order to also test the
hypothesis about higher sexual desire of redheaded women being a part of a faster life
strategy (see Introduction), we included physical disease and age into the structured models.
Redheadedness in women had direct positive effects on both sexual desire and sexual activity
(Fig. 1, top left). The direct effect of redheadedness on sexual activity (standardised
parameter estimate = 0.34) was stronger than either the indirect (sexual desire-mediated)
effect on sexual activity (standardised parameter estimate = 0.29 * 0.14 = 0.04) or the direct
effect on sexual desire (standardised parameter estimate = 0.29). Similarly, women’s
redheadedness had direct positive effects on both sexual desire and the number of sexual
partners of the preferred sex (Fig. 1, bottom left) and the direct effect of redheadedness on the
number of sexual partners of the preferred sex (standardised parameter estimate = 0.33) was
likewise much stronger than the significant indirect effect of redheadedness (standardised
parameter estimate = 0.31 * 0.24 = 0.07).
These results indicate that the higher sexual activity and higher number of sexual
partners of the preferred sex in redheaded women is not driven by their higher sexual desire.
Path analysis also showed no effect of redheadedness on physical disease, nor any effect of
worse health on sexual desire, sexual activity, or the number of sexual partners of the
preferred sex. The explanation of higher sexual desire in redheaded women driven by
adoption of a faster life strategy was not thus supported by the data.
In men, redheadedness also tended to have a direct positive effect on sexual desire
(Fig. 1, right), but it did not reach statistical significance (model for sexual activity: p = 0.26;
model for the number of sexual partners of the preferred sex: p = 0.052). Similarly, the results
for men showed no effect of redheadedness on physical disease and the data thus provided no
support for the faster life strategy hypothesis.
path analyses of relations between redheadedness and sexual activity (top) and relations
between redheadedness and the number of sexual partners of the preferred sex (bottom)
separately for women (left) and men (right). Numbers at arrows show standardised parameter
estimates. Associations with p values under 0.05 are marked by ‘*’, those with p values under
0.01 are marked by ‘**’, and those with p values under 0.001 are marked by ‘***’.
Discussion
The results of this study showed that the intensity of redheadedness is associated with shifts
in sexual behaviour in women but not in men. Women with red hair colour exhibited higher
sexual desire and sexual activity, a higher number of sexual partners of the preferred sex,
earlier initiation of sexual life, and lower sexual dominance (and therefore higher sexual
submissiveness).
Our results are in accordance with recent findings of Frost et al. (2017), who reported
a higher lifelong number of sexual partners in redheaded women. Similarly, our results
correspond to the results of two studies that showed no relationship between hair colour
(including red) and sexual orientation (Ellis et al., 2008; Loehlin & McFadden, 2003).
Contrary to our results, a large internet study by Flegr and Sýkorová (2019) found no
significant correlation between self-reported red hair colour and sexual desire in either
gender. In that study, however, sexual desire was measured as the intensity of being sexually
attracted to people of the preferred sex (self-reported using a 1–100 scale), which might differ
from sexual desire estimated more accurately by the SOI-R in the present study. Also
inconsistent with our observations is a result by Day et al. (2016), who reported an
association between genetically predicted red hair and later age at first sexual intercourse in
both sexes. But that study involved subjects aged 40–69 years, while participants of the
present study were at the peak of reproductive age, i.e., around 30. Therefore, this difference
in results could be due to age cohort differences in initiation of sexual life and associated
higher variability in the dataset of Day et al. (2016).
The higher sexual activity of redheaded women was not mediated by their higher
sexual desire and the mediating effect of sexual desire in the association between
redheadedness and number of sexual partners was weak. These observations thus do not
support the first, second, and third model explaining sexual behaviour in redheaded women
(see Introduction). It would seem that the fact that women have red hair more frequently than
men do and, according to our data, exhibit more liberated sexual behaviour more often than
men do might support the first model, which suggests the role of a molecule, e.g. prenatal
oestrogen, that would affect both women’s hair colour and sexual behaviour. This model also
seems to find support in our results which show that redheaded women express higher sexual
submissiveness, because the intensity of submissiveness is associated with a higher 2D:4D
digit ratio that indicates exposure to prenatal oestrogen (Butovskaya et al., 2015; Manning &
Fink, 2008). However, if prenatal oestrogen were indeed responsible for higher sexual
activity and higher number of sexual partners in women with red hair, it would affect their
sexual desire, which would then mediate, to a large extent, their less restrained sexual
behaviour. The existence of such a substantial mediating role of sexual desire was, however,
excluded by the results of the path analysis.
Our results also do not support the second model, which proposes that sexual desire in
redheaded women could be part of their faster life strategy induced by worse health. First of
all, we found no correlation between redheadedness and physical disease in either sex and
path analyses showed no mediation effect of worse health in associations between
redheadedness and sexual desire. Secondly, redheaded women reported higher sexual activity
and a higher number of sexual partners, while a previous study has shown that the faster life
strategy induced by impaired health results in a higher sexual desire but lower sexual activity
and having fewer sexual partners (Sýkorová & Flegr, 2021). That study suggested that poor
health adversely affects wellbeing and various physiological functions related to sexual life.
The third model, which aimed to explain higher sexual activity and sexual desire in
redheaded women by their changed self-perception, is not supported by our analyses either.
Because higher sexual desire did not mediate sexual activity in redheaded women, it is
unlikely that their increased sexual activity is due to an altered self-concept that incorporates
an internal conviction about the validity of stereotypes about permissive redheads.
The data of the present study do, however, seem to support the fourth model, which
suggests that higher sexual activity and promiscuity of redheaded women result from their
passive response to frequent mating efforts, usually made by men (who believe the
stereotypes about permissive redheaded women). In redheaded women, a higher sexual
activity and higher number of sexual partners were not primarily mediated by their higher
sexual desire. In fact, the intensity of their sexual activity was relatively higher than the
intensity of their sexual desire. This suggests that it is not the redheaded women’s own
initiative but higher demand for them which might be responsible for their higher sexual
activity and higher number of sexual partners. It could be argued that red hair colour is often
perceived as less attractive (Clayson & Klassen, 1989; Clayson & Maughan, 1976, 1986;
Feinman & Gill, 1978; Guéguen, 2012; Lawson, 1971; Swami & Barrett, 2011). But
Wortham, Miller, and Delvescovo (2018) showed that red hair was preferred over other hair
colours more frequently than expected based on the prevalence of redheads in the studied
population (both sexes preferred red hair 6% of the time, while only 3% of the female
population were redheads). Given such imbalance between supply and demand, individual
redheaded women are probably approached by potential mates more often than brunettes and
blondes are.
To test this model in future, it would be useful to explore the sexual behaviour of
women who have red body hair but are not redheaded. This would differentiate between
active sexual behaviour of women with red hair and behaviour that is a passive consequence
of mating efforts of potential suitors and prejudices about redheaded women. We could not
conduct this investigation because our sample unfortunately contained only six non-
redheaded women with red body hair.
We could neither prove nor disprove the fifth model, which suggests that the higher
sexual activity of redheaded women is the result of a mechanism of social feedback. Based on
our results, redheaded women might, in response to earlier experience with mating efforts,
mostly made by males, consider higher sexual activity a social norm and react more
positively in interaction with potential mates or even initiate sexual activity themselves. But
to decide whether this mechanism applies, one would have to explore women’s individual
motivations and opinions related to sexual behaviour exhibited by women with and without
red hair.
Although large cross-sectional internet studies showed worse health of redheaded
individuals (Flegr & Sýkorová, 2019; Frost et al., 2017), our data did not find this pattern.
We have no explanation for the absence of this effect except that our laboratory experiments
may have attracted a different subpopulation, namely people of lower age and in better
physical and mental health (Flegr et al., 2020). A study made with the same sample of
participants as the present study found that compared to non-redheaded individuals,
redheaded subjects have higher concentrations of calcidiol, the precursor of vitamin D, and
their concentration of calcidiol seems independent of the intensity of sun exposure or
protection from solar radiation (Flegr et al., 2020). That study suggested that people with red
hair need less sun exposure to achieve satisfactory levels of vitamin D than non-redheaded
people do. As a result, redheaded people might enjoy better health during some parts of the
year, namely during autumn, winter, and spring, when the amount of UV-radiation in higher
latitudes is low. At the same time, most health problems in redheaded individuals
(oncological and gynaecological diseases, heart and vascular system problems, metabolic
problems, fertility problems or Parkinson’s disease, and the like) are more common in older,
rather than young people. The mean age of participants of the present study (27.3 in women
and 31.8 in men) was lower than that of respondents of previous studies exploring health in
redheaded people (for instance, 32.9 and 34.6 in females and 35.1 and 36.8 in and Flegr and
Sýkorová (2019) and Frost et al. (2017) respectively). The lower mean age of the present
sample therefore might be why we did not find that redheaded subjects suffer from worse
health. Moreover, the absence of any difference between the health status of redheaded and
non-redheaded women in our study and the relatively young population sample could explain
why we found in redheaded women higher sexual activity and a higher number of sexual
partners of the preferred sex – which previous studies that were conducted on older samples
did not report.
The main limitation of this study is that the participants did not form a random,
representative sample of the Czech population. We suppose that subjects who took part in the
laboratory investigation may have been exposed to a sieve effect, forming a group of rather
altruistic, active people in good physical and mental condition. On the other hand, whenever
people have the option of refusing to participate in a study, that is, in all studies performed in
accordance with the widely accepted ethical standards, the issue of non-representativeness of
a sample is always present. In any case, the observed results should be verified in future by
using some more representative data, for instance collected by the internet questionnaire data,
or by repeating the study on other samples that would not be self-selected for better health or
altruism.
Conclusion
The results of the present study show that redheaded women exhibit higher sexual desire,
higher sexual activity, a higher number of sexual partners, an earlier initiation of sexual life,
and a higher level of sexual submissiveness. Because sexual desire does not seem to mediate
the more liberated sexual behaviour in redheaded women in our data, stereotypical social
labelling of redheaded women that might encourage potential mates to try and have sex with
redheaded women more frequently is likely to account for the association between
redheadedness and certain characteristics of sexual behaviour. In the process of forming this
association, redheaded women can either affirmatively respond to current courtship of
potential mates or consider frequent sexual activities a social norm and actively initiate
sexual interactions themselves. Neither concentration of prenatal oestrogen, nor a faster life
strategy induced by worse health or a strong internal belief of redheads in stereotypes about
them is likely to be responsible for the association. Yet given the probably non-representative
sample on which this study is based, our observations should be generalised with caution.
Declarations
Funding: The study was supported by the Grant Agency of Charles University (project no.
1494218).
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Ethical approval: All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in
accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional research committee and with the
1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. The
study was approved by the institutional review board of the Faculty of Science, Charles
University (No. 2018/30).
Consent to participate: Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants
included in this study.
Availability of data: The dataset used in this article can be accessed on Figshare
Authors' contributions: Kateřina Sýkorová designed research, collected and analysed the data,
and wrote the manuscript. Vojtěch Fiala, Jana Hlaváčová, and Šárka Kaňková collected the
data and revised the manuscript. Jaroslav Flegr designed research and participated in the
interpretation of results and writing of the manuscript.
Acknowledgement
We wish to thank Anna Pilátová for final revisions of the manuscript.