This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
Who engaged in home-based arts activities during the COVID-19
pandemic? A cross-sectional analysis of data from 4,731 adults in the
United States
*Jessica K Bonea, PhD
Hei Wan Maka, PhD
Jill K Sonkeb, PhD
Meg E Fluhartya, PhD
Jenny Leeb, MA
Anthony J. Kolenicb, PhD
Heidi Radunovichc, PhD
Randy Cohend, BA
Daisy Fancourta, PhD
a Research Department of Behavioural Science and Health, Institute of Epidemiology & Health,
University College London, London, UK
b Center for Arts in Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, US
c Family, Youth and Community Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, US
d Americans for the Arts, Washington DC, US
*Corresponding author
Address: Research Department of Behavioural Science and Health, 1-19 Torrington Place, London
WC1E 7HB, UK
Email: jessica.bone@ucl.ac.uk
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
Abstract
Arts engagement is a health-related behavior that may be influenced by social inequalities. While the
COVID-19 pandemic provided new opportunities for some people to engage in the arts, it might have
created barriers for others. We aimed to examine whether there was social patterning in home-based
arts engagement during the pandemic in the United States (US), and whether predictors of
engagement differed according to the type of arts activity. We included 4,731 adults who participated
in the US COVID-19 Social Study between April and July 2020. Three types of home-based arts
engagement were considered: reading for pleasure, arts or crafts activities, and digital arts activities.
Using logistic regression models, we tested cross-sectional associations between a broad range of
demographic, socioeconomic, psychosocial, and health-related factors as well as adverse events and
worries during lockdown and each type of arts engagement. The factors most strongly associated with
all three types of arts engagement were social support, social network size, age, race/ethnicity,
keyworker status, and experiencing physical or psychological abuse during the pandemic. However,
most socioeconomic and health-related factors were not associated with arts engagement, including
household income and mental and physical health problems. Overall, our findings indicate that the
social gradient in arts engagement was reduced in the first four months of the COVID-19 pandemic in
the US. Given the health benefits of arts engagement, the potential diversification of arts audiences
during the pandemic is promising for both population-level health and wellbeing and the future of the
arts and cultural sector.
Keywords
arts engagement; cultural engagement; lockdown; stay-at-home orders; social gradient; health;
wellbeing; US
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
Introduction
There is extensive pre-pandemic evidence that arts engagement has beneficial impacts on mental and
physical health (Fancourt & Finn, 2019), and these benefits appear to have endured throughout the
current coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Spending more time on hobbies such as painting, writing,
and other creative activities was associated with reductions in symptoms of depression and anxiety
and improvements in life satisfaction during the first lockdown in the UK (Bu et al., 2021). People have
reported using creative activities and consuming media to cope during lockdown, and arts activities
helped frontline health and social care professionals to cope with challenges of the pandemic,
supporting their mental health (Aughterson et al., 2021; Wright et al., 2021). Given the number of
people experiencing distress, depression, anxiety, and loneliness during the COVID-19 pandemic (Bu
et al., 2020; Holman et al., 2020), arts engagement is an important health behavior for improving the
mental health and wellbeing of the population during the pandemic.
Despite unprecedented challenges for the arts and cultural sector during the COVID-19 pandemic,
including the closure of community venues (Guibert & Hyde, 2021), home-based arts engagement
may have increased when people were directed to stay at home. In the US, there were large increases
in online sales of arts and crafts products at the start of the pandemic (Choi et al., 2020). In the UK,
nearly a quarter of 19,000 adults reported increases in their arts engagement during lockdown (Mak
et al., 2021). These increases in arts engagement were likely due to a range of factors, including
increased leisure time; using the arts to cope with boredom, stress, or health problems; using the arts
to connect with others socially; and the increased availability and promotion of virtual resources,
including online groups (e.g., choirs, book groups), streamed performances (e.g., plays, concerts), and
digital arts activities (e.g., virtual museum tours).
However, while the pandemic provided new opportunities for some people to engage in the arts, it
might have created barriers for others. In the UK, the social gradient in arts engagements was
maintained; older adults, those with less education, and males had lower levels of arts engagement
both before and during the pandemic (Mak et al., 2021). Despite this, those who had traditionally
been excluded from the arts, such as people of ethnic minorities and those with health conditions,
had similar levels of home-based arts engagement compared to others in the pandemic (Mak et al.,
2021). However, a parallel study did not find evidence for changes in arts audiences in the UK,
suggesting that pre-existing inequalities in arts engagement were maintained (Feder et al., 2021).
Although the rapid increase in digital arts activities might reach new audiences, it may also have
excluded individuals without access to reliable internet and those unable to use digital technology.
It remains unclear whether findings from the UK and Europe will generalize to the US. Pre-pandemic
surveys have shown that, similar to the UK and Europe, arts engagement in the US differs according
to socioeconomic position, education, and income (Bone et al., 2021; Stallings & Mauldin, 2016).
These factors mirror those that contribute to the inequalities in access to health care and health and
social outcomes. However, the different social, cultural, and demographic context of the US, coupled
with inconsistent, decentralized COVID-19 restrictions across states, could mean that the predictors
and patterns of arts engagement during the pandemic differed to other countries. Additionally,
different job subsidy structures could also have had distinct impacts on arts workers, affecting the
provision of the arts during the pandemic.
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
Therefore, in this study, we examined whether there was social patterning in home-based arts
engagement during the pandemic in the US, and whether predictors of engagement differed according
to the type of arts activity. We analyzed data from a large sample recruited during the first four months
of stay-at-home directives. Three types of arts engagement were considered: reading for pleasure,
arts or crafts activities, and digital arts activities. Understanding who is engaging in the arts in the US
has significant policy implications, particularly after 96% of arts events were cancelled in the first five
months of the pandemic (Americans for the Arts, 2021). Our findings should (a) reveal whether the
usual predictors of arts engagement continued to affect audience profiles, or whether barriers to
engagement were reduced for certain demographic groups in the US; (b) identify people who may be
at risk of being excluded from the arts during a national crisis, which is important given the link
between arts engagement and wellbeing; and (c) provide direction for arts organizations
(Radermecker, 2021).
Methods
Sample
The study was a US extension of the UK COVID-19 Social Study run by University College London; a
BSH/CSSUserGuide). The COVID-19 Social Study did not recruit a random sample and is thus not
representative of the US population. However, it does contain a heterogeneous sample that was
recruited using a snowballing approach with a focus on reaching diverse populations. National social,
health, and arts organizations and networks shared the study invitation through their email lists and
social media. We included 4,731 participants who participated between 6th April and 23rd July 2020
(see Supplement).
The study was approved by the UCL Research Ethics Committee (12467/005) and the University of
Florida Institutional Review Board (IRB202000785). All participants gave informed consent.
Measures
Arts engagement
We measured arts engagement with three questions at one wave completed by participants between
6th April and 23rd July 2020. These were part of a series of questions following a time diary approach,
in which participants were asked to focus on the last weekday and consider how much time they spent
on a range of activities. We chose weekdays to remove variation in responses due to whether
participants took part on weekends. Participants were asked how long they had spent engaging in 1)
reading for pleasure, 2) a home-based arts or crafts activity (e.g., painting, creative writing, sewing,
playing music, etc.), and 3) digital arts activities (e.g., streaming a concert, virtual tour of a museum,
etc.) on the last weekday. Given the low frequency of arts engagement, we created binary variables
indicating whether participants had spent time on each of the activities (yes, no).
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
Predictors
We measured a range of demographic, socioeconomic, psychosocial, and health-related factors as
well as adverse events and worries during lockdown. Demographic factors included age (18-29, 30-59,
≥60 years), gender (male, female), race/ethnicity (White, Black/African American, Asian/Asian
American, Mixed Race, Other [including Latino/Hispanic, Chinese/Chinese American, Middle
Eastern/Middle Eastern American, Native/American Indian/Alaska Native]), marital status (never
married, divorced/widowed, in a relationship/married living apart, in a relationship/married
cohabiting), living arrangement (alone, not alone but no children, not alone with children), and
urbanicity of home area (rural, city/town).
Socioeconomic factors were employment status (unemployed, employed), highest level of education
(high school or less, some college, undergraduate degree, postgraduate/professional degree), and
household income (<$75,000, ≥$75,000 household income per annum). Binary variables (yes, no)
measured household overcrowding (>1 person per room, excluding the bathrooms and kitchen),
homeowner status, and keyworker status (e.g., health or social care worker, teacher or childcare
worker still travelling to work, transport worker, key public services).
We included three psychosocial and two health-related measures. Social support was measured with
an adapted version of the 6-item Perceived Social Support Questionnaire. Higher scores indicate more
perceived social support (range 6-30; Lin et al., 2019). Large social network was indicated by the
number of friends (<3, ≥3). Loneliness was measured using the 3-item Revised UCLA Loneliness Scale,
with an additional item asking how often respondents felt lonely. Higher scores indicate greater
loneliness (range 4-12; Russell et al., 1980). Participants were asked if they had been clinically
diagnosed with a mental health condition (yes, no) or a physical condition/disability (yes, no).
Finally, we considered whether six adverse events were experienced or were a source of worry during
the pandemic (yes, no): 1) COVID-19 diagnosis; 2) physical/psychological abuse (physically
harmed/hurt, bullied, controlled, intimidated, or psychologically hurt by someone else); 3) financial
difficulties (unable to pay bills/rent/mortgage or had a major cut in household income); 4) lost work;
5) difficulties accessing food; 6) difficulties accessing medication.
Statistical analysis
We used logistic regression to investigate the cross-sectional associations between predictors and
each type of arts engagement (reading for pleasure, arts or crafts activities, digital arts activities)
separately. All predictors were included in the model simultaneously.
We weighted the final analytical sample to match the characteristics of the non-institutionalized US
population aged 18 and over by weighting according to age, gender, race/ethnicity, and education,
obtained from the US Census Bureau (US Census Bureau, 2021), using the Stata package ebalance
(Hainmueller & Xu, 2013). To remove extreme variation, weights were trimmed to a maximum of the
median plus six times the interquartile range, and then adjusted so that the total summed to the
number of participants (Chowdhury et al., 2007; Potter & Zheng, 2015). For comparison, unweighted
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
Results
Before weighting, 83% of the sample were female, 86% were of White race/ethnicity, and 47% had
80% were of White race/ethnicity, and 18% had postgraduate/professional qualifications. Of this
sample, 65% reported reading for pleasure on the last weekday, 42% did a home-based arts or crafts
activity, and 20% did a digital arts activity.
Reading for pleasure
The odds of reading for pleasure were higher for older participants and for those with increasing levels
reading for pleasure than those who were single. Additionally, participants reporting higher levels of
social support had higher odds of reading for pleasure. There was no evidence that any other
predictors were associated with reading for pleasure.
Home-based arts or crafts
was also evidence that participants of all races/ethnicities except Asian/Asian American were more
likely to do arts or crafts activities than White participants. Those living with other adults and children
were also more likely to do arts or crafts than those living alone. Additionally, individuals with more
social support and a larger social network had higher odds of doing arts or crafts activities, as did those
who had been physically or psychologically abused. However, keyworkers had lower odds of engaging
in arts or crafts activities than non-keyworkers.
Digital arts activities
Compared to the youngest participants, those aged 60 and over had higher odds of engaging in digital
Race had higher odds of engaging in digital arts activities than White participants. As for home-based
arts or crafts, individuals with more social support and a larger social network had higher odds of doing
digital arts activities, as did those who had been physically or psychologically abused, and keyworkers
had lower odds of engaging in digital arts activities.
Discussion
In this study, a range of factors were independently associated with home-based arts engagement
during the first four months of the pandemic. Around two thirds of participants reported reading for
pleasure, over one third did a home-based arts or crafts activity, and one fifth did a digital arts activity
on the last weekday. The strongest predictors of arts engagement were social support, social network
size, age, race/ethnicity, keyworker status, and experiencing physical or psychological abuse during
the pandemic. Other factors were only associated with one type of arts engagement. For example,
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
females and those living with children were more likely to do arts or crafts, individuals in a relationship
but living apart were more likely to read for pleasure, and higher levels of education were associated
with more reading for pleasure, but not engaging in arts or crafts or digital arts activities. Most
socioeconomic and health-related factors were not associated with arts engagement, including
employment status, household income and overcrowding, loneliness, mental and physical health
problems, having COVID-19, and other adverse events and worries experienced during the pandemic.
In comparison to before the pandemic, some predictors of arts engagement appear to have remained
consistent. For example, higher levels of perceived social support and larger social networks were
most consistently associated with arts engagement, as in pre-pandemic studies of home-based arts
engagement (Fancourt et al., 2020) and cultural engagement more broadly (Fancourt & Baxter, 2020).
This may be because individuals with more supportive relationships receive more encouragement to
participate in the arts, both in the form of material resources (e.g., paying for lessons or providing
tangible resources such as books) and non-material resources (e.g., emotional support, awareness of
online arts activities). This association may be bidirectional, as engagement could provide
opportunities to connect with others and build a sense of community (Fancourt et al., 2021). We also
found that females were more likely to do arts or crafts, which is in line with previous evidence before
and during the pandemic (Bone et al., 2021; Mak et al., 2020, 2021; Stallings & Mauldin, 2016).
However, some predictors of arts engagement in the US may have changed during the pandemic.
Although higher levels of education were associated with reading for pleasure, education was not
associated with doing arts or crafts or digital arts activities. This differs from pre-pandemic evidence
that education is one of the strongest predictors of all forms of arts engagement (Bone et al., 2021;
Stallings & Mauldin, 2016). It is possible that the increased availability of digital arts activities created
new opportunities for people from varied backgrounds to become aware of the arts during the
pandemic. Additionally, the closure of museums, theatres, and arts venues could have predominantly
impacted individuals with higher levels of education (Suarez-Fernandez et al., 2020).
Similarly, socioeconomic position is usually a strong predictor of broad arts engagement in the US
(Bone et al., 2021; Stallings & Mauldin, 2016), but we found no evidence that income was associated
with home-based engagement during the pandemic, as shown in the UK during the pandemic (Mak et
al., 2021). The lack of association with doing digital arts activities is particularly surprising given the
link between household income and access to electronic devices and a stable internet connection.
However, it could be because reading for pleasure, home-based arts or crafts, and digital arts activities
are often affordable and easily accessible. In contrast, in-person cultural events can be expensive and
require attendance at specific venues with associated transport costs.
Associations between race/ethnicity and arts engagement may also have changed in the pandemic.
We found that reading for pleasure did not differ by race/ethnicity, but individuals who were not of
White race/ethnicity were more likely to do arts or crafts and digital arts activities than people of
White race/ethnicity. This may be due to the shift in location of arts activities from physical spaces
rooted in white supremacy (e.g., art museums with colonial histories and racist legacies), which create
a foundational barrier for Black, Indigenous, and other people of color (BIPOC groups), to digital
interfaces that can be accessed from any location.
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
Also in line with findings from the UK (Mak et al., 2021), arts engagement did not differ for individuals
with or without physical or mental health conditions. In contrast, pre-pandemic studies of community-
based activities found that people with worse health and wellbeing were less likely to engage
(Fancourt & Baxter, 2020; Steptoe & Fancourt, 2019). In addition to the greater accessibility and
availability of home-based arts activities, individuals with existing health problems may have been
more likely to use the arts to manage symptoms and cope with stress during the pandemic (Fancourt
et al., 2019; Mak et al., 2021). Further, digital arts provision may have removed physical barriers
relating to access. People who experienced physical or psychological abuse were more likely to engage
in arts or crafts and digital arts activities, which might also be because these individuals were using
the arts to cope and regulate their emotional responses to adverse events (Mak et al., 2021; Wright
et al., 2021). The contrasting associations of social support and experiencing abuse with home-based
arts engagement are particularly interesting and should be explored in future research.
Some of our findings may be a direct result of the pandemic and restrictions. Keyworkers, who
continued travelling to work throughout the pandemic and may have faced increased working hours,
stress, and burnout (Ruiz & Gibson, 2020), were less likely to do arts or crafts and digital arts activities.
They may not have benefitted from the increases in leisure time experienced by others and instead
had a decreased work-life balance, making them less able to engage in arts activities. This is concerning
given that this group may have particularly benefitted from the arts as a coping strategy; enabling
keyworkers to engage in arts activities during future health emergencies should be a priority.
Additionally, individuals living with children were more likely to do arts or crafts activities, which might
have offered opportunities for parents to engage and bond with their children, as well as preventing
boredom (Choi et al., 2020). Finally, older adults were more likely to read and engage in digital arts,
which could be a result of the stricter stay-at-home directives for vulnerable older adults, with
additional time at home providing increased opportunities and motivations to engage.
This study has several strengths, including the large sample recruited early in the pandemic. It was
one of the first studies to examine arts engagement in the US during the pandemic. A wide range of
sociodemographic information was collected, allowing comparison to similar data from the UK (Mak
et al., 2021). However, the COVID-19 Social Study sample was not random and may have been biased
towards individuals who were more engaged in the arts as participants were recruited with the help
of Americans for the Arts. Whilst our data was weighted according to age, gender, race/ethnicity, and
education distributions in the US population (US Census Bureau, 2021), we cannot rule out biases due
to omitting other factors associated with survey participation in the weighting process. Given that the
survey was completed online, our sample may exclude people who do not have digital access or
comfort with digital interfaces.
Additionally, we excluded participants who did not identify as male or female to match our data to
available population statistics. As the US Census Bureau only gives people the option to report their
gender as male or female (US Census Bureau, 2021), the proportion of people in the US who do not
identify as male or female is unknown, and we could not include these individuals in our sample
weighting. Our weighted sample is thus not representative of all individuals in the US. We recognize
that gender is not a binary construct and changes to the measures used by the US Census Bureau are
needed. We also used an overly simple race/ethnicity variable due to small numbers in non-White
groups, which conflates experiences across diverse racial/ethnic groups. Future research must include
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
more diverse samples and collect detailed data on race/ethnicity. Furthermore, our analysis was based
on cross-sectional data, meaning causality cannot be established. It is likely that some associations
were bidirectional. As data collection began after the onset of the pandemic, we were not able to
compare arts engagement during the pandemic to pre-pandemic behavior. Future research could
investigate longer-term changes in arts engagement to better understand the changing characteristics
of audiences in the US and whether differences are sustained post-pandemic.
Overall, our findings indicate that the social gradient in arts engagement was reduced in the first four
months of the COVID-19 pandemic in the US. Additionally, individuals who were not of White
race/ethnicity were more likely to engage in some arts activities. Our findings are generally in line with
evidence from the UK, which also showed a narrowing of inequalities in arts engagement in the early
months of the pandemic when individuals were restricted just to at-home engagement (Feder et al.,
2021; Mak et al., 2021). Our findings contradict previous evidence that digital engagement replicates,
or even enlarges, existing inequalities in community-based cultural engagement (Weingartner, 2020).
It is likely that the pandemic was an exceptional situation, with many barriers to accessing the arts
removed, enabling engagement for people from a wide range of backgrounds. Given the numerous
health benefits of arts engagement (Fancourt & Finn, 2019), the potential diversification of arts
audiences during the pandemic is promising for both population-level health and wellbeing and the
future of the arts sector. Additionally, increasing arts engagement in historically excluded groups could
counteract inequalities in the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic (Dorn et al., 2020). Future research
should explore whether arts audiences changed further throughout the pandemic and how arts
programming can be more responsive to community needs. Subsequent studies should also explore
the specific conditions needed for people to continue participating following the pandemic and
conditions needed to reduce barriers to arts participation that have persisted, particularly for BIPOC
groups, in the US. This will require efforts to recruit more diverse and representative samples.
Declarations
Conflict of interest
No authors report any conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The researchers are grateful for the support of Americans for the Arts and members of the University
of Florida Center for Arts in Medicine Interdisciplinary Research Lab with their recruitment efforts. We
also gratefully acknowledge the contribution of the COVID-19 Social Study participants.
Funding
This Covid-19 Social Study was funded by the Nuffield Foundation (WEL/FR-000022583), but the views
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily the Foundation. The study was also supported
by the MARCH Mental Health Network funded by the Cross-Disciplinary Mental Health Network Plus
initiative supported by UK Research and Innovation (ES/S002588/1), and by the Wellcome Trust
(221400/Z/20/Z). The EpiArts Lab, a National Endowment for the Arts Research Lab at the University
of Florida, is supported in part by an award from the National Endowment for the Arts (1862896-38-
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.
C-20). The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the National
Endowment for the Arts Office of Research & Analysis or the National Endowment for the Arts. The
National Endowment for the Arts does not guarantee the accuracy or completeness of the information
included in this material and is not responsible for any consequences of its use. The EpiArts Lab is also
supported by the University of Florida, the Pabst Steinmetz Foundation, and Bloomberg
Philanthropies. DF is supported by the Wellcome Trust (205407/Z/16/Z). The funders had no final role
in the study design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report;
or in the decision to submit the paper for publication. All researchers listed as authors are independent
from the funders and all final decisions about the research were taken by the investigators and were
unrestricted.
Author contributions
JKS, JL, AJK, HR, RC, and DF were responsible for the study protocol development and participant
recruitment. JKB, HWM, DF and JKS designed the analyses in this manuscript. JKB conducted the
analysis and JKB and HWM drafted the manuscript. JKB, HWM, JKS, MEF, JL, AJK, HR, RC, and DF
contributed to the writing, made critical revisions, and approved the final manuscript.
This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed.