PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 1
***Please note that this manuscript has been accepted for publication in Experimental and
Clinical Psychopharmacology. © 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is
not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the
article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be
available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pha0000545
A Multisample Demonstration of Using the Prolific Platform
for Repeated Assessment and Psychometric Substance Use Research
Kasey Stanton***
University of Wyoming
Ryan W. Carpenter***
University of Missouri-St. Louis
Melissa Nance
University of Missouri-St. Louis
Taylor Sturgeon
Virginia Tech
Mara Villalongo Andino
Virginia Tech
Author Note: *** = Signifies joint first-authorship due to these authors making equal
contributions in preparing this manuscript for publication. Correspondence concerning this
paper should be addressed to Kasey Stanton at kaseyjstanton@gmail.com. Research ethics
committee approval was obtained for this research, and all individual research participants
provided informed consent for their participation. There is no funding to report for this research.
The data from the first sample of participants (i.e., the Prolific daily diary study) have not been
presented previously. Data from select measures from the other two samples (i.e., data from
Prolific participants from two assessments approximately 2 weeks apart; cross-sectional data
from undergraduates) have been published in one previous manuscript (see for more information:
manuscript is distinct from any prior research. Data presented in the manuscript and data
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 2
Abstract
The Prolific platform offers a potentially useful and efficient crowdsourcing option for repeated
assessment substance use research, including for psychometric research requiring large samples.
We present both (a) a series of practical recommendations for using Prolific and (b) data from
multiple samples demonstrating Prolific’s potential for efficiently collected repeated measures
data. First, we present data from a 5-day daily diary protocol. We recruited a large sample (N =
321 at Day 1) screened for a history of self-identified mental health issues and weekly alcohol
use. Participant adherence was good (82%) even without in-person contact. Alcohol use
patterns conformed to theoretical expectations: Participants were more likely to drink on Fridays
and Saturdays than other days, men drank more than women, and higher Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test (AUDIT; Saunders et al., 1993) scores were associated with an increased
likelihood of use and more overall drinking on a given day. Second, we present data from 429
Prolific participants screened for a history of mental health issues who completed assessments 2
weeks apart with strong retention (N = 377; 88%). We compare these data with data from
undergraduates (N = 529) to demonstrate Prolific’s utility for conducting psychometrically-
oriented substance use research. Internal consistency estimates for measures from the Prolific
data matched or exceeded those from the undergraduate data. Furthermore, measure scores
showed strong temporal stability, and factor structures (e.g., AUDIT item-level structures)
conformed to theoretical expectations. Collectively, these findings indicate that Prolific can be
used successfully for repeated measures data collection.
KEYWORDS: Crowdsourcing; repeated measures designs; substance use; psychopathology;
psychometrics
Public Significance Statement: We provide recommendations and data analytic examples
showing how the online crowdsourcing Prolific platform can be used to efficiently collect
longitudinal data from large samples of participants varying in their substance use and mental
health histories. Our demonstrations indicate that Prolific can be used successfully for (a)
studying how factors such as mood and interpersonal difficulties are associated with substance
use over time and (b) improving how researchers assess substance use and mental health issues.
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 3
A Multisample Demonstration of Using the Prolific Platform
for Repeated Assessment and Psychometric Substance Use Research
Crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) and Prolific have
become widely used in psychological research over the past decade (Arditte et al., 2016; Paolacci
& Chandler, 2014). Although these platforms have limitations, they can be useful for quickly
collecting substance use and mental health data (e.g., Bounoua et al., 2021; Stanton & Watson,
2016; Strickland & Victor, 2020). Furthermore, crowdsourcing data collection methods likely
will continue to play a prominent role in substance use research given the ongoing impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the unfortunate possibility of future pandemics (Tabish, 2020).
We build upon existing crowdsourcing research by demonstrating how the Prolific platform
can be leveraged for brief longitudinal data collection. Intensive longitudinal designs
increasingly are used in substance use research (e.g., Carpenter et al., 2019; Roos et al., 2020;
Weiss et al., 2017), but with some exceptions (e.g., Strickland & Stoops, 2018; 2019), prior
studies using crowdsourcing platforms have relied on cross-sectional designs. Furthermore,
prior reviews describing the use of crowdsourcing methods in substance use research have
focused primarily on AMT (e.g., Arditte et al., 2020; Mellis & Bickel, 2020; Schick et al., 2019),
such that demonstrating the utility of other platforms such as Prolific may be informative for
researchers.
We present descriptive information and example analyses from two Prolific-recruited
samples to demonstrate how this platform can be used to conduct repeated measures substance
use research. First, we present data from a sample of 321 Prolific participants who completed a
5-day daily diary protocol targeting substance use and mood assessment with good participant
1 More detailed descriptions of both of these Prolific samples and of the study goals associated with them are
provided in Online Appendix S1.
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 4
adherence across the study protocol. We examine patterns of alcohol use, other substance use,
mood, and interpersonal functioning over the 5-day study period to determine the extent to which
Prolific can be used to collect data confirming to theoretical expectations. For example,
demonstrating that more participants reported drinking and higher levels of drinking on Fridays
and Saturdays compared to other days would provide basic evidence of Prolific’s utility, as
would finding that participants with more self-reported alcohol problems at baseline drink more
across the 5-day study period. Other examples of theoretically consistent patterns of results
would include participants reporting higher average levels of positive mood and lower levels of
negative mood on weekend days and Fridays compared to other days of the week (Stone et al.,
2012).
We also present data and demonstrative analyses from second a Prolific-recruited sample
of 429 participants who completed substance use and psychopathology measures at two time
points roughly 2 weeks apart. These second series of demonstrations focus specifically on
longitudinal research questions relevant to psychometrics, assessment, and measure
development. They illustrate how Prolific can be used to recruit large samples needed for
psychometrically-oriented data analytic procedures such as factor analysis (Sellbom & Tellegen,
2019; Strickland & Stoops, 2019), as well as for conducting longitudinal analyses that are
important but often neglected in the measure development process (e.g., examinations of test-
retest reliability; Clark & Watson, 2019). We also compare data from this second Prolific
sample with cross-sectional data from 529 undergraduates who completed the same measures as
did this sample of Prolific participants. For example, we compare the amount of missing data for
the undergraduate sample with this second Prolific sample, and we also evaluate the consistency
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 5
of psychometrically-oriented analyses across samples (e.g., are factor structures similar across
the undergraduate and Prolific samples).
Practical Considerations for Participant Recruitment and Longitudinal Data Collection
Prior to presenting sample descriptions and illustrative analyses, we describe strategies for
targeting participant recruitment for longitudinal substance use and mental health research. First,
regarding participant compensation, Prolific enforces a minimum $6.50 USD per hour
documented issues concerning fair compensation in research using AMT (see Mellis & Bickel,
2020 for discussion relevant to substance use research). Researchers can compensate
participants at higher rates, but Prolific automatically pauses studies if hourly compensation rates
fall below this required minimum.
Regarding participant recruitment, Prolific requires participants to verify their identities
(this information is not provided to researchers to ensure participants’ anonymity). Participants
provide their first and last names, date of birth, country of residence, a photo of themselves, and
system assigns each participant a unique ID that researchers can request when administering
measures via Qualtrics or other survey platforms to link data across timepoints.
A limitation of crowdsourcing platforms is the inability to have in-person contact with
participants. However, researchers can interview participants using Zoom or similar
research using this feature. When using survey-based research designs, researchers can directly
message participants via the Prolific platform and send reminders to improve participant
retention in longitudinal studies. Although Prolific does not have a standalone smartphone app,
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 6
Prolific can be accessed via a web browser on smartphones. Messages sent by researchers
through the Prolific platform also are sent to participants’ registered email addresses.
Finally, participant recruitment can be targeted using screening filters that require no
additional cost, with a few exceptions (e.g., recruiting a nationally representative
sample). Screening filter information is self-reported by participants (e.g., self-reported histories
of mental health disorders are not corroborated by mental health professionals). Participants can
provided by Prolific for ensuring gender and other demographic representation in samples), as
well as their current levels of use of alcohol or other substances (e.g., smoking more than 5 times
per day). Other filters (e.g., experiences of chronic pain) also may be of interest when studying
substance use among specific populations (e.g., Carpenter et al., 2019; Schick et al., 2019), and
multiple filters can be used in tandem (e.g., using filters for both alcohol and tobacco use).
Additionally, multiple filters for screening participants based on mental health history are
available, including: (a) currently taking antidepressant, antianxiety, or antipsychotic medication
(or some combination thereof), (b) currently or previously having a diagnosed mental health
condition (any self-identified disorder), and (c) experiencing functional impairment related to
having mental health issues. However, researchers cannot screen participants for specific mental
health disorders other than filtering participants based on having a self-identified history of
autism spectrum disorder or a neurocognitive disorder.
Prolific Sample 1: Daily Diary Study
Sample
All participants in this and the subsequent samples provided informed consent, and all
research procedures received institutional review board (IRB) approval. Approval from the IRB
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 7
2021). Study analyses were not pre-registered. All samples described subsequently had more
than 300 participants at initial assessments to ensure analyses were well-powered. We provide
descriptions of data exclusions (i.e., measures that were administered to participants but not
included in analyses) and missing data following a review of the study sample characteristics.
All daily diary study participants were 18 years or older. The goal of this broader study
was to investigate day-level associations for substance use with interpersonal and mental health
experiences. Therefore, to increase the likelihood of sufficient variation in these constructs,
participants were screened using filters for (a) self-reported history of any mental health disorder
diagnosis (i.e., “do you have or have you had a diagnosed mental illness”) and (b) drinking
alcohol at least once weekly on average.
Initially, 340 Prolific participants enrolled in the 5-day daily diary study occurring during
the Fall 2020. Fifteen participants completed few to no baseline items on Day 1 and were
excluded. Four additional participants were also excluded: One for entering an incorrect ID
code; one for failing an obvious attention check at the beginning of the Day 1 survey (please type
the word “start”); and two for failing an obvious validity check item (e.g., select “strongly
agree”) on two or more daily surveys. Thus, only a small percentage (5.6%; 19 of 340) were
removed for invalid or non-responding and the final analyzed sample consisted of 321
participants.
participants identified as White or European American, with more variation for other
demographic variables. Demographics were similar to crowdsourced samples described in
reviews of studies using AMT in some ways (e.g., Arditte et al., 2016; Paolacci & Chandler,
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 8
2014), including participants tending to be relatively young and a substantial portion of them
being unemployed.
Study Procedure and Adherence
On Day 1, participants completed a baseline assessment consisting of personality and
substance measures. Immediately following this, they completed a brief daily
assessment. Collectively, these two series of measures took participants roughly 44 minutes on
average to complete, and participants were compensated with $10 USD. This compensation
amount and all amounts discussed subsequently were determined by our research team and
exceeded Prolific’s recommendations for participant compensation. Researchers have the option
of providing participants with “bonus” compensation, but we did not use any bonus
compensation incentives in either of our studies. Prolific provides an approximate estimate of
the average participant compensation per hour after removing outliers in completion time, which
was estimated to be approximately $15.60 for all Day 1 measures administered.
Participants then completed the same daily survey over the next 4 days, resulting in five
total daily data collection points. Participants were compensated with $3 USD for each of the
Day 2-5 surveys, which were expected to require 10 minutes on average. Prolific’s estimated
hourly compensation rate for these daily surveys after removing outliers was nearly $20 per hour
on average.
We completed several waves of data collection (with 75-130 participants per wave) so that
we could monitor and correct administration and adherence issues if needed. Across waves, Day
1 was always on a Wednesday and Day 5 was always on a Sunday to ensure all participants
reported over several weekdays and a weekend. Participants were instructed to complete daily
assessments as close to bedtime as possible so that their daily ratings would reflect the entirety of
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 9
the day. In the first recruitment wave, the survey became available at 4pm Eastern Time; this
was changed to 7pm Eastern Time for subsequent recruitment waves to ensure participants did
not complete assessments too early. For each assessment, participants received notifications
through the Prolific platform that directed them to Qualtrics surveys, which were formatted to be
mobile-friendly if participants accessed surveys via a smartphone. Participants were sent a
reminder to complete daily surveys each day and could contact research staff with questions via
the Prolific platform, but there was no researcher-participant contact otherwise.
Participants completed 1,366 daily surveys. Most were completed between 6pm and 9pm
Eastern Time (n = 1,112; 81.4%). Across all recruitment waves, surveys remained open until the
late morning or early afternoon of the following day (e.g., Wednesday surveys remained open
until the early afternoon on Thursday), although only a small number of surveys were completed
after 6am the following day (n = 43; 3.1%). For these 43 surveys, it was unclear whether
participants were answering questions about their current day or the previous day, so we dropped
them from analyses. We kept surveys that were completed between 12am and 6am (n = 84;
6.2%) because these may have been completed prior to going to sleep after a late night of
substance use. Participation declined somewhat across the 5-day protocol, with 320 included
responses on Day 1 and 245 on Day 5. The final dataset included surveys from 1,320 days out of
a possible 1,605 (321 x 5) for an adherence of 82.2%. Of these, 2 days were only partially
completed, but were included in analyses.
Measures
Baseline Substance Use
Participants in this sample and others described subsequently completed measure batteries
that were too extensive to integrate in their entirety here and included measures that were not
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 10
central to our study aims (e.g., retrospective ratings of childhood psychopathology). As a result,
we focused on using data from measures most relevant to our demonstrative analyses (e.g.,
examination of alcohol use patterns). More detailed description of the full study battery and data
exclusions are provided in Online Appendix S1.
First, participants completed the 10-item Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
(AUDIT; Saunders et al., 1993), which assesses alcohol use and associated
problems. Participants responded to the AUDIT items in reference to the past 6 months. Scores
were classified into Low (< 8), Hazardous (8-15), Very Hazardous (16-19), and Severe (> 19)
categories. Participants also completed the 8-item Cannabis Use Disorders Identification Test-
Revised (CUDIT-R; Adamson et al., 2010) to assess average level of cannabis use and its
potential impacts. Scores were classified into Low (< 8), Problems (8-11), and Probable Use
Disorder (> 11) categories. For both measures, the response scale varies according to the item in
question (e.g., Never to 4+ Times per Week for level of cannabis use; Never to Daily when
asking about specific consequences of use).
Daily Affect
At each daily assessment, positive affect, negative affect, and fatigue were assessed using
select items from the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form (Watson & Clark,
1999). Participants were asked to rate their affective experiences for that day on a 5-point
Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (very slightly or not at all) to 5 (extremely) for each item
administered. Participants completed positive affect items assessing joviality (joyful, excited,
cheerful), self-assurance (fearless, bold, strong), and attentiveness (attentive, determined, alert),
as well as negative affect items assessing anger (angry, hostile, irritable), sadness (sad, blue,
lonely), fear (nervous, afraid, jittery), and guilt (guilty, ashamed, disgusted with self). Item
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 11
scores were summed to create composite Positive (9 items) and Negative Affect (12 items)
scales. We also assessed Fatigue using 3 items (tired, sleepy, sluggish).
We assessed reliability of these indicators using a generalizability theory approach
(Cranford et al. 2006; Shrout & Lane, 2012). Specifically, we examined reliability of our
indicators in four ways: The ability to differentiate persons on a single fixed day (R ), the ability
1F
to differentiate between persons on different days (treating day as random; R ), the ability to
1R
differentiate based on their responses over all study days (R ), and the ability to detect
KF
systematic within-person changes from day to day (R ). R was high for all three indicators
C 1F
(Positive Affect = .89; Negative Affect = .92; Fatigue = .87). R was moderate (Positive Affect
1R
= .62; Negative Affect = .66; fatigue = .58). R was excellent (Positive Affect = .97; Negative
KF
Affect = .98; Fatigue = .97). R was good (Positive Affect = .79; Negative Affect = .82; Fatigue
= .77). Thus, measures generally evidenced good to excellent reliability. The ability to
differentiate persons across different days (R ) was somewhat lower, but this is not unusual and
1R
is largely not an issue in the current study because all participants started on a Wednesday and
ended the study on a Sunday. R would be more relevant, for example, if we only had weekend
1R
data for some participants and only weekday data for others.
Daily Alcohol and Other Substance Use
Each day, participants reported the number of standard drinks consumed (a) in the current
day and (b) the previous day. Definitions of a standard drink, with a visual aid, were provided to
participants within the survey. Participants also reported on substance use for the current day
and the previous day by indicating which substances they consumed from a list of options (e.g.,
nonprescribed cannabis, nonprescribed opioid use, other substances such as amphetamines).
Asking participants about the prior day allowed us to assess whether additional drinks or
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 12
substances were consumed during the prior day after the daily report was completed,
acknowledging that participants may be less accurate in recalling previous day experiences.
Daily Negative Interpersonal Experiences
Participants were administered 14 items describing experiences of interpersonal conflict
and rejection (e.g., “got into an argument;” “rejected by someone else”). Each day, they were
asked to indicate all experiences that occurred that day. These dichotomous responses were
summed to create an indicator of daily negative interpersonal experiences.
Prolific Sample 1 Results
Descriptive Information
As anticipated, due to screening Prolific participants based on having a significant mental
health history, most participants reported current psychotropic medication use (53.6%) and a
sizable portion of participants reported current psychotherapy (38.3%). A minority (5.9%)
reported current substance use treatment. The mean AUDIT score was 7.6 (SD = 7.1; ω = .89).
Most participants were classified by the AUDIT as Low (66.4%), and the remaining third scored
as Hazardous (18.7%), Very Hazardous (5.6%), or Severe (9.3%). The mean CUDIT-R score
was 4.4 (SD = 6.7; ω = .89). Most participants were classified as Low (77.9%), with the
remaining classified as having Problems (6.8%) and Probable Use Disorder (15.3%).
Daily Substance Use
We focus on the extent to which participants reported alcohol use in an expected manner to
provide researchers with a sense of the nature of daily diary data that can be obtained using
Prolific. Participants reported alcohol use on 311 days (23.56%). Responses were relatively
consistent for previous-day report, with participants reporting alcohol use on the previous day on
304 days (23.04%). Participants reported nonprescribed use of at least one other substance on
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 13
315 days (23.86%). Participants most often reported cannabis use (N = 215, 16.29%), followed
by use of nonprescribed opioids (N = 37, 2.80%), nonprescribed sleep medications (N = 30,
2.27%), and other substances (N = 71, 5.38%).
On drinking days, participants reported an average of 2.67 drinks (SD = 2.01). Participants
reported more drinks when reporting on the previous day (M = 3.58, SD = 2.90), which may
reflect that participants sometimes had additional drinks after completing a survey or, possibly, a
bias to over-report drinking from the previous day. Participant reports of drinking today and the
previous day (adjusted to match) were highly correlated, r(1,318) = .71. This reduced, but only
slightly, when removing non-drinking days, r(1,318) = .64, suggesting that the association was
not dependent on days without drinking (which may be easier to recall).
on a Wednesday). We present both the percentage of days with any drinking and the average
number of drinks on drinking days. Drinking was most likely on Fridays (27.78%) and
Saturdays (26.07%) and least likely on Wednesdays (19.06%) and Sundays (21.63%). On drink
days, participants reported the most drinks on Fridays (M = 2.83, SD = 2.00), followed by
Thursdays (M = 2.77, SD = 2.07). They reported the fewest drinks on Sundays (M = 2.34, SD =
1.84).
A multilevel logistic model with a person-level random intercept found that participants
were more likely to drink on the weekend (Fridays and Saturdays) than on weekdays (OR = 1.42,
95% CI [1.05, 1.93], p = .024). However, in a multilevel linear regression model examining
drink days, number of drinks did not differ between the weekend and weekdays (b = 0.21, 95%
CI [-0.16, 0.57], p = .271). Men and women did not differ in likelihood of alcohol use (OR =
The reports of individual substances sum to more than 315 because participants could report the use of multiple
substances on the same day.
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 14
1.27, 95% CI [0.76, 2.11], p = .355), but, on drink days, men (M = 3.16, SE = 0.23) drank more
than women (M = 2.15, SE = 0.17; b = 1.01, 95% CI [0.43, 1.58], p < .001). Higher AUDIT
scores were associated with greater likelihood of drinking on any given day (OR = 1.14, 95% CI
[1.11, 1.17], p < .001) and drinking more on drink days (b = 0.12, 95% CI [0.09, 0.15], p < .001).
Contextual Factors
conjunction with substance use: Positive affect (M = 2.07, SD = 0.74), negative affect (M = 1.92,
SD = 0.77), fatigue (M = 2.88, SD = 1.14), and daily negative interpersonal experiences (M =
1.78, SD = 1.51). These factors might be expected to follow a weekly pattern, such that
participants report more positive affect and less negative affect and fatigue, and fewer negative
experiences during the weekend compared to the rest of week. Such patterns are visible in
Saturday, Sunday), relative to weekdays, participants reported more positive affect (b = 0.06,
95% CI [0.01, 0.11], p = .032), less negative affect (b = -0.22, 95% CI [-0.27, -0.17], p < .001),
fatigue (b = -0.39, 95% CI [-0.47, -0.31], p < .001), and fewer negative interpersonal experiences
(b = -0.30, 95% CI [-0.43, -0.17], p < .001).
Daily Diary Study Summary
Our findings demonstrate that Prolific can be used to successfully target participant
recruitment (e.g., the AUDIT indicated that a sizeable subset of participants had possible issues
with alcohol use) and retain participants across a brief daily diary protocol. In fact, adherence
(82.2%) across the 5-day study period was above that observed in a meta-analysis of daily diary
For these analyses we classified Sunday as part of the weekend whereas we did not for alcohol use. This is
because alcohol consumption primarily happens in the evening, and Sunday evening is typically the transition point
back to the workweek for most individuals.
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 15
studies of substance use (76.8%; Jones et al., 2018). This strong adherence rate suggests that it
may be possible to conduct longer or more intensive protocols using Prolific (e.g., multiple
reports per day), although researchers may want to consider additional points of contact (e.g.,
more frequent reminders) or incentives (e.g., bonus compensation) to ensure adherence remains
high. Even these additional steps, however, would require relatively little in terms of researcher
effort and resources. Importantly, we collected a larger sample than is typical for intensive
longitudinal work (Jones et al., 2018). In terms of power, this has advantages, as increasing the
number of participants benefits power more than increasing the number of assessments, even
holding person-assessments constant, especially when the observed frequency of substance use is
less (or more) than 50% of observations (Lane & Hennes, 2019). However, it would be
reasonable to recruit a smaller number of participants to complete a longer or more intensive
protocol for an equivalent cost in compensation.
Results of our longitudinal analyses aligned with theoretical expectations regarding both (a)
temporal patterns (e.g., drinking being most likely on Fridays and Saturdays) and (b) associations
amongst indicators of substance use, mood, and interpersonal experiences. Collectively then, our
results indicate that Prolific represents a potentially sound option for collecting longitudinal daily
diary data of good quality, although it would be beneficial for future studies to examine Prolific’s
utility when using other study designs (e.g., multiple assessments per day).
Prolific Sample 2: Test-Retest Study
Samples
Prolific Participant Demographics and Procedure
Our second sample of Prolific participants (N = 429) were US adults (age 18+) who
completed two assessments roughly 2 weeks apart in the Fall of 2020. Participants were
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 16
screened based on a history of mental health issues using the same filter described
previously. These data were collected as part of a broader study focused on improving
transdiagnostic mental health assessment (see Stanton et al., 2021). All analyses presented are
original, and more information regarding this study’s goals and data exclusions (i.e., scores from
measures that were administered but not included here) are provided in Online Appendix S1.
sample (e.g., regarding employment status). Both Prolific sample participants and the
participants from the undergraduate sample described subsequently completed surveys
administered via Qualtrics, which again included a mobile-friendly version for participants who
chose to complete study measures in this manner.
We obtained data from an initial sample of 439 Prolific participants, but nine of these
participants (a) failed to pass an obvious initial attention check (i.e., type the word “start”) and/or
(b) answered few to no study items. Participants also were administered two other obvious
validity items (i.e., please answer “strongly agree”). One participant failed both validity items,
and removal of this participant’s data and data from other the nine cases described reduced our
sample size to 429 participants. Notably then, only a very small percentage (2.3%; 10 of 439) of
cases were removed due to invalid responding. There were very little missing item-level data
after removing invalid cases (e.g., the AUDIT was administered, but there were only a handful of
missing AUDIT item scores in this dataset). Data collection was efficient, as all data from the
initial assessment were collected after the study had been posted for less than 2 days.
Most of the original 429 Prolific participants (N = 377; 87.8%) completed the second
assessment occurring approximately 2 weeks after the first (13.7 days; SD = 1.3; mode of 13
days; range from 13-21 days). From hereon, we refer to the first and second assessments as
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 17
“Time 1” and “Time 2,” respectively. The original Time 2 sample size was 395, but 15 of these
failed to respond to nearly all items or failed multiple validity checks (i.e., failing to select an
instructed response). Additionally, three participants made errors when entering their Time 2
Prolific IDs at Time 2, which prevented us from linking their data and reduced the final Time 2
sample size to 377. Participants were compensated with $7.50 USD for completing each survey
assessment, and Prolific’s estimated average participant completion time after removing outliers
for each survey was approximately 30 minutes. Therefore, estimated compensation was
approximately $15 per hour.
Of the 377 participants who completed the Time 2 assessment, 92% (347) completed this
assessment within a 13- to 15-day window. This suggests that researchers may be able to obtain
follow-up data from participants within precise timeframes, thereby avoiding complications
introduced by participants varying widely in their timing of completing follow-up assessments
(e.g., complications when evaluating retest coefficients if some participants complete measures
after a week but others after 3-4 weeks). Furthermore, our retention rate of 87.8% was achieved
by sending a single reminder to participants via the Prolific system at follow-up and compares
favorably to other studies. For example, some studies using online administration with
undergraduate samples report 2-week retention rates of 65-75% (Chmielewski et al., 2017;
Stanton & Watson, 2020), with 2-week retention rates of roughly 80% reported for some studies
including in-person administration (Jonason & Webster, 2010; Watson et al., 2019).
Undergraduate Comparison Sample Demographics and Procedure
As reviewed, we also present cross-sectional data from undergraduate participants. These
participants were recruited from the psychology department subject pool at a large southern
university over the duration of the Fall 2020 semester (early September through mid-December).
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 18
All participants received course credit for their participation. Participants were required to be 18
years or older but were not screened based on any other criteria. This sample initially consisted
of 613 participants, but data from 84 participants were removed, reducing our final sample to
529 participants. Reasons for data removal included 71 participants failing to respond to nearly
all study items as well as 13 participants failing the same attention checks used with our second
was somewhat more variability in some demographic characteristics such as racial identity in the
undergraduate than in the Prolific samples, though less variation in other demographic variables
such as sexual orientation.
Measures
Substance Use and Mental Health History
Participants completed a range of items assessing their substance use and mental health
histories (e.g., currently receiving psychotherapy). We also asked participants to self-identify
whether they had ever been diagnosed with a range of mental health disorders. Although
participants may lack specific knowledge of various disorder criteria, we still present these data
to provide a general sense of the types of mental health issues Prolific participants oversampled
for psychopathology history may report.
Substance Use Questionnaires
The 10-item AUDIT and 8-item CUDIT-R were administered to assess alcohol and
cannabis use in reference to the past 12 months. Additionally, participants completed an 8-item
version of the Drug Use Survey (DUS; Clark & Watson, 1999) to assess lifetime use of other
substances (e.g., amphetamines, tranquilizers). The DUS asks participants to report the number
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 19
of times they have used specific substances on a 7-point scale ranging from 0 (Never) to 6 (40
times or more), and ratings for all DUS items were summed to create a composite score.
Personality Pathology and Symptom Measures
Participants completed select scales from the Comprehensive Assessment of Traits
Relevant to Personality Disorder (CAT-PD; Wright & Simms, 2014). Given that we
administered many different CAT-PD scales, we summed scores from scales that were strongly
correlated to create composite variables to model trait domains from DSM-5 Section III
Alternative Model for Personality Disorders (AMPD). All scales summed to create composites
were correlated ≥ .50 in the undergraduate data and Prolific data across timepoints. Participants
responded to all items using a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (very untrue of me) to 4 (very true of
me). Composites included a Disinhibition composite created by summing CAT-PD
Irresponsibility (7 items) and Non-Perseverance (6 items) scores; an Antagonism composite
representing a sum of Callousness (7 items) and Manipulativeness (6 items); Anxiousness (7
items) and Depressiveness (6 items) summed to create a Negative Affectivity composite; and
Unusual Beliefs (7 items) and Unusual Experiences (7 items) used to create a Psychoticism
composite. Scores from the CAT-PD Social Withdrawal scale also were used as an indicator of
the AMPD Detachment domain.
Additionally, participants completed the Mood Disorder Questionnaire (MDQ; Hirschfeld
et al., 2000), which assesses a lifetime history of hypomania/mania symptoms using 13
items. Participants responded to these items using a dichotomous “Yes” or “No” format. We
summed scores on these 13 items to create a dimensional hypomania history score. We also
report the percentage of participants who screened positively for a possible hypomania history.
A positive MDQ screen requires endorsement of seven or more MDQ items. It also requires
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 20
participants to endorse that (a) multiple symptom experiences occurred during the same time
period, and (b) symptoms experienced caused moderate to severe impairment. Finally,
participants completed the 10-item Dysphoria scale (e.g., “felt discouraged”) from the Expanded
Version of the Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms (IDAS-II; Watson et al.,
2012). These 10 items were summed to create a dimensional Dysphoria scale score, and we also
report the number of participants who exceeded a Dysphoria screening score cutoff of 28.
Scores exceeding this cutoff indicate an increased likelihood of meeting criteria for one or more
internalizing disorders (e.g., major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder; Stasik-
O’Brien et al., 2019).
Prolific Sample 2 Results
Descriptive Statistics
Information regarding participants’ mental health and substance use histories are provided
mental health history, most participants reported current psychotropic medication use (52.9% at
Time 1), and roughly a third reported current psychotherapy (32.4% at Time 1).
The Prolific and undergraduate samples differed markedly in terms of mental health
history. This was expected given that Prolific participants were screened on psychopathology
history whereas undergraduate participants were not. However, this provides evidence that the
Prolific screening filters worked as intended. For example, current antidepressant use was over
three times higher in the Prolific (42% and 41.4% at Times 1 and 2, respectively) than in the
undergraduate sample (13%), and nearly three-fourths (> 70% across timepoints) of Prolific
participants self-identified as having been diagnosed with a depressive disorder. Although this
Prolific sample was not screened for substance use, 10.3% of Time 1 participants reported
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 21
having ever sought treatment for substance use (versus 2.1% of the undergraduate sample), and
9.3% of Time 1 participants reported having been diagnosed with any alcohol or other substance
use disorder (versus 1.5% of the undergraduate sample; Time 2 frequencies generally were
consistency estimates provided as coefficient omega values. For nearly all measures reported,
coefficient omega values from the Prolific sample were equal to or exceeded those from the
undergraduate sample (e.g., > .90 across timepoints for the AUDIT in the Prolific data; .85 in the
undergraduate data).
We computed Cohen’s d effect size differences to compare measure scores for the Time 1
most psychopathology measures were higher for the Prolific than undergraduate sample, with
sizeable effect size differences in some cases (e.g., d = .83 for Detachment). Lifetime substance
use history scores assessed via the DUS were higher in the Prolific than in the undergraduate
data (d = .78), but CUDIT-R and AUDIT differences were trivial (both ds < .14).
When considering AUDIT and CUDIT-R classification levels across Time 1 and
undergraduate data, more Prolific participants (i.e., 76.7%) than undergraduates (67.6%) were
classified as Low by the AUDIT; however, a greater percentage of Prolific participants (5.6% at
Time 1 versus 1.9% of undergraduates) were classified in the AUDIT Severe range. Regarding
CUDIT-R classification, slightly higher percentages of Prolific participants (e.g., 10.3% at Time
1 for Probable Use Disorder) were classified as having Problems or Probable Use Disorder than
in the undergraduate sample (7.8% Probable Use Disorder).
Substance Use Item Factor Analyses
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 22
Factor analysis commonly is used in psychometric research (Sellbom & Tellegen, 2019),
and we present a series of factor analyses demonstrating Prolific’s utility for conducting
psychometrically-oriented longitudinal research. Many different types of factor analyses could
be conducted using the data across the samples and timepoints available here. Acknowledging
this, we focus on basic demonstrative analyses examining single-factor structures of item scores
from the AUDIT, CUDIT-R, and DUS (e.g., examining a single-factor structure of the 10
AUDIT items). Although these measures are widely used and validated, these analyses show
that all item scores from each measure reflect a common factor as would be expected
theoretically (however, see Watts et al., 2021 for discussion regarding the unidimensionality of
substance use item sets and the substance use disorder criteria).
All factor analyses were exploratory factor analyses (EFA) conducted using principal axis
factoring with squared multiple correlations as the communality estimates. All EFAs were based
on polychoric correlation matrices given our focus on analyzing item-level ratings. We also
evaluated the similarity of EFA results across timepoints and samples using comparability
coefficients. With this approach, coefficients can be computed using both sets of data. For
example, when evaluating the similarity in single-factor structures across the two samples, one
coefficient can be generated using the Prolific dataset for scoring and a second coefficient using
the undergraduate dataset for scoring (Everett, 1983). These coefficients can then be averaged to
obtain an estimate of overall comparability, and comparability coefficients ≥ |.90| indicate strong
factor similarity (Everett, 1983).
All items from each measure (e.g., when factor analyzing the 10 AUDIT item ratings)
loaded strongly (≥ .50) onto a single factor across samples and time points (i.e., the Time 1 and
Time 2 Prolific data; the undergraduate data). Factor loadings are presented in Online
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 23
loaded ≥ .55 on a common factor, (b) all CUDIT-R items loaded > .80 onto a common factor,
and (c) all DUS items loaded ≥ .74 onto a common factor. All comparability coefficients
indicated very strong factor similarity for the AUDIT, CUDIT-R, and DUS factor structures
across the Prolific sample timepoints (i.e., all coefficients were ≥ .98). Thus, factor structures
were consistent across Prolific timepoints and with theoretical expectations in all cases.
Cross-sample factor similarity also was strong when comparing the Prolific and
undergraduate sample results. For example, factor structures of both the AUDIT and CUDIT-R
items showed very strong similarity across the Time 1 Prolific data and the undergraduate data
(all comparability coefficients ≥ .97). Comparability across the Prolific Time 1 and
undergraduate results was somewhat weaker for the single-factor structure of the DUS items
when using the undergraduate data for coefficient scoring (coefficient = .89), although
comparability (coefficient = .95) was stronger when using the Prolific Time 1 data for
scoring. The average of these coefficients still was .92, suggesting that the single-factor
structures of the DUS were comparable across the Prolific Time 1 data and undergraduate data
overall.
Stability of Scores Across Timepoints
Finally, we demonstrate how Prolific can be used to obtain data needed for other
psychometrically-oriented analyses involving examination of the test-retest stability of measure
scores. Use of data from the 377 Prolific participants who completed both study assessments for
computing test-retest correlations exceeds even stringent sample size recommendations (e.g., 300
participants; Watson, 2004), which is important to note given that researchers often use very
small sample sizes for test-retest analyses if they are conducted at all (e.g., samples of 50-75
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 24
participants; Watson, 2004). Test-retest stability coefficients reported as Pearson correlations
conformed with theoretical expectations when examining stability over the 2-week study period,
administered (i.e., the AUDIT, CUDIT-R, and DUS) were ≥ .90, consistent with expectations
that past year (AUDIT and CUDIT-R) and lifetime reports of substance use (DUS) should not
change meaningfully over a 2-week retest timeframe. Temporal stability estimates for other
measure scores (e.g., personality pathology) also aligned with theoretical expectations.
Test-Retest Study Summary
Results from this second Prolific sample provide further evidence that filters available via
the Prolific platform are useful for efficient and targeted data collection. Retention across the 2-
week assessment interval also was strong in the Prolific sample. The analyses based on this
sample demonstrate how Prolific can be used to collect data from relatively large samples that
are necessary, but often difficult to obtain, to adequately conduct longitudinal psychometric
analyses. The Prolific data used for these analyses also compared favorably in many ways to
data collected from the undergraduate sample (e.g., fewer missing data than in our undergraduate
sample). This is noteworthy given that researchers may have concerns about participants
recruited from crowdsourcing platforms responding carelessly to study items, although we
acknowledge that concerns regarding response validity often apply to undergraduate samples as
well. Taken together, these results suggest the Prolific platform has significant potential for use
in psychometrically-oriented research.
General Discussion and Future Directions
Our data from two Prolific samples collected across seven assessments (i.e., 5 days of daily
diary data collection in our first sample; an initial and follow-up assessment in our second
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 25
sample) indicate that Prolific can be used to collect data of reasonably high quality for repeated
measures substance use research. The complementary series of analyses presented using data
from the daily diary and test-retest studies demonstrate specific ways researchers can use Prolific
to address contemporary research questions, and it was encouraging that results across samples
conformed to theoretical expectations (e.g., the likelihood of alcohol use was increased on
Fridays and Saturdays compared to other days for the daily diary study). Furthermore, data from
both samples were collected with relatively little time and effort cost on the part of our research
team. Prolific’s built-in screening filters aided in ensuring an efficient data collection process,
and descriptive information indicated that these screening filters were useful for targeting
participant recruitment to address specific substance use and mental health research questions.
Screening filters may not be as readily available or as straightforward to apply when recruiting
participants from other convenience samples (e.g., undergraduate samples), and Prolific’s
process of verifying participant identities may be another advantage over other online
recruitment platforms where doing so may be more difficult (e.g., Facebook).
Our examples are by no means exhaustive of how Prolific could be used by substance use
researchers. For example, it would be interesting to evaluate Prolific’s utility for conducting
research using more intensive or extended sampling approaches. This could include examining
the extent to which adherent, valid, and reliable responses can be obtained when assessing
participants over longer time periods and/or multiple times per day (i.e., ecological momentary
assessment [EMA]). Instead of using Qualtrics as we did here, Prolific potentially could be
paired with software specifically designed to collect EMA data. Relatedly, retention was strong
for our second Prolific sample over a 2-week period, and results were highly consistent across
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 26
assessments. However, it would be interesting to examine retention and patterns of results over
more extended follow-up periods (e.g., 6 or 12 months).
Finally, although we found our results encouraging overall, we are not arguing that
crowdsourcing platforms such as Prolific can or should replace in-person research efforts. For
example, it is often useful to incorporate multimethod assessment when validating new measures
(e.g., to examine convergence across self and interview ratings). However, it is difficult to
determine the extent to which Prolific is useful for conducting multimethod research due to most
existing research with this platform having focused on self-report. Furthermore, although
crowdsourcing is efficient for collecting large samples, samples recruited with these methods
may have their own idiosyncrasies (e.g., possible personality differences for crowdsourced
samples compared with other sample types; Arditte et al., 2016; Paolacci & Chandler, 2014; Peer
et al., 2017). Given the vagaries of the internet, Prolific may also be vulnerable to sudden and
large shifts in its participant pool, both in terms of response quality and participant demographics
(e.g., temporary increases in the number of young women participating in Prolific studies; see
likelihood of such issues). Acknowledging these considerations, our results may be helpful for
guiding researchers interested in using Prolific for longitudinal research, and they suggest that
sound data can be obtained quickly for study protocols involving relatively few longitudinal
study assessments.
PROLIFIC AND LONGITUDINAL SUBSTANCE USE RESEARCH 27