Dacre, Gkogkidis, & Jenkins 2018
Co-Creation of Innovative Gamification
Based Learning: A Case of
Synchronous Partnership
a a* b
Nicholas Dacre , Vasilis Gkogkidis , & Peter Jenkins
Science Policy research Unit, University of Sussex Business School, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
Brighton Business School, University of Brighton, Brighton, UK
Corresponding Author: v.gkogkidis@sussex.ac.uk
Abstract
In higher education, gamification offers the prospect of providing a pivotal
shift from traditional asynchronous forms of engagement, to developing
methods to foster greater levels of synchronous interactivity and partnership
between and amongst teaching and learning stakeholders. The small vein of
research that focuses on gamification in teaching and learning contexts, has
mainly focused on the implementation of pre- determined game elements.
This approach reflects a largely asynchronous approach to the development
of learning practices in educational settings, thereby limiting stakeholder
engagement in their design and adoption. Therefore, we draw on the theory
of co-creation to examine the development process of gamification-based
learning as a synchronous partnership between and amongst teaching and
learning stakeholders. Empirical insights suggest that students gain a greater
sense of partnership and inclusivity as part of a synchronous co-creation
gamification-based learning development and implementation process.
Keywords: Co-Creation Theory, Gamification, Engagement, Partnership, Higher Education,
Synchronous, Innovative, Students, Learning, Pedagogy, University, Asynchronous.
Cite this Paper
Dacre, N., Gkogkidis, V., & Jenkins, P. (2018). Co-Creation of Innovative Gamification
Based Learning: A Case of Synchronous Partnership. Society for Research into Higher
Introduction
Coates (2005) argues that student engagement is an important indicator of the
quality of a university course and it should be measured and factored in when
trying to improve teaching methods and processes. The role of partnerships in
fostering engagement has been linked to pivotal higher education factors such as
the student experience, and teaching and learning practice (Bryson, 2016; Bryson
& Hand, 2007). Research suggests an array of tools, methods, and concepts upon
which pedagogic practice can draw on to elicit novel, and innovative approaches
to engage students (Kirkwood & Price, 2014; McLaughlin et al., 2014). One such
approach which has steadily been gaining interest and relevance with learning and
Co-Creation of Innovative Gamification Based Learning: A Case of Synchronous Partnership 1
Dacre, Gkogkidis, & Jenkins 2018
teaching practice, is through the concept of gamification (Dacre, Constantinides,
& Nandhakumar, 2015; Tsay & Kofinas, 2017; Urh, Vukovic, & Jereb, 2015).
Gamification is defined by Deterding et al. (2011, p. 9) as “the use of game design
elements in non-game contexts”. Research suggests that the application of game-
based elements has the potential to enhance engagement and promote
participative interaction (Dacre, Constantinides, & Nandhakumar, 2015; Nacke &
Deterding, 2017).
As suggested by Fotaris et al. (2016), gamification can be an effective tool when
successfully implemented to help increase student engagement with teaching and
learning practice. However, the majority of gamification research in higher
education has mainly focused on introducing pre-designed gamified solutions to
understand their influence on practice (Iosup & Epema, 2014; Tsay & Kofinas,
2017; Urh et al., 2015). In these settings the level of synchronous partnership is
limited by the asynchronous gamification development, whereby educators
implement pre-designed solutions. Conversely, the concept of co-creation offers a
much more dynamic and interactive partnership during the process of product and
service development.
The idea of introducing co-creation in the context of higher education was explored
by Díaz-Méndez and Gummesson (2012) suggesting a positive influence on
student engagement. Co-creation is described by Vargo and Lusch (2008) and
Barile and Polese (2010) as the joint creation of value where customers and
organisation work together both offering resources to improve the outcome of the
design process. Therefore, this paper draws on the theory of co-creation to
examine the partnership in developing a gamification-based learning system to
improve engagement amongst and between teaching and learning stakeholders
on a postgraduate course.
The programme that the gamification-based learning system is designed for is an
elective postgraduate business management module. It is an intensive programme
that teaches students when and how to use gamification elements in business
contexts. Our findings suggest that students gain a greater sense of partnership
and inclusivity as part of a synchronous co-creation development and
implementation process as well as high levels of satisfaction from the course.
Research Approach
The gamification-based learning system that was co-created by the teaching and
learning stakeholders, included game design elements like missions, virtual
currency, power ups and virtual treasure chests (Dacre, Constantinides, &
Nandhakumar, 2015; Huang & Soman, 2013).
The co-creation process was undertaken with all stakeholders by clearly agreeing
to the goals and expected outcomes of the system, responding to suggestions
through regular feedback sessions, and experimenting with new gamification
elements. At the end of each day a short feedback session would be facilitated by
Co-Creation of Innovative Gamification Based Learning: A Case of Synchronous Partnership 2
Dacre, Gkogkidis, & Jenkins 2018
the lecturers reflecting on the gamification system and how the learnings of that
specific day might influence it. Students needed to complete missions to win virtual
coins that would allow them to buy power ups and treasure chests. Treasure
chests offered various rewards to the students. Missions that were co-created as
part of the gamification development process, where players could earn coins
upon completion included:
Not exceeding the time given to present
Not exceeding the number of slides given to present
Best presentation of the day (that was decided through voting that included only
students)
Answer quiz questions during an everyday Kahoot session.
Present without slides
Present without talking
The power ups that were co-created where students could buy with the coins they
got from completing missions were:
Give someone two more minutes for their next presentation
Take away two minutes from someone’s presentation
Increase the number of slides on someone’s presentation by two
Decrease the number of slides on someone’s presentation by two
Someone from the class has to wear a funny hat the whole day
A Google spreadsheet was created to facilitate the co-creation process, where all
students had access to view a dashboard and review suggestions, developments,
how many earned coins, what they can buy with their coins, and how many times
they completed each mission. The spreadsheet was updated on a daily basis with
the latest developments and results from the day’s activities and record of
students’ progress and engagement.
Data collection also comprised of a combination of semi-structured interviews and
focus groups where students offered feedback and further design ideas (Denzin &
Lincoln, 1994; Neuman, 2013).
Co-Creation of Innovative Gamification Based Learning: A Case of Synchronous Partnership 3
Dacre, Gkogkidis, & Jenkins 2018
Findings
Co-creation resulted in a very fruitful and productive partnership between the
students and the lecturers (Bryson, 2016; Díaz-Méndez & Gummesson, 2012).
Students were able to achieve 100% success rate in passing the module and when
asked if being part of the design process helped them pass the module, 100%
answered:
“Yes, because I understood more about how gamification works”
Additional data from the university’s standard survey asking for feedback about
the course further supported the belief that including students in the design
process improves engagement and satisfaction. When asked if they would
recommend this course to their friends 100% answered “Definitely would” and
some students even said:
“It has been definitely my favourite module out of the ones we have
been studying this year”
There were a number of salient elements of the gamification-based learning
system which were interpreted as being more successful (Dacre, Constantinides,
& Nandhakumar, 2015). The ‘give someone two more minutes’ and ‘give someone
two more slides’ power ups made complete sense to all students as they had the
chance to better prepare for their final presentation. One comment that stood out
was:
“I felt that I could break the rules of the game and get more out of it”
The ‘funny hat’ power up that gave students the power to make someone wear a
funny hat for the whole day was also enjoyed by most of the students as it ‘created
an atmosphere of fun in the classroom and helped break the barriers between
lecturers and students’. Conversely there were elements of the gamification
system which were interpreted as being less relevant through the co-creation
process.
up with ideas about the gamification learning system.
Co-Creation of Innovative Gamification Based Learning: A Case of Synchronous Partnership 4
Dacre, Gkogkidis, & Jenkins 2018
Feedback was unanimous on the “present without slides” and “present without
talking” missions. They initially were incorporated into the design of the system as
they were deemed fun and challenging but were not aligned with the goals
students had for the course. The following comment reflected the overall
consensus:
“The final presentation includes both talking and using slides, so why
would I go for any of these missions when they actually take away
from final goal that is to deliver a good presentation at the end of the
course?”
Conclusion
The use of a co-creation approach to embedding a gamification-based learning
system, resulted in higher level of engagement and a sense of partnership. In the
student’s own words:
“I felt like we were working on something that will help future students
and at the same time we were learning how to improve it”
Future work should be focused on building and testing new versions of
gamification learning systems using the co- creation methodology while getting
data on student excellence and levels of satisfaction from the course.