TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 1
Advancing Transparency and Impact of Research:
Initiating Crosstalk between Indigenous Research and Mainstream “Open Science”
P. Priscilla Lui, Ph.D., Southern Methodist University
Monica C. Skewes, Ph.D., Montana State University
Sarah Gobrial, Southern Methodist University
David Rollock, Ph.D., Purdue University
CRediT statement: Lui led the study idea conception, data curation, provision of
funding and supervision. Lui and Skewes contributed equally to the conceptualization and
writing of the manuscript. Gobrial conducted data analysis and contributed to manuscript
writing. Rollock supported design of methods and data curation and contributed to manuscript
writing.
Positionality statement: Lui is an East Asian American clinical psychologist with
research expertise on ethnic minority mental health. Lui has been using open science practices
since 2017. Skewes is a European American health psychologist with expertise in community-
based participatory research. She has been engaged in health equity research with Native
communities since 2014. Gobrial identifies as an Egyptian American and White mixed-heritage
person, and is a graduate student in clinical psychology under the supervision of Lui. Rollock is
an Afro-Caribbean American clinical psychologist with research expertise on ethnic minority
health and intergroup adjustment.
Correspondence regarding this manuscript should be directed to P. Priscilla Lui
(plui@smu.edu) or Monica C. Skewes (monica.skewes@montana.edu).
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 2
Abstract
To answer questions about human psychology, psychological science needs to yield credible
findings. Because of their goals of understanding people’s lived experiences and advocating for
the needs of the Native communities, Indigenous scholars tend to use community-based
participatory research (CBPR) or approach science from a constructivist framework. The primary
goal of mainstream psychological science is to uncover generalizable facts about human
functioning. Approached from a postpositivist framework, mainstream psychological scholars
tend to assume the possibility of identifying researcher biases and achieving objective science.
Recently, many psychological findings fail to replicate in new samples. The replication crisis
raised concerns about the validity of psychological science. The mainstream open science has
been promoted as a solution to this replication crisis; the open science movement encourages
researchers to emphasize transparency and accountability to the broad research community. The
notion of transparency aligns with the principles of CBPR—research approach common in
Indigenous research. Yet, open science practices are not widely adopted in Indigenous research,
and mainstream open science does not emphasize researchers’ accountability to the communities
that their science is intended to serve. We examined Indigenous researchers’ awareness and
concerns about mainstream open science. Participants endorsed the value of transparency with
the participants and their communities. They also were concerned about being disadvantaged and
the possible negative impact of data sharing on the Native communities. We suggest that there is
value in connecting mainstream open science and Indigenous research to advance science that
empowers people and makes positive community impact.
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 3
Advancing Transparency and Impact of Research:
Initiating Crosstalk between Indigenous Research and Mainstream “Open Science”
Scientific research is one of several ways of seeing and knowing about the world.
Psychological science is a systematic and precise way of observing and measuring
psychologically relevant phenomena; its goal is to answer questions about people’s lives. To
reach this goal, research needs to yield consistent (reliable) and accurate (valid) results. For
scientific findings to provide credible information about human psychology, the findings should
be reproducible if different investigators study them in a new sample from the same population
(Gone, 2011). Along with other approaches to seeing and knowing—local wisdom, traditions,
and teachings that are passed down across generations—one aim that can be achieved by
psychological research is to reflect and understand Native peoples’ experiences, behavioral,
mental, relational, and spiritual processes, and ways of being.
Philosophies of Research
Psychological knowledge can be informed by both Indigenous-focused approaches and
mainstream “Western” scientific approaches. The primary goal of Indigenous research is to
understand people’s experiences. The researchers’ role is to advocate for the well-being of
Native people, families, and communities to inform community practices, and promote strengths
and resilience. Hence, Indigenous researchers tend to use a collaborative, participatory approach
to engage participants in their community throughout the scientific process—including the steps
in confirming the accuracy of results and sharing findings with the community. This
transparency aligns with the goals of open science, but it extends those goals by using research to
advocate for communities and promote social justice. The goals of Indigenous research also are
consistent with a constructivist worldview, in which different lived realities are represented, and
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 4
meaning and theories are induced from participants’ stories and narratives. Because
interpretations are shaped by their own biases and perspectives, researchers actively discuss the
role of their personal identities and values as part of the scientific process. Given these two
guiding principles, investigators in Indigenous research traditions strive to share broadly the
meanings and understandings generated by their efforts, and to seek ways to disseminate them
usefully.
By contrast, the goals of mainstream research are to describe psychological phenomena,
predict and explain human behaviors, emotions, and thoughts, and to modify maladaptive
experiences. These goals generally are consistent with a postpositivist worldview, in which a
singular reality is assumed and tested using deductive and quantitative methods. Relatedly, a
postpositivist approach assumes that identification of researcher biases is possible, and that once
accomplished, optimal and objective science is achievable.1 Postpositivism in part can explain
the persistent dominance of samples from Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic
(WEIRD) societies in psychological research (Arnett, 2008; Henrich et al., 2010; Thalmayer et
al., 2021).
Replication Crisis and the Mainstream Open Science Movement
In recent years, mainstream psychology has discovered that many research findings—
particularly studies with laboratory experimentation—do not replicate when examined by
different scientists in new and larger samples (Open Science Collaboration, 2012, 2015). This
“replication crisis” has shaken the field to its core. The crisis raised concerns not only about the
validity of findings that were widely accepted as true, but psychological science itself. Threats to
1 Readers interested in in-depth discussions of the different research paradigms and philosophical worldviews may
consult Creswell & Clark (2011) and Guba & Lincoln (1994, 2005).
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 5
reproducible science include: designing quantitative studies with small samples and limited
statistical power, and analyzing data in ways that maximize positive findings—and in turn inflate
false discoveries (Munafò et al., 2017). Importantly, key culprits may be the current incentive
structure and “normalized” process in mainstream research. Researchers are rewarded with
tenure, promotion, and grant funding for publishing novel findings that support the hypothesis;
null results often are buried in file drawers. Hence, there are strong motivations to ensure that
data yield positive results supporting the research questions and hypotheses, and to ignore
contradictory findings. Because of the beliefs in the objectivity of researchers and their methods,
it naturally raises alarm when findings cannot be reproduced.
Is “Open Science” Limited?
Touted as a means to address the replication crisis, the “open science movement”
encourages researchers to increase rigor and transparency of findings. The language of
mainstream open science highlights that, “predictions, analysis plans, data, and supplemental
material[s] are made available to the broad scientific community” (Shrout & Rodgers, 2018, p.
488). In particular, preregistering the study plan prevents investigators from radically changing
their methods or analyses after having observed data patterns to achieve the result they
anticipated. Sharing all study materials with other researchers also promotes transparency.
Although open science is considered a radical shift in the ways that mainstream researchers
produce knowledge, many of these open science practices are congruent with the transparent and
collaborative approaches used in Indigenous research. Yet, the language of open science is
uncommon in Indigenous research and other domains of ethnic minority psychology/cultural
diversity research. Thus, it would be useful to understand whether open science practices and
Indigenous research can be mutually informative.
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 6
Research Procedures and Results
We administered survey and open-ended questions to psychological researchers who
identified as Native American/Hawaiian or Indigenous Peoples. The present data were collected
as part of a larger study on researcher practices in the ethnic minority psychology/cultural
diversity field. Indigenous doctoral and master’s-level researchers came from diverse
psychology-related disciplines, including clinical and counseling psychology. This group of
researchers on average published 11 peer-reviewed articles as a primary author and 15 articles as
a co-author. Researchers were asked to indicate their opinions about open science practices. For
example, individuals rated their understanding of the “replication crisis” and “open science
movement.” Researchers also indicated their beliefs about scientific rigor, transparency, and
reproducibility of their work.
We found that Indigenous researchers were “somewhat familiar” with the replication
crisis and “moderately familiar” with the open science movement. Individuals were “somewhat
concerned” about the research reproducibility problem in not only psychological science in
general, but ethnic minority psychology/cultural diversity specifically. Indigenous researchers
believed rigor and transparency to be very important in their research; they placed relatively less
value on the reproducibility of their findings. This may reflect the slight difference between the
goals of mainstream psychological science and Indigenous research discussed above (i.e., to
create generalizable knowledge vs. to advocate for social change for Native people). Among the
10 individuals who had engaged in open science practices, it was most common for researchers
to post an open-access pre-print/post-print of their research reports, registering their research
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 7
Open Science Practices Used By Indigenous Researchers
Conducted registered report
Conduct a replication
Shared a postprint
Archived a preprint
Shared analytic codes
Shared study materials
Shared data
Registered data anlytic plan
Registered study aims
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Current Research Past research
to share their findings with research participants in the community and ensuring transparency in
their research procedures. Sharing findings is not unique to practices promoted in the mainstream
open science movement. Sharing findings also is key to community-based participatory research
(CBPR), a research approach that is preferred—or required—in many Native communities (e.g.,
Wallerstein et al., 2018). A main difference, however, is that the mainstream open science
movement prioritizes sharing findings with the scientific community, whereas CBPR prioritizes
sharing findings with research participants and their communities.
Researchers' Reasons For Using Open Science Practices
Required by institution
Required by advisors/collaborators
Earn open science badges
Try out new scientific methods
Be accountable to funders
Improve rigor in research design
Get research into best possible outlets
Share results openly with participants
Ensure transparency in procedures
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 8
concerns about being “scooped” in their work. Researchers also stated that open science
practices were uncommon and unincentivized in their subfields/institutions.
Reasons Against Using Open Science
No added value
Added time will hurt research productivity
Constrained by collaborators/funders/institution
Uncomfortable with data sharing
Concerns about being disadvantaged (e.g. scooped)
No incentives
Uncommon in (sub)field
Added financial costs
Unfamiliar with practices
0 1 2 3 4 5
science practices
Two themes emerged from the written responses and suggested Indigenous researchers’
concerns about “open science.” As illustrated in the excerpt below, researchers believed that the
mainstream open science movement had not embraced CBPR frameworks and qualitative
methods. Researchers also cautioned about misinterpreting contextualized experiences in the
Indigenous communities.
“The language of open science movement is still based on Euro-western scientific framework and concepts of
validity. Indigenous validity is met through validation of Indigenous methodology from the communities
engaged in the process or encircling or some methodology for ensuring the community recognizes the work as
valid.”
On the one hand, Indigenous researchers in our sample appeared to believe that “open science”
applied only to researcher-initiated studies that used quantitative methods. On the other hand,
when materials and data were shared openly with other scientists, Indigenous researchers were
worried that research processes and findings would be misrepresented and misinterpreted by
outsiders. Namely, research results and conclusions might be invalid without meaningful
community participation.
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 9
Enhancing Crosstalk between CBPR and Mainstream Open Science
Our participants’ responses support the notion that research with Native people
emphasizes community participants’ narratives and stories, and values transparent and equitable
collaborations with community partners. Indigenous researchers view empirical inquiry to be a
way of understanding the population, through which applications can advocate for the needs of
Native communities. Although mainstream “open science” rarely is discussed in Indigenous
research and Indigenous research is rarely discussed among those promoting open science, we
believe that this separation unnecessarily reflects differing worldviews to scientific inquiry.
Mainstream open science practitioners and Indigenous researchers have much to learn from one
exhaustive prescription, we hope that this article opens a constructive crosstalk between
Indigenous research and mainstream open science practices.
and Mainstream Open Science (OS) Practices
CBPR Principles Common Mainstream OS Goals and Practices
Enhances understanding by communicating with the Minimizes biases by communicating with the
research participant community scientific community
Builds on strengths and resources within the Indigenous Collaborates among research teams and shares
community resources within the scientific community
• Communicates research ideas and process through
preregistrations and registered reports, open
materials, and open data sharing
Facilitates a collaborative, equitable partnership in all Builds team science to minimize individual biases and
phases of the research with the community establishes partnerships for broader reach of the
population
• Multisite collaborations
• Transparency with data and analyses to democratize
incentives/rewards and knowledge production
Fosters co-learning and capacity building among all Basic and continuing education for investigators
partners
Balances knowledge and action for the mutual benefit of Disclosure of investigator interests and their conflicts
all partners
Addresses locally relevant health problems and Uncovers universal laws and facts, and enumerates
considers multiple determinants of health and disease possible modifiers across groups and
settings/conditions
Occurs in a cyclical and incremental process that Self-corrections of scientific methods and applications
includes ongoing evaluation of successes and obstacles • Replication studies (including resampling methods,
cross-validation) to demonstrate reproducibility of
results and to reinforce viability of findings
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 10
• Explicit differentiations of confirmatory and
exploratory analyses
Disseminates findings and knowledge to all partners Disseminates findings and knowledge widely
• Preprints that are free and widely accessible
• Use of open social media platforms for sharing and
discussion
Involves a long-term process and commitment to Involves sustained accountability to the scientific
sustainability community and cumulative knowledge production
• Share primary data, relevant research materials, and
data analysis syntax
• Incentives/rewards for upholding principles,
including digital open science badges
• Team science for data pooling
• Longitudinal research with extensive data collection
and intensive analyses
Some open science practices may be useful for Indigenous researchers and will allow
Indigenous research to have a broader impact within the mainstream scientific community. For
example, allowing public access to research conception and planned methods, study materials,
and relevant data can facilitate independent observation of psychological phenomena. In our own
experience with study preregistrations, there is value in investing in the significance of the
research questions and planning process by consulting with both research collaborators and
community advisory boards prior to knowing the patterns in the observed data. Registration of
research plans and analyses can apply to various research methods—including qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. Additionally, by making data—and when
appropriate, analytic syntax—and researchers’ reflexivity and interpretations available to the
scientific community, we can gain greater appreciation for making our records and process
accessible by independent researchers.
Other open science practices may be inappropriate when working with Native
populations and when conducting CBPR. For example, mainstream researchers suggest that
larger sample sizes and higher statistical power can enhance scientists’ confidence in
(quantitative) studies (Button et al., 2013; Fraley & Vazire, 2014). This prescription does not
account for the small population in different tribes of Native Americans—who often have unique
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 11
lived experiences and sociocultural contexts. Additionally, although our research team has
benefited from multisite collaborations—endeavors that facilitate participant recruitment of some
segments of the population—coordinating such collaborations with tribal advisory boards may
be challenging.
Importantly, we believe that mainstream open science movement can help researchers
broaden their conception of accountability and transparency. Rather than be accountable only to
other researchers who examine study materials and data to ensure that they were handled
responsibly from a scientific viewpoint, mainstream science would benefit from increased
transparency and accountability to individual participants and their communities. Indigenous
researchers view science as a sacred endeavor that aims to not only understand people but also
help them and change the systems in which they live (Salois et al., 2006). How are researchers to
know if their work is beneficial without a relationship to the community it intends to help?
Making transparent the methods, study materials, analyses, and interpretations of the data would
equip other scientists, practitioners, and policymakers to make good decisions and propel the
field forward in a way that serves Native people and communities.
Nevertheless, to assess whether research is achieving its intended impact, evaluation
methods must be grounded in true understanding of the communities and cultural contexts. From
the perspective of CBPR, the community owns the data, and it is up to the tribe to decide
whether and how to share them with interested outsiders. Researchers with limited experience
with Native cultures and communities may easily and inadvertently misinterpret findings without
the proper guidance from community members. Innovative solutions are needed to bridge this
and other gaps between Indigenous research and open science. Perhaps, formalized practices of
vetting researchers and data sharing agreements can contribute to a new Indigenous open science
TRANSPARENCY AND IMPACT: INDIGENOUS RESEARCH AND OPEN SCIENCE 12
approach that helps address the replication crisis while also protecting and empowering Native
communities and researchers.
Final Thoughts
The goal of increasing transparency of research and improving reproducibility is
important for increasing validity of study findings. Practices promoted by proponents of the
mainstream open science movement can help reduce instances of data manipulation but may not
eliminate them. As long as the incentive structure rewards scientists only for finding positive
results and emphasizes major, groundbreaking discoveries, individuals will be motivated to
manipulate open science or any other research practices. We see the mainstream open science
movement as a good starting point toward improving the quality of scientific inquiry. We also
believe that the movement would benefit from an expanded view of accountability held by
Indigenous researchers. Dialogue to find connections between open science and Indigenous
science are likely to benefit all who use research to create useful understanding that empowers
people—and the communities it is intended to help.