Running head: CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 1
Practical Recommendations for Considering Culture, Race, and Ethnicity in Personality
Psychology
Forthcoming at Social and Personality Psychology Compass
Memoona Arshad1
Joanne M. Chung2
1Department of Psychology, York University
2Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Mississauga
Author Note
We would like to thank Sanaz Talaifar, Rick Robins, Jin X. Goh, and Amber Thalmayer
for their helpful feedback on this manuscript.
Correspondence regarding this manuscript may be directed to Memoona Arshad. Email:
arshad.memoonaa@gmail.com.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 2
Abstract
Personality science is the study of the individual. It aims to understand what makes people
similar to others, different from some, and unique to themselves. However, there is room for
research in personality to more thoughtfully consider culture, race, and ethnicity in order to
better understand individual differences in people’s patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving.
High impact personality journals rarely include such factors into the interpretation of results, and
cross-cultural and ethnic minority publications are limited within the discipline. This paper offers
a brief, non-exhaustive overview of how culture, race, and ethnicity are examined in relation to
personality, showing that: 1) social structures continue to be neglected in the research, 2) we can
learn from research being conducted in neighboring areas, and 3) valuable work is already being
done within personality psychology. We offer recommendations that emphasize community
based participatory research methods, combined etic-emic approaches, and contextualizing
research findings to improve the consideration of culture, race, and ethnicity in personality
research.
Keywords: personality, culture, race, ethnicity, combined etic-emic approach, daily life,
community based participatory research
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 3
Practical Recommendations for Considering Culture, Race, and Ethnicity in Personality
Psychology
Personality science seeks to understand what makes people similar to others, different
from some, and unique to themselves. These questions require looking at the range of people’s
experiences, including factors related to culture, race, and ethnicity. This is to not only increase
the generalizability of our research, but also to understand human personality from a lens that
does not prioritize the mainstream majority (King, 2021). Yet, studies that carefully consider
these factors are relatively rare within personality psychology. This is a problem that is not
exclusive to personality psychology, as psychological science in general has tended towards
excluding people from underrepresented groups (Espinosa & Verney, 2020; Hall, Yip, & Zárate,
2016; Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010; Saucier & Thalmayer, 2012; Syed et al.,
2018).There have been calls for research that more carefully considers culture, race, and
ethnicity in personality psychology, and this has been viewed as a much needed avenue for
scholars to engage with real world issues (Dupree & Boykin, 2021; King, 2021; Roberts et al.,
2020), especially because resources are more widely available (e.g., open materials and data,
frameworks for conducting collaborative research, and funding geared towards addressing
societal problems).
Additionally, a raised consciousness about injustices that marginalized people have
experienced and continue to experience (e.g., global protests in response to the killing of George
Floyd; King, Lee, & Kaleem, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021) further highlights the need to address
these factors in personality psychology. Debates about who should conduct research focused on
communities of colour and other underrepresented groups often place the responsibility on
researchers from those groups (Dupree & Boykin, 2021; Milner, 2007), or those who already
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 4
recognize the importance of such research. However, all researchers should work to
acknowledge their own positionality and awareness of culture, race, and ethnicity to circumvent
harmful stereotypes or misconceptions of individuals and communities, regardless of whether
they explicitly study these factors in their research (Milner, 2007; Cheon, Melani, & Hong, 2020;
Roberts et al., 2020). We think that personality psychology especially should and can grow in
this regard. In this paper, we briefly review some approaches from neighboring areas within
psychology, highlight work that is already being conducted within personality psychology, and
provide initial, practical recommendations for researchers who are interested in incorporating a
consideration of culture, race, and ethnicity into personality science in meaningful ways.
What is Culture, Race, and Ethnicity?
The idea that psychology has centered the experiences of WEIRD (Western, Educated,
Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic) people (Espinosa & Verney, 2020; Henrich et al., 2010;
Saucier & Thalmayer, 2012) is not new, however it remains an issue today. Furthermore, people
from multicultural and minority populations, including racial and ethnic minorities, have been
historically excluded from research studies in psychological research (e.g., Hall et al., 2016;
Syed et al., 2018). Race and ethnicity are closely related to the concept of culture, and while
often used interchangeably in the research literature, are distinct from each other (Causadias et
al., 2018; Hall et al., 2016). Although some people hold the lay belief that race is biological (e.g.,
as examined in Plaks et al., 2012; Williams & Eberhardt, 2008), we refer to it as a social
construct that groups people together via shared physical characteristics, such as skin colour.
Racial differences between people are often created by dominant groups in a society to denote
worth or hierarchy of minority group members. In turn, this categorization can have profound
effects on the psychology of people, because it includes others’ perceptions of them, through
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 5
generalizations and stereotypes, which can then influence their racial identity development
positively or negatively (Betancourt & López, 1993; Roberts et al., 2020; Utsey et al., 2008).
Ethnicity, in contrast, is a social grouping of individuals that share common nationality,
language, history, traditions, and cultural practices (Betancourt & López, 1993; Golash-Boza,
2016; Markus, 2008). Race and ethnicity are integrated into the idea of culture, as they all
operate at individual and group (e.g., societal) levels and are used by people to organize and
distinguish communities (Causadias et al., 2018; Betancourt & López, 1993; Markus, 2008). As
such, culture is defined as a learned and shared system of meanings (i.e., beliefs & values) that
are transmitted through shared activities, change over time, and are shaped by people to
construct, define, and interpret the world around them (Markus, 2008; Matsumoto et al., 1996;
Rohner, 1984).
Culture, Race, and Ethnicity Matter for the Understanding of Personality
People’s cultural, racial, and ethnic heritage can impact their access to resources, their
socioeconomic status, and prospects for social mobility (e.g., Feinstein, 1993; Manstead, 2018;
Williams et al., 2010) via experiences with social structures. Social structures refer to relations
between individual members and societal institutions (e.g., political and educational entities,
social services) that organize and assign value to social categories, such as race, ethnicity,
gender, and class (e.g., Cortina, Curtin, & Stewart, 2012). These variables interact hierarchically
to create systems of privilege and disadvantage (Cortina et al., 2012; Mullings & Schulz, 2006).
Racial and ethnic stereotypes, upheld through dominant institutions in society, including the
government and media, can negatively impact people’s access to educational (Manly et al.,
2002), occupational (Emerson & Murphy, 2014) and health care (Glymour & Manly, 2008)
resources. In turn, different aspects of people’s personalities can be affected through forces of
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 6
racism and oppression (e.g., Chávez et al., 2008; Cortina et al., 2012). Because social structures
affect people (e.g., Cortina et al., 2012), including samples of people that have been historically
excluded in personality psychology is essential for understanding individual differences and
personality processes. This is becoming increasingly important as the number of those who
identify as racial and ethnic minorities grows; for example, in Canada, racial and ethnic
minorities are expected to make up between 35% to 38% of the population by 2036, and in the
United States, over 50% of the population by 2044 (Espinosa & Verney, 2020; Morency et al.,
2017)1.
Additionally, focusing on social structures in personality psychology creates an
opportunity for researchers to explicitly consider the role of contextual factors in relation to
individuals’ personalities. For example, some studies indicate that individuals’ expression of
their personality and self-views differ across different relationships and positions in society (e.g.,
Clifton, 2014; Roberts, 2007, Suh, 2002). In other studies, social contextual factors of
socioeconomic status (SES), family environment, and discrimination have been shown to be
important for the development of Mexican American adolescents’ self-regulation and life
satisfaction (e.g., Atherton, Lawson, & Robins, 2020; Willroth, Atherton, & Robins, 2021).
Findings also indicate geographical variations in Big Five personality traits, highlighting how
contextual factors, such as racial diversity, community development, and crime rate, are
Here, we specifically focus on providing recommendations for increasing considerations for race, ethnicity, and
culture in personality psychology, while acknowledging that there are other factors that continue to be understudied
in personality psychology, and psychology more generally. Low-income individuals, people from 2SLGBTQIA+
communities, and people with disabilities are some examples of people that have been historically excluded
(Espinosa & Verney, 2020; Henrich et al., 2010; Syed & Kathawalla, 2020). It is important to note that these factors
often interact. For example, an individual can simultaneously identify or be perceived by others as belonging to
several groups (e.g., a cisgender, heterosexual, Asian woman), resulting in having different advantages and
disadvantages in society, referred to as intersectionality (Combahee River Collective, 2005; Crenshaw, 1989;
Henderson, 1997). We hope that in improving our consideration of culture, race, and ethnicity, and thus
acknowledging social structures, that intersectionality in relation to personality processes may be attended to in the
future.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 7
negatively (i.e., low racial diversity, high crime rate) and positively (i.e., established community
centres/resources) associated with how people think, feel, and behave within and across countries
(e.g., Rentfrow, Gosling, & Potter, 2008; Rentfrow & Jokela, 2016). These examples show that
the examination of many constructs examined in personality research can benefit from the
consideration of factors related to culture, race, and ethnicity (e.g., Lui et al., 2016).
A Consideration of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity Can Improve Personality Research
Incorporating a consideration of culture, race, and ethnicity in personality psychology can
help researchers improve their research because it helps to contextualize it. One benefit to doing
so is that it can appropriately constrain researchers to be careful about making blanket statements
about their findings, for example, about the adaptiveness of certain aspects of personality over
others and the universal applicability of Big Five personality traits, by making sure readers are
reminded of sample characteristics, rationale and assumptions behind the methods used, and any
other constraints on generality (Simons, Shoda, & Lindsay, 2017). Moreover, considering these
factors also allows us to revisit the generalizability of previous and current personality research.
Including samples of underrepresented people challenges personality researchers to justify their
samples and make clear the relevance of their findings to people from the group in question
instead of providing vague, general statements about a larger unrelated population. For example,
with the implicit assumption that American samples are White (Devos & Banaji, 2005), studies
on non-White American samples are labeled as “cultural” studies and are seen as less
generalizable (Cheon et al., 2020). This serves the assumption that research on White Americans
is more generalizable than research on non-White Americans (Cheon et al., 2020), and
challenges researchers to be more explicit about the replicability and credibility of their findings.
It is important to note that this is an issue related to race within a country, and that issues related
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 8
to representation across countries may present themselves differently (e.g., van de Vijver, 2013).
While personality psychology has been at the forefront of the credibility revolution (Atherton et
al., 2021), the relative lack of regard for culture, race, and ethnicity within the field is an issue
for replicability as well. The ways in which researchers recruit and study individuals should
ensure findings can be generalizable because generalizability influences the perceived impact
and credibility of the research (Cheon et al., 2020; Simons et al., 2017). Moving forward,
improving the representation of underrecruited samples in personality research should be just as
important to researchers as are open science approaches and preregistrations, especially as
generalizability constraints are not limited to “cultural” studies but apply to Western research as
well (Cheon et al., 2020).
Personality Psychology Currently Lacks Research on Culture, Race and Ethnicity
Personality psychology has historically focused on a narrow population, as part of its
beginnings was focused on assessing the intelligence and ability of White men in the military
(e.g., Gibby & Zickar, 2008; Winter & Barenbaum, 1999). Personality psychology has
broadened in its scope, yet, culture, race, and ethnicity are still understudied.
In a recent commentary, Atherton et al. (2021) reported a search of the 50 most cited
articles that use personality as a keyword, and the results showed that studies used samples
predominantly composed of American undergraduate students, and were authored almost
entirely by individuals in the Western world. These results suggest that researchers in personality
psychology should orient themselves towards more meaningfully addressing culture in their
work by conducting and prioritizing work that uses non-Western samples.
Additionally, in a notable commentary on the current state of personality psychology that
in part motivates the current work, Syed (2021) highlights the relative absence of race, ethnicity,
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 9
and culture in personality research, specifically identifying the exclusion of structural
considerations (e.g., power, privilege, and context) in understanding personality. In doing so,
Syed (2021) emphasizes that personality encompasses more than just traits and should include a
consideration of structural contexts and social structures, concepts that are relatively rare within
personality psychology.
For example, in one important review Cortina et al. (2012) examined the number of
empirical articles in three leading journals in personality psychology (i.e., Journal of Research in
Personality (JRP), Journal of Personality (JP), and Journal of Personality and Social Psychology:
Personality Processes and Individual Differences (JPSP) section that focused on race, ethnicity,
and other variables such as gender, class and sexual orientation. Among these journals, only
three percent of the JPSP articles acknowledged race or ethnicity in the interpretation of results
(and none in either JRP or JP; Cortina et al., 2012). This neglect of social structures was not
reflected in psychology journals that have a special focus on race and ethnicity (i.e., Cultural
Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, The Journal of Black Psychology, and The Hispanic
Journal of Behavioral Sciences). Cortina et al. (2012) found that the majority of articles in each
of these journals examined social structures in the study of personality. This suggests that
although advances in understanding the relations between personality and social structures are
being addressed, they are not reaching a larger audience (i.e., mainstream personality
psychologists) who might greatly benefit from this work (Cortina et al., 2012).
Broadening to Other Areas of Psychology
Others who have reviewed the literature have shown that a consideration of culture, race,
and ethnicity is lacking more generally in psychology (e.g., Arnett, 2008; Hartmann et al., 2013;
Roberts et al., 2020; Thalmayer, Toscanelli, & Arnett., 2021). These reviews investigated the
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 10
presence of diverse research samples in prominent psychology journals (Arnett, 2008; Thalmayer
et al, 2021), trends for ethnic-minority and cross-cultural publications indexed in PsycINFO
(Hartmann et al., 2013) and the frequency of research publications highlighting race, with an
additional focus on race of authors and editors (Roberts et al., 2020). Research samples in
psychology continue to be predominantly from Western, English-speaking countries (Arnett,
2008; Thalmayer et al., 2021), publications using cross-cultural and ethnic minority perspectives
are limited in APA journals (Hartmann et al., 2013), and the majority of articles published in
high impact psychology journals do not highlight race as an issue of interest, while the ones that
do are mostly edited and written by White people who recruit fewer participants of colour in
their participant samples (Roberts et al., 2020). This suggests that considerations of race,
ethnicity, and culture are not seen as important in mainstream, high-impact journals, and works
to further devalue the work of researchers who highlight these issues.
Conceptualizations of Personality Already Include Culture, Race, and Ethnicity
A pervasive view of personality psychology is that it is restricted to the Big Five
personality dimensions where traits are evidence of one's personality. However, in addition to
our recommendations about contextualizing personality, there are other approaches to studying
personality, including the three-level organizational system (McAdams, 1995, McAdams & Pals,
2006; see Syed, 2021 for a more detailed treatment of this approach). This approach makes room
for an examination of personality in relation to culture, race, and ethnicity, for example, with
regard to characteristic adaptations as they are situated in specific contexts and are shaped by
social experiences, and life narratives because they allow individuals to share how they make
meaning of their cultural experiences in their own words (McAdams & Pals, 2006).
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 11
Furthermore, there has been a recent increase in research focused on personality
dynamics, which examines processes, mechanisms, and changes that are integral to the
expression of and changes in personality (e.g., Kuper et al., 2021). One of the reasons for the
renewed attention on personality dynamics is the increased availability of technology (e.g.,
smartphones and wearables) related to daily life methods. Daily life methods (Bolger, Davis, &
Rafaeli, 2003) have typically been lauded for being more ecologically valid than other
methodologies such as questionnaires and interviews because they allow for people to engage
with a research study in situ over time (Allemand & Mehl, 2017), for example, by responding to
a push notification on their smartphone. Although not often specifically discussed in this context,
daily life methods hold special promise for examining how personality processes are related to
different aspects of culture, race, and ethnicity via the structural contexts individuals exist in. We
can learn from work that is already being done on the relations between daily experiences of
racial discrimination and well-being outcomes in ethnic minority individuals (e.g., Seaton et al.,
2018; Seaton, 2019), highlighting the utility of daily life studies for offering a unique window
into the effects of racial discrimination in everyday life, as well as in the long term (Hoggard,
Byrd, and Sellers, 2012 and 2015; Ong, Burrow, Fuller-Rowell, Ja, & Sue, 2013; Ong, Fuller-
Rowell, and Burrow, 2009; Seaton & Douglass, 2014).
What is Already Being Done in Other Areas of Psychology?
Personality psychology can make improvements in considering culture, race, and
simplified overview based on our knowledge of these areas.2
2 We provide a basic overview while recognizing that the lines among these areas are often fuzzy. We also
emphasize these specific areas while acknowledging that each area interplays with social psychology.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 12
Broad Overview of How Neighboring Areas in Psychology Consider Culture, Race, and
Ethnicity
Area in How culture, race, and ethnicity are considered Example(s)
Psychology
Cross-cultural Explicit consideration of culture in relation to The extent to which there are similarities on linguistic, functional,
psychology thoughts, feelings, and behavior; focus is on conceptual, and metric criteria in different cultural groups that are being
similarities in 2 or more cultures (van de Vijver, compared (e.g., Leong, Leung, & Cheung, 2010)
Leung, & Leung, 1997)
Etic approach: import construct and measure from one cultural context to
another (e.g., Berry, 1989; Cheung, van de Vijver, & Leong., 2011;
Cheung, 2012; Fetvadjiev & van de Vijver, 2015)
Cultural Explicit consideration of culture in relation to Emic approach: consider construct and measure within cultural context of
psychology thoughts, feelings, and behavior; comparison is interest (e.g., Berry, 1989; Cheung et al., 2011; Cheung, 2012; Fetvadjiev
not the primary goal & van de Vijver, 2015)
Ethnic minority Focus on psychology of people from historically Examining instances of racial discrimination (e.g., Seaton et al., 2018)
psychology marginalized racial and ethnic groups (e.g., Hall using experience sampling studies (e.g., Bolger et al.,2003)
et al., 2016)
Community Joint consideration of person and community Community based participatory research: Proactively assessing
psychology factors (including to promote positive social community resources, structures, and power dynamics in combination
change) with partnering with community members at each stage of the research
process (e.g., Collins et al., 2018; Espinosa & Verney, 2020)
Developmental Examination of culture, race, and ethnicity as Integrative model: Examine institutional racism, positionality, cultural
psychology proxies of important contextual factors for practices in relation to risk and resilience factors in ethnic minority
change (e.g., Quintana et al., 2007) children (García Coll et al., 1996)
culture, race, and ethnicity in thoughtful ways. Personality psychologists can acknowledge and
learn from this work to expand their own theoretical and methodological toolboxes.
Another approach for improving personality psychology’s treatment of culture, race, and
ethnicity is to take a closer look at studies that are being conducted within the realm of
highlight the link between culture and personality in different ways.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 13
Summary of Recent Studies in Personality Psychology That Meaningfully Consider Culture
Citation Purpose of the study How culture is considered Why it is important
Khwaja, Vaid, Examine extent to which mobile sensing data could be used Used machine learning to specify personality classification models Illustration of how etic and emic approaches
Zannone, Harari, to predict people's standing (e.g., low or high) on self- based on smartphone data features (i.e., accelerometer, pedometer, can be used in combination with behavioral
Faisal & Matic reported Big Five traits in sample of participants from the battery usage, ambient noise, etc.). methods used to study daily life
(2019) United Kingdom, Spain, Chile, Peru, and Colombia
Specified: 1) a model that was trained on all possible combinations of
data from four countries, and then tested on data from fifth country; 2)
a model that was trained on a subset of data within each country, and
then tested on the other part.
Thalmayer, Job, Examine personality descriptors in the Khoekhoegowab Examined Khoekhoe descriptors that came from a dictionary in Illustration of combined etic-emic approach.
Shino, Robinson, & language in people living in Sub-Saharan Africa and test the combination with descriptors from studies conducted in North
Saucier (2020) universality of the Big Five and other proposed universal America. Demonstration of how collaboration can
models in a culturally distant sample of community occur with people who are members of the
members in southern Africa. Asked participants to report on someone they knew on advice of local community.
collaborators who shared that people who spoke Khoekohoegowab
might not typically describe their own qualities. Illustration of how the research team was
able to clarify and update interpretations of
Teachers of Khoekhoegowab helped to recruit participants, and also meanings of descriptors that seemed
administered the questionnaire in a face-to-face setting to allow for ambiguous based on their definition in the
participants who were not fluent in reading and writing the language English language.
to be included.
Illustration of how open science methods can
Used semi-structured interviews to follow up on quantitative results. be used in combination with careful
consideration of culture.
People’s open-ended responses featured in the manuscript.
Preregistration, open materials, and transparent reporting about
procedures were also used.
Cheung, Kube, Tay, Examine impact of the Syrian conflict on well-being of Provide details about the events in Syria, including the Arab Spring Example of how authors can effectively
Diener, Jackson, Syrian people residing in and outside of Syria between 2006 and the civil uprising that followed, and the loss of life, internal situate the sample into historical, social, and
Lucas, Ni, & Leung and 2016 displacement, and forced migration that has occurred since then. cultural contexts.
(2020)
Compare measures of social support and well-being in Syrian people Illustration of combined etic-emic approach
(pre-and-post conflict) to well-being in people across the rest of the to show that the decrease in well-being is
world. most significant for Syrian people relative to
the rest of the world.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 14
Chung, Meijer, Examine emotions and personality change in Syrian young Included Syrian people and bilingual Arabic-English speakers in Example of how people from the community
Zonneveld, Sawaf, adults who have resettled in the Netherlands research team. Consulted with a Cultural Advisory Board to ensure can become involved with psychological
Alajak, Moopen … appropriateness of methodology and research materials. research.
Laceulle (2021)
Translated and adapted research materials using a back translation Example of using research methods that
process. Coding open-ended and behavioral data in Arabic. allow for discussions about constructs that
emerge in Arabic language and Syrian
Created additional opportunities for participants (e.g., newsletters culture
with accompanying small gifts following each data collection,
celebratory event facilitated by team members, workshop series for Illustration of how participation can be
participants, electronic book of participants' artwork to be shared with enriched beyond monetary compensation.
Dutch and international communities).
Example of how scientific findings can be
Plan to create summaries of scholarly output in Dutch and Arabic to communicated to the community.
allow participants to engage with the findings from study.
Atherton, Lawson, & Examine developmental antecedents of stability and change Considered cultural systems specific to sample of Mexican-origin Illustration of how social contextual factors
Robins (2020) in the construct of effortful control from late childhood to youth, such as nativity status, perceived ethnic discrimination, and are important for studying personality
young adulthood in Mexican-origin youth living in the Mexican cultural values. development.
United States
Applied Bronfenbrenner’s (1979) ecological systems theory, Importance of examining environmental and
examining multiple environmental factors to provide a holistic view cultural variables in relation to effortful
on personality development. control of ethnic minorities.
Used culturally specific questionnaires in combination with measures Illustration of combined etic-emic approach.
not tailored for Mexican-origin youth.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 15
personality psychology, but also indicates the relative absence of considering race and ethnicity
within the field (e.g., Syed, 2021) raised in our earlier discussion of the current state of
personality research. Thus, future research in personality psychology might use these extant
studies as examples for more deeply considering culture, but more work is clearly needed
regarding race and ethnicity.
Recommendations for Considering Culture, Race, and Ethnicity in Personality Psychology
After reviewing what is being done in neighboring areas of psychology and within
personality psychology, we have a few recommendations for researchers who are interested in
more carefully considering culture, race, and ethnicity in the planning, implementation and
3 We also acknowledge that researchers serve in multiple roles in the field, e.g., as stakeholders, editors, and
reviewers, and hope that our recommendations can stimulate thinking about how to increase representation in these
roles in the future.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 16
Recommendations for Considering Culture, Race, and Ethnicity in Personality Psychology
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 17
ethnicity in personality psychology. In our recommendations we emphasize connecting and
collaborating with people from the group and/or community of interest. Community Based
Participatory Research (CBPR) methods have been used in indigenization of psychology
movements in South America, Africa and Asia, in addition to applied settings within social and
organizational psychology. CBPR methods work as a tool to foster community action (Collins et
al., 2018) and provide an approach that allows for a more horizontal exchange between
researchers and community members (e.g., Balls-Berry & Acosta-Pérez, 2017; Espinosa &
Verney, 2020). CBPR methods can be used at any stage in the research process, including
building important relationships with people from the community of interest before designing the
study (e.g., using focus groups), providing opportunities for feedback throughout the data
collection process (e.g., through frequent meetings with the research team), and interpreting
study results with the team to facilitate appropriate interpretation before sharing them with both
the scientific and layperson communities. For an excellent overview of CBPR methods in
psychology, see Collins et al., 2018. One implementation of CBPR is to use an advisory board,
where individuals who have lived experiences being part of the community of interest are
included and can provide guidance on issues such as the appropriateness of the study materials,
participant recruitment, and the study procedure. In general, a benefit of having community
members involved in the research process is that research protocols can be piloted and/or altered
based on feedback, likely increasing the study’s reach.
Our recommendations also advocate for the use of mixed methods that can address both
universal and culturally specific aspects of psychological constructs (e.g., Cheung et al., 2011;
Silan, 2020; Thalmayer et al., 2020). For example, with regard to questionnaires, both close-
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 18
ended and open-ended questions can be administered, with open-ended questions allowing
participants to provide feedback on their experience with the task, and to share any additional
information they feel is important. Daily life methods (Allemand & Mehl, 2017; Bolger et al.,
2003) can also be used to further assess how people encounter social structures in everyday life
(e.g., Seaton et al., 2018). We also recommend that where translation of items is needed,
researchers use a multi-step process including expert panels, in addition to methods such as
forward-back translation(e.g., World Health Organization guidelines on translation;
information regarding the cultural context of the sample, regardless of the assumed
representativeness of the sample, can help to change norms for how mainstream personality
psychology considers culture, race, and ethnicity. For example, what is the population that the
sample is drawn from like with regards to norms, beliefs, and cultural practices? What historical,
social, and cultural factors should the reader know about to contextualize their interpretation of
the study results (e.g., Muthukrishna. Henrich, & Slingerland, 2021; Sullivan, 2020)?
Discussion
Overall, our recommendations provide some avenues for researchers to carefully consider
race, ethnicity, and culture in their work. However, there are also larger, systemic factors at play
that must be acknowledged in the goal to improve personality research. For one, incentives for
academic publishing and job security in the field can discourage researchers from incorporating a
consideration of race, ethnicity, and culture into their research. The work researchers conduct on
racialized topics is less likely to be funded and publicized, contributing to fewer studies that use
this approach being published in higher impact journals (Dupree & Boykin, 2021).
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 19
Moreover, the majority of researchers who write, edit, and publish work that highlights
race tend to be White, despite authors of colour being more invested in communities of colour
and racial diversity (Roberts et al., 2020). These factors combined can contribute to the lack of
diverse representation in psychology, as people who want to conduct meaningful research on
race, ethnicity, and culture may not find value in their work, or feel able to progress through
academia with research that is seen as niche and specialized. However, opportunities can be
created here to promote diverse work in psychology. Including people in the research team who
are members of the group we are interested in learning about can lead to opportunities for
training, opening doors for them to pursue scholarly research in the future. We recommend that
editors, grant panelists, and those in other positions of power, work to improve racial diversity in
psychological research (e.g., Roberts et al., 2020) and develop practices to reduce racial
inequality in academia (e.g., Dupree & Boykin, 2021) to increase representation of these issues
more broadly across the area of personality psychology. For example, editors of personality
psychology journals could initiate special issues devoted to culture, race, and ethnicity in
personality psychology. Additionally, grant agencies could create funding opportunities for such
research. Furthermore, professional societies that focus on personality psychology could create
awards that recognize scholarship in these areas.
Finally, we want to acknowledge that not all researchers will be particularly interested, or
able to, incorporate the provided recommendations to their work. We encourage those who claim
to be uninterested to think about how their positionality (e.g., with regard to the researcher’s
gender, race, SES, social status, and life experiences) can impact the way they approach their
own research activities (Milner, 2007). Additionally, we urge those individuals that hold
positions of power to interrogate how their disinterest may shape or hinder certain research
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 20
programs focused on culture, race, and ethnicity within personality psychology. For those who
do not have access to resources (e.g., diverse samples, funding, data), we encourage reflecting on
tasks that are attainable, such as reporting demographic characteristics in data, and making use of
online repositories. For example, the Personality Development Collaborative
to share and use existing longitudinal data to study personality development. There are also
additional panel datasets that allow for the examination of personality using non-Western
samples (Atherton et al., 2021), for example, the Survey of Midlife Development in Japan
(Markus, Coe, Ryff, Karasawa, Kawakami, & Kitayama, 2009-2010), the Indonesian Family
Life Study (RAND, n.d.), the Chinese Family Panel Study (Institute of Social Science Survey,
2015), and the Korean Longitudinal Survey of Women and Families (Joo, 2007-2016). These
resources provide opportunities to those without access to diverse samples or funding to
incorporate a consideration of culture, race, and ethnicity, in their work.
Personality psychologists have much to do to improve their consideration of race,
ethnicity, and culture. This paper has provided a brief, non-exhaustive overview of the current
state of personality science, as well as psychology more broadly. However, this is not to say that
culture, race, and ethnicity are missing in personality research. Rather, when they are considered,
many researchers do not adequately address people’s lived experiences and community needs.
Without contextualizing our work, or including historically underrepresented people in the
research process, we are unable to appropriately conduct and interpret our research. Individuals
exist in contexts, and identities across gender, class, race, ethnicity, and culture, (often working
simultaneously) can shape the experiences of people in unique ways. If we are interested in
individuals’ identities, lived experiences, and personality processes, but continue to neglect
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 21
including the experiences of people from some groups in our research, we are doing our field a
disservice. The future of personality research must be developed with contributions from
researchers with unique perspectives and a commitment to including underrepresented
minorities, in order to improve research and make it applicable to more people.
CONSIDERING CULTURE IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 22