Tipping in Crises: Evidence from Chicago Taxi Passengers during
COVID-19
Sarah Conlisk
April 2021
JEL Classification: D91, D12, I15, M52, Z13
PsycINFO Classification: 2229, 3020, 3900, 3920
Key words: consumer behavior; tipping; COVID-19;
Abstract
In early 2020, the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) spread to the United States and upended normal life.
Using trip-level data on over 17 million taxi rides taken in Chicago from 2018-2021, I document how tipping
behavior changed during the COVID-19 pandemic. I find that the average non-zero tip increased by almost
2 percentage points, from roughly 26% to 28% of the taxi fare. Meanwhile, the likelihood that a passenger
left a tip at all declined by roughly 5 percentage points, down from a pre-pandemic likelihood of 95%.
My preferred specification suggests that the effect on the intensive margin dominates that in the extensive
margin, leading to an aggregate increase in tipping generosity during the pandemic. I leverage granularity
in the data to explore the mechanisms behind these trends and offer two explanations consistent with the
data. First, passengers responded to the two economic shocks of the pandemic – unemployment and savings
overhangs – by varying their tipping rates accordingly. Second, passengers internalized the increased risk
of COVID-19 infection as an additional cost for taxi drivers and increased their tips as compensation. My
analysis testifies to the sustainability of tipping in times of crises and offers theoretical insight into what
drives tipping behavior.
I thank Michael Lynn for advice and mentorship throughout this project. All errors and omissions are my own responsibility.
This research was not supported by any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
The views expressed in this paper are solely my own and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System. Instructions and material
for replicating my analysis are publicly available on Mendeley Data (Conlisk, 2021).
Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Email: ssconlisk@gmail.com
1 Introduction
1.1 Importance of Tipping
Tipping is a pervasive and significant feature of the American service economy. Although social norms
vary across industries and locations, tips are frequently given to workers providing services, notably servers,
bartenders, hairdressers, parking valets, taxi drivers, and tour guides (Star, 1988). And while individual
tips tend to be modest, the total can be substantial, with some workers earning over half of their income in
tips (Payscale, 2012). In the US restaurant industry alone, it was recently estimated that over 46 billion is
earned each year through tips (Azar, 2011). Further, historical trends suggest that tipping is becoming more
economically meaningful: while the tipping norm was 10% in late 19th century America, it rose to 15% in the
middle of the 20th, and by the end of the 20th century had reached 20% in large cities (Post, 1997).
And yet, the voluntary nature of tipping does not comport with standard economic theory; why would a
customer pay more for a service after it has been rendered? This question has inspired a robust interdisci-
plinary literature that seeks to understand tipping behavior (see Lynn (2006, 2015a, 2017) and Azar (2007,
2020) for reviews). Previous research has covered a variety of topics, including differences on the extensive
and the intensive margins of tipping (Keith Schwer & Daneshvary, 2000; Haggag & Paci, 2014; Lynn 2015b;
Alexander et al., 2021); income effects in tipping (Azar, Yosef, & Bar-Eli, 2015; Frank & Lynn, 2020; Tan
& Zhang, 2020); the role of reciprocity in tipping (Lynn & Grassman, 1990; Lynn, 2009; Lynn 2015a; Lee
& Sohn, 2020); and most recently, how the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted tipping behavior (Brewster &
Gourlay, 2021; Lynn, 2021; Majid, et al., 2021).
Working with a rich dataset of taxi trips taken in Chicago from January 2018 to March 2021, this study
contributes to each of these research areas. First, I demonstrate how the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted
tipping behavior in both the extensive and intensive margins. Second, I construct a proxy for passenger’s
household income and test for heterogeneity in the effect of the pandemic on tipping. Third, I examine
whether COVID-19 tipping trends were additionally related to perceived and actual infection risk at the time
of the taxi ride. My findings have practical implications for the viability of tipping in times of crisis and
provide theoretical insight into the mechanisms underlying tipping.
2 Background and Literature Review
2.1 COVID-19 Pandemic
As most research on tipping has taken place during periods of relative stability, the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic offers a new context for researchers to gain insight into tipping. COVID-19 is a highly infectious
disease, transmitted through droplets from an infected person’s cough, sneeze, or breath (Galbadage et al.,
2020). On March 11th, 2020 the World Health Organization declared the disease outbreak a pandemic, and on
March 13th, the president of the United States announced a national emergency. In order to slow the spread
of the disease, the country went into lockdown; by late March, many states had closed schools, restaurants,
bars, and other businesses. Citizens were banned from public gatherings and encouraged to stay home. When
in public spaces, they were asked to wear masks and socially distance from others. The pandemic was not only
a public health crisis, but an economic crisis as well, as the US economy shrunk 3.5% in 2020 (Crutsinger,
2021) and 20.5 million Americans lost jobs in April 2020 alone (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020). Notably,
the economic toll of the pandemic was not felt equally. Job losses were concentrated among low-wage workers,
and by April 2021 employment among the bottom third of earners was still down 30% from pre-pandemic
levels (Chetty et al., 2020). Meanwhile, government-issued stimulus checks, rising stock markets, and reduced
consumption led to a 18 trillion increase in wealth among U.S. households; of this excess savings, 70% went
to the top 20% of earners (Batty et al., 2021). The outcome of these two shocks are often characterized as
having a K-shaped effect on the economy: wealthy individuals gained wealth, while less wealthy individuals
lost income when they lost their jobs, resembling the diverging strokes of the letter K when plotted (Saraiva,
2020).
From a practical standpoint, it is important to understand whether tips remain a dependable source of
income for service workers during crises, especially as we prepare for climate change disasters and future
pandemics. From a theoretical perspective, whether tipping behavior changed under the significant lifestyle,
economic, and public health shocks of the COVID-19 pandemic provide insights into the underlying mecha-
nisms that drive tipping.
2.2 Tipping in COVID-19 Pandemic
Recent research by Lynn (2021) provides some initial insight into how the pandemic has affected tipping.
Analyzing data provided by a pizza delivery drivers in Texas from January 2020 to July 2020, Lynn finds that
the average tip increased after COVID-19 was declared a national emergency and remained elevated through
July 2020. In a secondary study of data from Square payment systems, Lynn finds broadly similar results;
average tip as a percent of the bill increased by roughly five percentage points for distanced transactions at
restaurants and increased by two percentage points at face-to-face quick service restaurants. These trends
align with a recent survey from two small businesses that found customers report they would tip more (in both
the extensive and intensive margins) after the pandemic than before (Majid et al., 2021). However, Lynn also
identified a decrease in average tip percentages at full service restaurants with face-to-face interactions after
the start of the pandemic. Lynn speculates that the overall increase in tip amounts is due to a heightened
perception of server needs during the pandemic, and suggests that any decreases in tipping rates can be
attributed to the changing nature of face-to-face service in the pandemic. Relatedly, Brewster and Gourlay
(2021) conduct a hypothetical experiment and find that masks are not likely to have a meaningful impact on
the tips that restaurant customers leave, although servers with masks were generally perceived as less friendly.
Lynn’s evidence that tipping broadly increased during the pandemic is compelling and prompts further
questions. For example, are the positive effects on tipping in the pandemic that Lynn observed driven by
more customers deciding to tip or by customers leaving a larger tip when they do? For another, how well
do these effects generalize across customers or time? This paper builds upon the findings of Lynn (2021) to
probe the mechanisms underlying pandemic tipping in 3 respects: (1) I estimate the impact of COVID-19
separately for both the extensive and intensive margin; (2) I examine whether these effects are heterogeneous
across (i.e. moderated by) income; and (3) I consider whether tips are additionally related to true or perceived
COVID-19 infection risk at time of trip.
2.3 Predictors of tipping on the extensive and intensive margins
The motivations behind tipping have fascinated researchers across the fields of economics, psychology, soci-
ology, and marketing for decades (see Lynn, 2006; Azar, 2007; Lynn, 2015a; and Azar, 2020 for reviews).
Notably, the tipping decision has two components: (1) the consumer decides whether to tip; and (2) the
consumer decides how much to tip. These two decisions are clearly linked and unsurprisingly share several
motivations. In a web-based study of consumers, Lynn (2015b) demonstrates that reward motives (e.g. “to
reward good service”) and altruistic motives (e.g. “to help servers”) are associated with both greater tip sizes
and increased likelihood of leaving a tip, as reported by the consumer. Additional evidence for the impact of
service quality on both tip frequency and size points to the similarities in the underlying decision processes.
For instance, consumers in South Africa who perceived “quality service” (i.e. neat, friendly, attentive and
prompt) from their car guards tipped more frequently and at higher rates (Saunders & Lynn, 2010). Likewise,
trips from the rideshare platform Uber that receive higher quality ratings from passengers are more likely to be
tipped and tipped more generously (Chandar et al., 2019). Notably, the relationship between service quality
and tips extends beyond the subjective. Chandar et al. (2019) found both tip likelihood and non-zero tip size
decreased when drivers sped, braked hard, and accelerated quickly. Another shared predictor of tipping on the
extensive and intensive margins is degree of server-consumer interaction: taxi rides where the passenger and
driver converse are 1.33x more likely to be tipped (Aydin & Acun, 2019), and evidence from the restaurant
industry suggests that servers can increase the size of their tips by touching and complimenting diners, as
well as addressing them by name (Ebesu Hubbard et al., 2003; Seiter 2007; Seiter & Weger, 2013).
However, the tipping literature has also identified a number of effects that differ on the extensive and
intensive margins. For instance, studying tips at a beauty salon, Schwer and Daneshvary (2000) found that
the cost of a haircut, identifying as female, and whether one cares about their appearance were all positively
associated with tip size but unrelated to the likelihood of tipping. Particularly compelling are instances in
which the effects on the extensive and intensive margins go in opposite directions. In one such instance, Lynn
(2015b) found that duty motives (e.g. “I tip to obey social norms”) increased the likelihood of tipping but
decreased the size of those tips left across a variety of services. In another instance, Lynn (forthcoming)
manipulated the fullness of a tip jar and observed that a full tip jar increased the likelihood of tipping but
decreased the size of the average tip left. These two studies suggest that pressure to leave a tip – whether
internally or externally motivated – increases likelihood of leaving a tip but at the expense of the tip amount.
Interestingly, pressure to leave a larger tip increases tip sizes while decreasing the likelihood of tipping.
For example, Haggag and Paci (2014) take advantage of a change in default tip selection for taxi rides and
demonstrate that higher defaults increase non-zero tip sizes and drivers’ tip incomes on aggregate, but also
increase the likelihood a passenger will “stiff,” or not tip, by 50%. The authors reason that passengers
perceived higher default tips as unfair and chose to penalize drivers by not tipping. Similar evidence can
be found in Alexander et al., (2017) who show that increasing tip recommendations for a laundry service
led to greater tips but reduced likelihood of tipping. However, Alexander et al. also find that higher tip
recommendations did not affect customer satisfaction, patronage, or spending. This runs contrary to the
penalty justification for stiffing and and provides little clarity on the mechanisms underlying tipping on the
extensive margin.
Reviewing this evidence, consumers respond to pressure to leave a tip vs. not by tipping more frequently,
but leaving smaller tip amounts when they do so. Conversely, consumers respond to pressure to leave a
larger tip by leaving greater tip amounts, but by tipping less frequently. Thus, observing that COVID-19 was
associated with contradicting effects on the extensive and intensive margins may suggest that the pandemic
affected tipping through pressure mechanisms. This literature highlights the relevance of examining tipping
in the pandemic along both the extensive and intensive margins.
2.4 Effects of wealth and costs on tipping
Under standard consumer theory, demand for a good is an increasing function of income (Engel, 1857). Con-
sidering tips to be a normal good, one can anticipate that such an income effect exists in tipping: when
consumers are wealthier, they tip more. Existing tipping literature lends some support to this theory. For
example, Lynn (2009, 2015b) finds a positive correlation between consumer income and their reported like-
lihood of tipping in occupations that are routinely tipped. Similarly, in an analysis of 13 million taxi trips
taken in NYC, Elliot et al., (2017) demonstrate that passengers originating in locations with lower average
income per capita are consistently more likely to stiff.
The positive relationship between consumer’s income and tip behavior is observed in the intensive margin
as well (Lynn, 2009) and remains significant even after controlling for a number of potentially confounding
demographics such as dining frequency (Parett, 2006). Specifically in a context similar to taxi rides, Chandar
et al., (2019) identify a positive relationship between tips an Uber driver receives and the median income of
a passenger’s zip code. However, the evidence on this point is not unanimous, as Elliot et al. fail to find a
corresponding relationship with median income of a passenger’s pickup area among New York City taxis.
Given that income is correlated with a large number of customer demographics that may also impact
tipping behavior (i.e. education, ethnicity (Lynn, 2009)), stronger causal inferences can be derived by exam-
ining how tips respond to shocks in a customer’s income. In one such study, Tan and Zhang (2020) estimate
that a one standard deviation increase (decrease) in stock returns is associated with a .3% greater (smaller)
daily average tips. This association is limited to trading hours and robust to other large news events, which
Tan and Zhang interpret as evidence that the relationship operates through an income effect (tips increase
with income), rather than a sentiment effect (tips increase with happiness). Possible evidence of an income
effect is also presented in Azar, Yosef & Bar-Eli (2015), who conduct a field experiment in which restaurant
customers are randomized to receive extra change before tipping. They observed that customers who receive
$ $
a greater amount of extra change ( 12 vs. 3) tipped their server larger amounts, indicating that positive
income shocks inspire greater tips. In a related literature, researchers have found that positive shocks to
income also increase charitable giving (Auten et al., 2002).
And yet, other evidence suggests that tips are somewhat insensitive to changes in a customer’s budget.
For instance, tips tend to increase linearly with bill size, contrary to the quadratic trend expected if customers
were concerned with cost (Lynn & Sturman, 2003). A recent field experiment from Frank and Lynn (2020)
provides further evidence against a wealth effect; server’s tips increased when a magician performed at their
customer’s tables, but were independent of the size of the magician’s tip.
Given that the literature concerning the effect of income shocks on tipping is mixed there is need for more
research on the subject. The COVID-19 pandemic was a source of two non-trivial economic shocks: job losses
and significant savings overhangs. If there is an income effect in tipping, one would expect to see tipping
generosity decline among customers who lost jobs in the pandemic but increase among those who grew their
savings. Thus, studying how tipping behavior in the pandemic interacts with these economic shocks may offer
Importantly, the authors caveat that the data may not fully support evidence of an income effect, given that the observed
relationship between tip amount and extra change is independent of whether the customer actually returned the change. However,
a pro-social trait such as altruism may be positively associated with tip amount and likelihood of returning the change, which
could explain why the income effect was observed in both cases.
evidence in support of an income effect in tipping.
2.5 Equity theory in tipping
Lynn and Grassman (1990) pose that from a rational choice perspective, customers tip in order to buy
equitable relationships. Their hypothesis is rooted in equity theory (Adams, 1965; Walster et al., 1973) which
offers that individuals are socialized to feel anxiety or distress when participating in an unequal exchange.
Adams (1965) represents equity theory with the formula
O O
A B
= (1)
I I
A B
where O and O refer to person A’s and person B’s outcomes from the exchange while I and I refer to
A B a B
A’s and B’s inputs to the exchange, respectively. When the equality is not met, the exchange is considered
to be unequal. Applying equity theory to the context of tipped professions, the costs of providing a service
are the inputs for service worker A (I ), and tips received are A’s outcome (O ). Meanwhile, customer B
A A
inputs tips (I ), and receives service quality as an outcome (O ) (Lynn & Grassman, 1990). Customers who
B B
perceive their exchange is unequal will tip more in order to restore equity in the exchange, a mechanism also
referred to as the norm of reciprocity.
Existing tipping literature offers a fair amount of support for such equity motives in tipping. In the service
context, equity theory predicts that tips increase in proportion to the consumer’s perception of (1) the quality
of service they receive and (2) the cost for the worker of providing the service. Consistent with (1), customers
report that the factor most driving their tip behavior is the desire to “to reward good service” (Lynn, 2009).
And researchers have found that customers do leave tip amounts that are positively and reliably related to
their evaluations of service, although this service-tipping relationship is somewhat weaker than consumers
claim (Lynn & McCall, 2000).
In support of (2), there is some evidence that customers internalize worker’s cost of providing a service
and tip accordingly. For example, Lee and Sohn (2020) identify a positive relationship between inclement
weather and taxi tipping in NYC: passengers are more likely to tip above 20% in extreme temperatures and
when it is precipitating. They hypothesize that passengers recognize the driver’s increased efforts in poor
weather, and attempt to restore equity by tipping more. In addition, Lynn, Jabbour, and Kim (2012) find
that customers tip more the longer they stay at a restaurant, an effect that is largest for customers with
the smallest bill sizes, and interpret this relationship as recognition of an opportunity cost: consumers are
aware that their lingering costs the server additional customers and so voluntarily compensate servers for that
lost opportunity. Finally, recent field experiments have also found that restaurant customers left higher tips
when they witnessed servers being mistreated by other customers (Hershcovis & Bhatnagar, 2017), as well as
when servers were yelled at or criticized by their supervisors (Jin et al., 2020). These results are consistent
with equity theory because consumers are likely to perceive the negative treatment of the server as a cost of
providing service.
As proposed by Majid et al., (2021), the increased risk of a COVID-19 infection can be considered an
This study adds an interesting dimension to the literature on weather and tipping. Notably, Cunningham (1979) identified
a positive relationship between sunshine and tipping, presumably operating through the positive effects of pleasant weather on
mood. However, Flynn & Greenberg (2012) fail to replicate with a significantly larger sample. It seems possible that the positive
effects on tipping of both sunshine and inclement weather offset each other, leading to the null results in Flynn & Greenberg
(2012).
additional cost from the service worker. To the extent that customers recognize this additional input, they
will reciprocate with greater tips, restoring equity in the exchange. Through this mechanism, equity theory
manifests as a discretionary form of hazard pay. Hazard pay is a common assumption in the economics
literature: workers in more dangerous jobs will demand a higher wage rate (Viscusi, 1978), and the market
will offer higher wages for riskier work (Thaler & Rosen, 1976). While the formal wage in the taxi market may
be slow to adjust for the additional risk of COVID-19, equity theory predicts that passengers who internalize
this additional cost will take it upon themselves to compensate the driver by tipping more. Thus, investigating
how tipping on the intensive margin varies with perception of COVID-19 infection risk may lend empirical
support to motives of reciprocity in tipping.
3 Data and Methods
3.1 Raw Data
As part of their open data initiative, the City of Chicago provides publicly available data on taxi rides through
the Chicago Data portal (Levy, 2021a). This dataset is a nearly comprehensive record of each trip taken since
2013, and includes 23 variables containing trip-level information. This study subsets the data to all trips
taken between January 2018 and April 2021 and makes use of the following variables
Trip End Timestamp (15-minute interval)
Trip Duration (in seconds)
• 3
Pickup Location (one of 77 community areas )
• $
Fare Amount (in )
• $
Tip Amount (in )
Payment Type (Cash or Credit Card)
Taxi ID (6,181 different taxis in sample)
I complement the trip-level data with three other sources. First, I incorporate data on the median income
for each community area provided by the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning (CMAP, 2015). Second,
I merge in daily counts of COVID-19 hospitalizations since March 1st, 2020 available through the Chicago
data portal (Levy, 2021b). Third, I consider the 2020 presidential election results for Chicago (Chicago Board
of Election Commissioners, 2020). The election results are provided at the ward level, which is not a direct
mapping to community areas. I address this by identifying the three wards that had the highest Trump/Pence
vote share for the 2020 presidential election, and consider the community areas that comprise those wards
as relatively pro-Trump regions. Further description of these data and the cleaning process can be found in
Appendix B. The material needed for replicating my analysis is available on Mendeley Data (Conlisk, 2021).
Map of community areas provided in Appendix A.
Chicago is a very blue city; Trump received under 16% of the vote share and there is no ward in which Trump received the
majority of votes. However, in wards 41, 38, and 19, Trump received 47%, 40%, and 38% of votes, respectively, and thus I consider
passengers coming from community areas in those wards as relatively more pro-Trump than the average Chicago passenger.
spirT
fo
noitcarF
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
% of Fare
3.2 Sample
Given that records on cash tips are unreliable and often missing, I first filter the data to include only those
trips paid with a credit card. Next, I follow the procedure outlined in Tan and Zhang (2020) and include only
$ 5 $
trips with fare amounts that are greater than 3.25 (the base rate for a ride ) but less than 1,000, as well as
trips with a positive duration in seconds. On this subset of trips I create three variables: Tip?, an indicator
for whether the passenger left a tip; Tip %, or the tip amount as a percentage of the fare, conditional on the
tip being positive; and Pandemic, an indicator for whether the trip occurred after March 13th, 2020, the a
national emergency was declared. I further drop from the sample any trips where Tip % is greater than 100%,
so that exceptionally large tips would not bias the main estimates. The distribution of the tip as a percent
aligns with previous research on taxi tip rates in NYC (Elliot et al., 2017). The distribution is skewed to the
right, with most passengers tipping more than 20%, while roughly 5% of passengers did not tip at all.
mean sd p25 p50 p75
# of Rides (Daily Average) 25,142 7,592 20,732 26,384 30,365
Tip? (Daily Average) 95 1.5 94 95 96
Tip % (if positive) 27 12 20 24 32
Fare 16 15 6.5 9 20
Trip Duration (min) 16 19 7 11 21
Median Income of Pickup Area 91,493 19,783 83,575 99,732 107,246
COVID-19 Hospitalizations (Daily) 34 38 7 23 42
“Pro-Trump” Passengers .135 .34 0 0 0
Observations 17,757,921
See Taxi Rate Calculator
Doing so reduced my sample by .4%, or by 73,144 trips. As a robustness check, I repeat my analysis on the full sample, and
winsorize Tip % at the 99th percentile instead of dropping large values. There is no significant change in estimates, which are
available upon request.
2018 - April 2021. On average, there is a record for 25,132 trips each day, of which 95% of passengers leave a
tip. The average tip in the sample is 27% of the fare, whereas the median is 24%, reflecting the right skewed
7 $
roughly 16 minutes. The median household income of the area in which the passenger is picked up is 91,493,
while the average number of COVID-19 related hospitalizations is 34, and roughly 14% of trips are taken by
passengers I classify as coming from “Pro-Trump” locations.
corresponds to the average of that variable for a given day; for instance, the very first square in Panel A
indicates that roughly 93% of passengers left a tip on Jan 1, 2018. Clearly, both statistics are fairly stable
up until the spring of 2020, when the country entered lockdown in response to COVID-19. In the second half
of March 2020 the percent of riders who left a tip plummeted about 15 percentage points and remained well
below the pre-pandemic mean even a year later. Meanwhile, Panel B suggests that the average non-zero tip as
a percent of the fare increased by several percentage points during the pandemic, and has been elevated since
then, at tipping rates similar to Christmas day, a time in which tipping rates are unusually high (Greenberg,
2014).
Although these trends in daily averages are compelling, they may be driven by several outliers or reflect
the changing characteristics of taxi rides during the pandemic. For instance, evidence from the UBER ride-
sharing platform that tips are greater for airport trips (Chandar et al., 2019) may generate a downward bias
on average estimates, given that tourism and business trips shrank dramatically during the pandemic. The
regression analysis I employ takes advantage of trip-specific characteristics to help control for this confounding
variability.
Calendar Heat Map of Average Tip Pct for Positive Tips
Calendar Heat Map of % of Riders who leave a Tip
Sunday
Sunday Monday
Monday Tuesday
Tuesday Wednesday
Wednesday Thursday
Thursday Friday
Friday Saturday
Saturday
0.33
2019 0.32
0.95 Sunday
Sunday Monday 0.31
Monday Tuesday
Tuesday Wednesday
Wednesday Thursday 0.30
Thursday 0.90 Friday
Friday Saturday 0.29
Saturday
0.28
0.85 2020
2020 0.27
Sunday
Sunday Monday 0.26
Monday
Tuesday
We T d u n e e s s d d a a y y 0.80 Wednesday 0.25
Thursday
Thursday
Friday
Friday Saturday 0.24
Saturday
2021 2021
Sunday Sunday
Monday Monday
Tuesday Tuesday
Wednesday Wednesday
Thursday Thursday
Friday Friday
Saturday Saturday
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
(a) Tip? (b) Tip %
This might seem high for an average tip percent. One possibility is that passengers are calculating their tip off of the total
fare, which includes additional costs such as tolls or taxes.
3.3 Methods
I formally test for the effect of the pandemic on tipping behavior with the equation
Y = α + δX + γ + βCOV ID + ϵ (2)
r,i,t r i t r,i,t
where Y is the dependent variable for trip r in pickup area i at time t, representing either the outcome
r,i,t
Tip?, the likelihood that the passenger left a tip, or Tip %, the tip as a percent of the taxi fare, conditional
on the tip being positive. I additionally provide estimates for Tipping generosity, which includes both zero
and non-zero tips as a percent of the total fare, and captures the aggregate effect of the pandemic on tipping
behavior. The main coefficient of interest is β, which is an estimate of how Y has changed since COVID-19
r,i,t
was declared a national emergency in the US. X denotes a vector of controls for each trip r, namely the
duration of the trip in minutes and the fare of the tip, while γ represents fixed effects for the pickup location
i, one of Chicago’s 77 community areas. I follow Haggag and Paci (2014) and cluster standard errors for all
estimates at the driver level.
4 Results
4.1 Main Effects of the Pandemic
margin (columns 1-3), intensive margin (columns 4-6) and on aggregate (columns 7-9). The coefficient on
COVID in column 1 indicates that the proportion of passengers that left a tip dropped 5.74 percentage
points since the pandemic began in March 2020, down from a pre-pandemic mean of 94.8%. Meanwhile, the
coefficient in column 4 demonstrates that the average tip left as a percent of the fare increased by about 1.62
percentage points since COVID-19, up from a pre-pandemic average tip rate of 27.2%. One concern with
these simple differences in means is that characteristics of the typical ride or passenger changed during the
pandemic, and this shifting sample could be responsible for observed trends. Columns 2 and 5 testify that the
effects of the pandemic on both Tip? and Tip % are robust to the inclusion of controls for the fare amount
and the duration of the trip in minutes. In columns 3 and 6 I add fixed effects for the pickup location of the
rider in an attempt to control for any shifts in ridership that might have occurred during the pandemic. While
the estimate on Tip? is somewhat attenuated, it is still strong and negative, with a 3.9 percentage point
reduction in the likelihood that a passenger will leave a tip. Meanwhile, the estimated effect of COVID-19
on Tip % remain positive and significant, at almost 2 percentage points. The relative consistency of the
estimates across columns 1-3 and 4-6 suggest that shifting characteristics of trips are unlikely to be biasing
the estimates observed, and that the majority of variation in Tip? and Tip % can be attributed to effects of
the pandemic.
Taken together, these results indicate seemingly contradictory effects of the pandemic on tipping behavior;
while fewer passengers left tips, those who did left a significantly higher amount. One potential explanation
is that the passengers who stopped tipping altogether during the pandemic were also the ones who tipped on
the low end of the distribution of Tip % to begin with. Simply removing some of the population of low tippers
measure of Tip % that also includes passengers who do not tip, which helps adress the issue of a changing
Tip? Tip % Tipping generosity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗ ∗∗∗
COVID -5.74 -5.71 -3.89 1.62 1.92 1.81 -0.12 0.25 0.67
(0.18) (0.18) (0.15) (0.14) (0.09) (0.09) (0.15) (0.10) (0.10)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
Constant 94.78 94.84 94.69 27.19 31.84 32.87 25.77 30.13 30.97
(0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.02) (0.03) (0.03)
Observations 17757921 17757921 17757921 1681257716812577 16812577 1775792117757921 17757921
Controls No Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes
Loc. F.E.s No No Yes No No Yes No No Yes
*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001.
Cells report estimates and associated S.E.s in parentheses.
Controls include fare amount and trip duration.
Fixed effects include pickup location.
In all estimates standard errors are clustered by Taxi ID.
Tip? indicates whether a passenger left a tip.
Tip% is the tip as a percent of the fare, conditional on the tip being positive.
Tipping generosity is the tip as a percent of the fare, including zero tips
population of tippers. Column 7 signals that on the aggregate, the increased number of “stiffers” in the
pandemic offset the elevated tipping rates, leading to an insignificant change in tipping generosity overall.
However, columns 8 and 9 indicate that controlling for trip-level characteristics and fixed effects for pickup
location boosts the effect of the pandemic on Tipping generosity to be positive and significant, although
attenuated to an increase of .3-.7 percentage points. Consequently, one can infer that the shifting population
of tippers may explain some, but certainly not all of the increase in tipping rates. My preferred specification
in column 9 also reinforces the findings of Lynn (2021) that the pandemic increased tipping generosity in
contexts where the service did not substantially change, although to a lesser extent than the 2-5 percentage
point increase in tips that Lynn observed.
Notably, the conflicting trends along the extensive and intensive margins during the pandemic coincide
with the evidence on tipping defaults; higher defaults are associated with greater non-zero tips as a percent
of the bill, as well as average tips received by drivers overall, but are accompanied by an up to 50% increase
in stiffing rates (Haggag & Paci, 2014; Alexander et al., 2021). Alexander et al. reason that such effects are
plausible because (i) default options convey information about the expected contribution, which guides the
behavior of those willing and able to conform with the implied norm, but (ii) may discourage those unable to
meet these norms into not tipping. Interpreting the pandemic as a de facto increase in social norms of tipping,
whereby putting pressure on consumers to tip more, is consistent with equity theory; passengers that perceive
COVID-19 risk as an additional cost for the worker will perceive that the tipping norm has proportionally
increased. I explore evidence for this equity mechanism in section 4.3.2.
4.2 Robustness in Main Results
One concern with the standard OLS approach of 2 is that standard errors may be correlated beyond the Taxi
ID (e.g. by pickup location or by time of day), resulting in deceivingly small standard errors (Bertrand et al.,
2004). I attempt to control for this with a secondary model, that uses two stages to estimate the effect of the
pandemic on tipping as shown in equation 3 and equation 4 below.
The main change in taxi rides during the pandemic was the requirement of a mask (Exec. Order. No. 43, 2020), which
occurred on June 26, 2020
Y = α + δX + γ + Z + ϵ (3)
r,i,t r i t r,i,t
Z = βCovid + ν (4)
t t t
In equation 3 I modify equation 2 to include a full set of indicators for each date t in the sample, such that
t ∈ {Jan 1, 2018, Jan 2, 2018 ... March 31, 2021}. The resulting vector of coefficients Z represent fixed effects
for each day, which I regress on an indicator for the pandemic in equation 4. β becomes the coefficient of
the size and significance of estimates from the two-stage regression are very comparable, bolstering confidence
a definition of pandemic that begins on March 20th, the day that Chicago’s governor issued a stay at home
order. These estimates are virtually the same as those that rely on the March 13th definition of the pandemic
and from community areas that contain airports. This helps to control for the substantial decrease in
tourism during the pandemic, which may bias estimates given evidence from Uber that tips are systematically
higher for airport trips (Chandar et al., 2019). Notably, these estimates replicate the main results but are
less among local passengers than traveling ones and increased tip sizes more among local passengers than
traveling ones. Such heterogeneity comports with a recent survey emphasizing how local consumer support
for small businesses increased during the pandemic via tipping (Majid et al., 2021). Lastly, in columns 3, 6,
the day of the week (i.e. Sunday, Monday, etc) that the trip was taken. These additional controls are justified
by research identifying significant driver and seasonal effects, as well as more generous tips on Wednesdays
and Fridays (Chandar et al., 2019; Greenberg, 2014; Flynn & Greenberg, 2012). This full set of fixed effects
does not meaningfully change the magnitude or significance of the estimates, further building confidence in
the main results.
outcomes – (1) Tip ? ; (2) Tip % ; (3) Tip % (median); and (4) Tipping generosity – on the outcome of that
day exactly 1 year prior and an indicator for the pandemic. This specification will explicitly control for any
general time trends and again eliminate seasonal effects that may be biasing the coefficients (Greenberg, 2014).
The key takeaways remain: the likelihood that a passenger tips is significantly lower during the pandemic,
while both the average and median non-zero tip increased. Without any trip-level or location controls, the
teedakbfw5gvdgmnaxlel54hau-story.html
Chicago has 2 airports: O’Hare airport is in the O’Hare community area, Midway airport is in the Garfield Ridge community
area
4.3 Interactions
The results from Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 indicate that the pandemic was associated with significant changes
in tipping behavior: customers were less likely to tip, but tipped greater amounts when they did. Next, I
examine heterogeneity in (i.e. moderation of) these associations to shed light on possible mechanisms through
which the pandemic may affect tipping.
4.3.1 Heterogeneity/Moderation by Income
Pandemic Began
?piT
Pandemic Began
01jan2018 01jan2019 01jan2020 01jan2021
Median Income of Pickup Location
Low Income Mid Income
High Income
(a) Tip?
piT
01jan2018 01jan2019 01jan2020 01jan2021
Median Income of Pickup Location
Low Income Mid Income
High Income
(b) Tip %
Pandemic Began
)lanoitidnocnU(
piT
01jan2018 01jan2019 01jan2020 01jan2021
Median Income of Pickup Location
Low Income Mid Income
High Income
(c) Tipping generosity
First, I explore whether tipping trends might be driven by the economic shocks of the pandemic, consistent
with an income effect in tipping. Job losses may force passengers to eliminate discretionary expenses like
tipping, while savings overhangs may embolden passengers to increase their tips. I rely on evidence that
job losses during the pandemic were more common in lower-income households while wealth gains were
concentrated among higher-income households (Chetty et al., 2020; Batty et al., 2021), and proceed to
investigate whether COVID-19’s effect on tipping behavior differs by a passenger’s income, which I proxy with
the median income of a passenger’s pickup area. Specifically, I classify rides into one of three terciles relative
to the rest of the data – low-, middle-, or high-income – depending on pickup location, and use these terciles
to analyze the pandemic effect by passenger’s income. If these interactions indicate that passengers from
higher-income areas increased their tips more than passengers from lower-income areas during the pandemic,
or that the increase in stiffing rates was driven by lower-income passengers, this may be evidence of an income
effect in tipping.
outcome of interest by income tercile. Panel A demonstrates that passengers from the lowest-income tercile
were less likely to leave a tip prior to the pandemic, which is consistent with recent research on stiffing rates
among NYC taxi passengers (Elliot et al., 2017). The declaration of a national emergency in March 2020 led
to a drop in Tip? for all terciles, but the drop was substantially larger for passengers from low-income areas.
Monthly averages since 2021 demonstrate that the level of Tip? had not recovered and the gap for passengers
from low-income areas remains exacerbated. Panel B tells a parallel story: passengers from lower-income
areas have consistently tipped lower percentages than passengers from middle- and high-income terciles and
the increase that Tip % has experienced during the pandemic is primarily driven by passengers from middle-
and high-income areas. In panel C, I plot monthly averages of Tipping generosity to visualize heterogeneity
in the aggregate effect of the pandemic. Here, the diverging rates of tipping generosity between middle-
and high-income locations and low-income locations is evocative of a K shape; the pandemic led to more
generous tipping behavior among passengers from high- and middle-income locations, while passengers from
lower-income areas became more stingy with their tips.
Although these plots are compelling evidence for an income effect in tipping, systematic differences in
trip-level characteristics during the pandemic may be biasing the average estimates. I formally test for
heterogeneous effects of the pandemic with equation 5, in which I estimate the effect of the pandemic, β,
separately for each tercile.
T ip = α + δX + γ + βCOV ID + β COV ID + ϵ (5)
r,i,t r income t income t r,i,t
In this specification, income ∈ [1, 3] such that (income = 1) represents the community areas in the lowest
tercile of median household income, (income = 2) represents community areas in the middle-income tercile,
and so on. This allows the estimate of β , or the effect of COVID-19 pandemic on tipping behavior,
income
to vary by income tercile of pickup location. Meanwhile, γ controls for average tip behavior for each
income
of the three income terciles prior to the pandemic, conditional on trip-level characteristics. Because there
are only three terciles, the model will absorb the coefficient on the lowest-income tercile by default. Thus,
the β coefficient on COV ID will represent the effect for passengers from the low-income tercile, while β + β
represents the effect of the pandemic for passengers from the middle-income tercile, and β +β for high-income
differ for passengers coming from middle and high, relative to low, income locations.
the pandemic, while this decrease was substantially smaller for passengers from middle and high-income areas,
who decreased tipping likelihood only about 3-4 percentage points. Column 2 demonstrates that the twice-
as-large effect magnitude for passengers from low-income areas remains robust to the inclusion of controls
for fare amount and trip duration, although is attenuated by several percentage points. Likewise, columns
3 and 4 showcase that the positive effect of the pandemic on Tip % is primarily driven by passengers from
Tip? Tip % Tipping generosity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
Mid Income 1.41 0.08 3.41 -0.01 3.59 0.01
(0.05) (0.18) (0.03) (0.09) (0.03) (0.10)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
High Income 1.96 -0.12 3.38 -0.04 3.72 -0.06
(0.05) (0.19) (0.03) (0.09) (0.03) (0.10)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
COVID -7.30 -4.60 1.06 0.79 -0.90 -0.36
(0.23) (0.21) (0.13) (0.09) (0.12) (0.10)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
COVID × Mid Income 4.27 1.61 2.32 1.87 3.15 2.02
(0.24) (0.24) (0.17) (0.14) (0.16) (0.14)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
COVID × High Income 3.55 1.24 2.42 2.29 3.04 2.29
(0.29) (0.27) (0.21) (0.18) (0.22) (0.20)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
Constant 93.65 94.71 24.90 32.89 23.32 30.99
(0.06) (0.13) (0.03) (0.07) (0.03) (0.07)
Observations 17757921 17757921 1681257716812577 17757921 17757921
Controls No Yes No Yes No Yes
Pickup location fixed effects No No No No No No
+p<.10, *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001.
Cells report estimates and associated S.E.s in parentheses.
Controls include fare amount and trip length in seconds.
In all estimates standard errors are clustered by Taxi ID.
Tip? indicates whether a passenger left a tip.
Tip% is the average non-zero tip as a percent of the fare.
Tipping generosity is the average tip as a percent of the fare, and includes zero tips.
The coefficient on COVID is the effect of the pandemic for passengers traveling from low-income locations.
The coefficient on COVID x Mid Income is the effect for middle-income relative to low-income passengers.
The coefficient on COVID x High Income is the effect for high-income relative to low-income passengers.
middle and high-income areas, who tipped about 3 percentage points more when they tipped. And columns 5
and 6 combine the effects along the extensive and intensive margins to estimate aggregate trends in Tipping
generosity: average tips from passengers in low-income areas fell during the pandemic, dominated by greater
stiffing rates, but remained elevated for passengers coming from middle- and high-income locations.
The heterogeneity observed in Tip? is consistent with an income effect in the event that passengers from
lower-income areas were more exposed to negative economic shocks of the pandemic such as job losses, and
chose to conserve money by tipping less. Given the evidence that wealth gains during the pandemic were
concentrated among wealthier households (Batty et al., 2021), the data also support an income effect in Tip %.
Passengers traveling from middle- and high-income locations left tips that were roughly 3 percentage points
higher than pre-pandemic rates, while passengers from lower-income locations left tips only 1 percentage point
higher. On aggregate, the estimates of tipping generosity during the pandemic were K-shaped, in sync with
the aggregate economic trends.
4.3.2 Role/Impact of Infection Risk
Second, I consider whether tipping trends on the intensive margin are further associated with infection risk.
This analysis is motivated by an application of equity theory (Adams, 1965), that supposes passengers increase
their tips in order to offset the greater risk of a COVID-19 infection for the driver during the pandemic;
in practice, equity theory operates as a discretionary form of hazard pay. I push on this mechanism by
investigating whether Chicago taxi passengers leave greater tips on trips where the perceived risk of a COVID-
19 infection is higher. Common knowledge on how diseases spread maintains that the likelihood a passenger
infects a driver with COVID-19 increases with time spend in the taxi, as well as the prevalence of COVID-19 in
the community at the time of the trip. Thus, I look at two sources of heterogeneity for infection risk during the
pandemic: (1) trip duration in minutes and (2) the rolling 12-day average of the COVID-19 hospitalizations
in Chicago, which is a proxy for prevalence of COVID-19, and thus risk of infection, on any given day.
I focus on the Tip % measure since passengers whose tip amount is motivated by equity theory will likely
already be tipping. I also provide estimates for Tipping generosity, driven by the same logic as before: if
greater risk of COVID-19 infection is correlated with low-tipping passengers ceasing tipping this could look
like hazard pay, when the change is instead due to a shifting sample of tippers. Notably, I limit the analysis
that considers COVID-19 hospitalization admissions to trips taken after March 13th, which will net out the
previously established effects of the pandemic on tipping.
with lower tipping rates across the whole sample, a trend unaffected by the pandemic. This relationship is
inconsistent with a theory of hazard pay if passengers believe risk of COVID-19 infection increases with
time spent in the same vehicle. Meanwhile, the positive and significant coefficient in Column 2 supports
a mechanism of hazard pay: when COVID-19 is more prevalent in the community, passengers tip more to
offset the greater cost for taxi drivers. Specially, column 2 suggests that every additional 100 COVID-19
hospitalizations in Chicago during the pandemic is associated with a .64 percentage point increase in the
average tip among passengers who tip. When estimated for both tipping and non-tipping passengers this
effect becomes insignificant, as shown in column 5.
Tip % Tipping generosity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se b/se
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
COVID 1.96 0.81
(0.20) (0.18)
COVID × Trip Duration (min) -0.01 -0.01
(0.01) (0.01)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
Trip Duration (min) -0.04 -0.03
(0.01) (0.00)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗
COVID Hospitalizations (100) 0.64 0.73 0.16 0.24
(0.11) (0.12) (0.11) (0.12)
∗∗ ∗
Trump × COVID Hospitalizations (100) -0.54 -0.47
(0.18) (0.21)
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
Constant 32.87 35.85 35.86 30.97 31.77 31.78
(0.03) (0.18) (0.18) (0.03) (0.19) (0.19)
Observations 16812577 282662 282662 17757921 317471 317471
Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Pickup location fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001.
Cells report estimates and associated S.E.s in parentheses.
Controls include fare amount and trip duration.
In all estimates standard errors are clustered by Taxi ID.
Daily hospitalizations are calculated on a 12-day moving average.
Tip? indicates whether a passenger left a tip.
Tip% is the average non-zero tip as a percent of the fare.
Tipping generosity is the average tip as a percent of the fare, and includes zero tips.
The coefficient on Trump x COVID Hospitalizations is the effect of hospitalization rate on tipping for Pro-Trump
passengers relative to other passengers.
I construct a 12-day window to reflect that hospital admissions occur 10-12 days after infection, on average (Mayo Clinic, 2020).
I use rolling averages rather than a 12-day lag to account for passengers who have imperfect information about the underlying
prevalence of COVID-19 in their community, and thus update their perceptions of risk as news about cases, in addition to
hospitalizations, comes in.
In summary, there is some evidence that passengers increase tip sizes under heightened risk of COVID-19
infection in the community. However, the lack of significance on trip duration indicates they do not participate
in this form of hazard pay when they themselves are the source of infection risk. It is possible that this is
due to comparative optimism bias, where individuals perceive their risk of COVID-19 infection as lower than
others (Kuper-Smith et al., 2020). Another explanation is that hospitalization admissions are correlated with
some other factor that increases tipping generosity, and hazard pay motives are not driving the observed
increase in tip sizes. For instance, number of rides per day is highly correlated with hospitalization rate, as I
show in Appendix E. Perhaps, passengers recognize that taxi drivers are receiving less income on slow days
and tip to help workers out of altruism, a commonly recognized motive for tipping (Lynn, 2015a).
While this is alternative explanation is plausible, I exploit further variation in perception of infection risk
to bolster support for a mechanism of hazard pay. Famously, President Trump had been very dismissive of
COVID-19 risk, with statements that “we have it totally under control,” that the coronavirus “affects virtually
nobody,” and that those who are sick “are going to get better very quickly” (Summers, 2020). Given the
high publicity of COVID-19 as a topic during the 2020 presidential campaign between Donald Trump and
Joseph Biden, I assume that supporters of Trump are less likely to recognize the risk of COVID-19 infection
and thus less likely to increase their tips as hazard pay. Although Chicago remains a predominately blue
city, I code passengers coming from community areas that are in wards where the highest proportion of
Trump voters live in as relatively “Pro-Trump” and interact that indicator with the rolling average of hospital
admissions. A mechanism of hazard pay predicts that the coefficient on the interaction between Trump and
hospitalizations is negative, indicating that, relative to all other passengers, Pro-Trump passengers perceive
less need to compensate the risk of infection with a higher tip.
Formally, I estimate the following equation
T ip = α + δX + γ + βHospitalizations + β Hospitalizations + ϵ (6)
r,i,t r i t trump t r,i,t
where the coefficient of interest is β , and T rump ∈ {0, 1} to capture whether the relationship between
T rump
tipping and hospitalization rate is weaker for passengers from relatively pro-Trump community areas relative
to all other passengers.
relatively pro-Trump locations are significantly less sensitive to increased hospitalization rates when tipping:
the majority of passengers leave tips that are .73 percentage points higher for every additional 100 hospitaliza-
tions at time of trip, while this relationship is reduced to .19 percentage points for passengers from relatively
pro-Trump areas. Column 6 demonstrates that the significance of these results holds when estimated over the
total population of tippers and non-tippers.
pro-Trump locations in Chicago tipped less prior to the pandemic. But they were less sensitive to the
steep increase in hospitalizations in April 2020 and maintained tipping rates similar to pre-pandemic rates
throughout 2020 and into 2021. Meanwhile, passengers from non-Trump locations increased tipping rates by
over 2 percentage points when hospitalizations first rocketed, and slightly elevated them again in response to
the second wave of COVID-19 following the holiday season.
This analysis lends support to a mechanism of hazard pay during the pandemic. When hospitalization
admissions increased, a majority of passengers responded by tipping higher percentages. However, this re-
piT
snoitazilatipsoH
yliaD
01oct2019 01apr2020 01oct2020 01apr2021
Date
Monthly Avg. (Non−Trump) Hospitalizations
Monthly Avg. (Trump)
sponse was not universal; passengers from relatively pro-Trump regions of Chicago did not tip at greater rates
when COVID-19 was more prevalent. Given the politicization of recognizing COVID-19 infection risk, this
heterogeneity provides additional support for hazard pay motivated by equity theory; passengers who do not
perceive that the exchange relationship has changed due to risk of infection will not increase tips.
5 Conclusion
Tipping is an economically meaningful and behaviorally curious feature of the American economy that has
inspired a robust literature. However, most research on tipping has been completed in times of relative stability.
The lifestyle, public health, and economic shocks of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic offer a new context for
researchers to gain insight into tipping. Notably, Lynn (2021) has studied tipping during the pandemic and
identified an increase in average tips in the majority of service contexts. The extent of and the mechanisms
behind this increase are practically and theoretically interesting, and warrant further investigation.
Building upon Lynn (2021), this study leverages a high frequency publicly available dataset from January
2018 - March 2021 to examine how tipping behavior among Chicago taxi passengers changed during the
COVID-19 pandemic along the extensive and intensive margins. Further, it exploits granularity in the data to
control for trip-level characteristics and explore possible mechanisms for this effect. I find that while passengers
were 5 percentage points less likely to tip during the pandemic, those that did left tips roughly 2 percentage
points higher, for a 7.5% average increase in the amount tipped. My preferred specification suggests that
the effect on the intensive margin dominates that in the extensive margin, leading to an aggregate increase
in tipping generosity during the pandemic. These findings are consistent with the main takeaway from Lynn
(2021) that customers tipped more after the pandemic began. However, they also highlight that effects along
the extensive and intensive margins are not always consistent, and underscore the importance of measuring
both in future tipping research.
Interestingly, opposing effects in the extensive and intensive margins mirror research examining default tips:
introducing tip defaults increases the average non-zero tip amount customers leave but leads to fewer customers
leaving a tip at all. Observing a similar response during COVID-19 suggests an analogous mechanism: the
pandemic increased how much customers thought they should tip. Such pressure is likely to have inspired
greater tips from some customers but also prove to be insulting/prohibitive to others, who ceased tipping at
all.
I bolster confidence in these main estimates with a series of robustness checks. Specifically, I provide
comparable estimates under alternative empirical frameworks that (1) compare tipping behavior across unique
days of the year to control for seasonal effects and (2) estimate the model in two stages, which sidesteps the
issue of multiple levels of clustered errors. I also demonstrate that these effects remain in specifications that
use an alternative definition of when COVID-19 began, consider additional trip-level controls, and exclude
trips involving airports. Notably, I find that removing airport trips puts upward pressure on estimates, leading
fewer passengers to stiff in the pandemic, and increasing the average non-zero tip size by roughly 3 percentage
points instead of 2. These results indicate that the mechanisms leading passengers to increase tips during the
pandemic are more salient among local passengers, which aligns with recent surveys documenting consumer
support of local businesses through tipping (Majid et al., 2021).
Next, I explore heterogeneity in these trends to shed light on the mechanisms by which the pandemic
may be affecting tipping. I show that the decline in tip likelihood during the pandemic is concentrated
among passengers traveling from low-income locations; meanwhile, increases in average non-zero tips are
driven by passengers from middle- and high-income locations. Combining these effects across the extensive
and intensive margins leads to an aggregate increase in tips among passengers from middle- and high-income
locations but a decrease among those coming from low-income locations. This evidence aligns with research
on the disparate effects of COVID-19 economic shocks – job losses were concentrated among low-income
individuals, while wealthier households experienced savings booms – and suggests that the trends in tipping
during the pandemic may be driven by underlying changes in passenger wealth: passengers experiencing
financial losses cut back on the discretionary act of tipping just as passengers experiencing gains increased
tips. While such income effects are widely recognized in consumer theory and observed in related contexts
such as charitable giving (Auten et al., 2002), the research on how tips respond to shocks in income remains
somewhat mixed. Specifically, tips have been found to increase when customers receive extra change and to
mimic movements in the stock market, but are unrelated to additional costs such as larger bill sizes or tips
given to magicians (Lynn & Sturman, 2003; Azar, Yosef & Bar-Eli, 2015; Frank & Lynn, 2020; Tan & Zhang,
2020). This study joins research on stock market fluctuations in providing evidence for an income effect in
losses as well as gains, and is the first to document that negative income shocks may lead to reductions on the
extensive margin of tipping. Further, the persistence of these trends over nearly a year during the pandemic is
somewhat stronger evidence of an income effect, as such consistent effects cannot be due to the mood boosting
(lowering) properties of gaining (losing) wealth that compromise short term studies of income effects (Tan &
Zhang, 2020; Azar, Yosef & Bar-Eli, 2015). However compelling, it is important to note that pickup location
remains a rather crude proxy for a passenger’s income shock. Further research that considers better identified
economic shocks – such as stimulus checks or changes in base taxi fare – will reveal more on the relationship
between a consumer’s budget and tipping behavior.
Lastly, I consider whether tips during the pandemic are additionally related to greater risk of COVID-
19 infection, of which I consider two sources: (1) the length of time a passenger spends with the driver in
the taxi and (2) COVID-19 hospitalization rate at time of trip. While the relationship for trip duration is
insignificant, I find that the daily COVID-19 hospitalization rate is positively associated with non-zero tip
sizes during the pandemic. This result suggests that passengers may be participating in a discretionary form
of hazard pay: when the community prevalence of COVID-19 is higher, so is infection risk, and passengers tip
their drivers more as compensation for this greater cost of providing the taxi service. However, it is possible
that the positive relationship between tips and hospitalizations is confounded by seasonal effects or altruistic
tendencies during periods of low ridership. To address such concerns, I take advantage of the politicization of
the pandemic and show that this effect ceases to exist among passengers traveling from relatively pro-Trump
regions of Chicago. This interaction bolsters support for a theory of hazard pay that is motivated by equity
theory: customers who perceive the driver’s cost of providing a taxi ride has gone up will increase their tip
amount to maintain equity in the exchange, while customers who do not perceive an additional cost will not.
Although equity motives have been studied in the tipping literature, the focus has been on how consumers
reciprocate in response to the quality of the service they receive (Lynn 2001; 2003). This study contributes to
a smaller body of research that observes increases in tips when service is more costly, such as in circumstances
of dangerous driving conditions (Lee & Sohn, 2020), lost opportunity for additional customers (Lynn, Jabbour,
& Kim, 2012), and employee mistreatment (Hershcovis & Bhatnagar, 2017; Jin et al., 2020). Given the new
appreciation for service workers sparked by the pandemic, a collective desire to compensate them more is
not altogether surprising. Furthermore, interpreting the pandemic as putting upwards pressure on tipping
norms is consistent with the evidence of tip defaults on the extensive and intensive margins; customers tip
higher amounts, but fewer customers tip. Research on whether tipping rates remain elevated throughout the
roll-out of vaccines will provide additional insight into a mechanism of hazard pay and equity motives.
Ultimately, this study testifies to the sustainability of the tipping model in crises. Despite the significant
economic and societal upheaval of the pandemic, the majority of passengers continued to tip, and many began
to tip larger amounts, leading to an average increase in the tips that drivers receive. Not only does this
highlight the enduring popularity of giving tips to service workers, but also underscores the benefits of tipping
as a voluntary form of price discrimination: passengers can adjust their tips to the shocks of the pandemic and
still afford the taxi service. The evident resilience and utility of tipping speaks to its longevity as a pricing
model and stresses the relevance of future research on the topic.
In fact, the pandemic has inspired a push for a policy of hazard pay. In April 2021 Senate Democrats introduced a proposal
calling for a COVID-19 “Heroes Fund,” through which the federal government would finance “premium pay” of an additional
$ $
25,000 (or roughly an additional 13 per hour) for essential frontline workers (Kinder, 2021).
6 References
Alexander, D., Boone, C., & Lynn, M. (2021). The Effects of Tip Recommendations on Customer Tipping,
Satisfaction, Repatronage, and Spending. Management Science, 67(1), 146-165.
Adams, J. S. (1965). Inequity in social exchange. In Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 2,
pp. 267-299). Academic Press.
Auten, G. E., Sieg, H., & Clotfelter, C. T. (2002). Charitable giving, income, and taxes: An analysis of
panel data. American Economic Review, 92(1), 371-382.
Aydin, A. E., & Acun, Y. (2019). An investigation of tipping behavior as a major component in service
economy: The case of taxi tipping. Journal of behavioral and experimental economics, 78, 114-120.
Azar, O. H. (2007). The social norm of tipping: A review 1. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 37(2),
380-402.
Azar, O. H. (2009). Incentives and service quality in the restaurant industry: the tipping–service puzzle.
Applied Economics, 41(15), 1917-1927.
Azar, O. H. (2011). Business strategy and the social norm of tipping. Journal of Economic psychology,
32(3), 515-525.
Azar, O. H., Yosef, S., & Bar-Eli, M. (2015). Restaurant tipping in a field experiment: How do customers
tip when they receive too much change?. Journal of Economic Psychology, 50, 13-21.
Azar, O. H. (2020). The Economics of Tipping. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 34(2), 215-36.
Batty, M. M., Deeken, E., Volz, A. H. (2021). Wealth Inequality and COVID-19: Evidence from the
Distributional Financial Accounts (No. 2021-08-30-2). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (US).
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we trust differences-in-differences
estimates?. The Quarterly journal of economics, 119(1), 249-275.
/en/election-results-specifics.asp
Brewster, Z. W., Gourlay, K. (2021). The “Mask Effect” on the tips that customers leave restaurant servers.
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 99, 103068.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). (2020). Payroll Employment Down 20.5 million in April 2020. TED:
The Economics Daily (blog), May 12, 2020. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor,
Washington, DC.
Chandar, B., Gneezy, U., List, J. A., & Muir, I. (2019). The drivers of social preferences: Evidence from a
Nationwide tipping field experiment (No. w26380). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Hendren, N., & Stepner, M. (2020). The economic impacts of COVID-19: Evidence
from a new public database built from private sector data. Opportunity Insights.
[dataset] CMAP. (2015). Chicago Community Area (CCA) CDS data. Accessed 26 April 2021. https:
//datahub.cmap.illinois.gov/dataset/community-data-snapshots-raw-data/resource/8c4e0
96e-c90c-4bef-9cf1-9028d094296e
Conlisk, S. (2021), “Chicago Taxi Trips (Tipping)”, Mendeley Data, V2, doi: 10.17632/tm47d7z5xf.2
Crutsinger, M. (2021, January 28). U.S. economy shrank 3.5 percent in 2020 after growing 4 percent last
Ebesu Hubbard, A. S., Tsuji, A. A., Williams, C., Seatriz Jr, V. (2003). Effects of Touch on Gratuities
Received in Same-Gender and Cross-Gender Dyads 1. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 33(11),
2427-2438.
Elliott, D., Tomasini, M., Oliveira, M., Menezes, R. (2017). Tippers and Stiffers: An Analysis of Tipping
Behavior in Taxi Trips. money, 21, 22.
Engel, Ernst. 1857. “Die Produktions- und Consumtionsverh¨altnisse des K¨onigreichs Sachsen.” Zeitschrift
des Statistischen Bu¨reaus des K¨oniglich S¨achischen Ministeriums des Innern, 8 and 9. (Reprinted in
Engel (1895). Appendix I, pp. 1–54.)
Exec. Order No. 43 (June 26, 2020).
Flynn, S. M., & Greenberg, A. E. (2012). Does Weather Actually Affect Tipping? An Empirical Analysis
of Time-Series Data 1. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 42(3), 702-716.
Frank, D. G., & Lynn, M. (2020). Shattering the Illusion of the Self-Earned Tip: The Effect of a Restaurant
Magician on Co-Workers’ Tips. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, 87, 101560.
Galbadage, T., Peterson, B. M., & Gunasekera, R. S. (2020). Does COVID-19 spread through droplets
alone?. Frontiers in public health, 8, 163.
Greenberg, A. E. (2014). On the complementarity of prosocial norms: The case of restaurant tipping during
the holidays. Journal of Economic Behavior Organization, 97, 103-112.
Haggag, K., & Paci, G. (2014). Default tips. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(3), 1-19.
Hershcovis, M. S., & Bhatnagar, N. (2017). When fellow customers behave badly: Witness reactions to
employee mistreatment by customers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 102(11), 1528.
Jin, D., Kim, K., & DiPietro, R. B. (2020). Workplace incivility in restaurants: Who’s the real victim?
Employee deviance and customer reciprocity. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 86,
102459.
Keith Schwer, R., & Daneshvary, R. (2000). Tipping participation and expenditures in beauty salons.
Applied Economics, 32(15), 2023-2031.
Kinder, M. (2021, April 10). COVID-19’s essential workers deserve hazard pay. Here’s why—and how it
Kuper-Smith, B. J., Doppelhofer, L. M., Oganian, Y., Rosenblau, G., & Korn, C. (2020). Optimistic beliefs
about the personal impact of COVID-19.
Lee, W. K., Sohn, S. Y. (2020). A large-scale data-based investigation on the relationship between bad
weather and taxi tipping. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 70, 101458.
[dataset] Levy, J. (2021a) Taxi Trips record data. Chicago Data Portal. Accessed 9 April 2021. Available
[dataset] Levy, J. (2021b). Hospitalizations data. Chicago Data Portal. Accessed 14 May 2021. Available
nd-Hospitalizations/naz8-j4nc
Lynn, M. (2001). Restaurant tipping and service quality: A tenuous relationship. Cornell Hotel and
Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 42, 14-20.
Lynn, M. (2003). Tip levels and service: An update, extension and reconciliation. Cornell Hotel and
Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 44, 139-148.
Lynn, M. (2006). Tipping in restaurants and around the globe: An interdisciplinary review.
Lynn, M. (2009). Individual differences in self-attributed motives for tipping: Antecedents, consequences,
and implications. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 28(3), 432-438.
Lynn, M. (2015a). Service gratuities and tipping: A motivational framework. Journal of Economic Psychol-
ogy, 46, 74-88.
Lynn, M. (2015b). Explanations of service gratuities and tipping: Evidence from individual differences in
tipping motivations and tendencies. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, 55, 65-71.
Lynn, M. (2021). Did the COVID-19 Pandemic Dampen Americans’ Tipping for Food Services? Insights
From Two Studies. Compensation Benefits Review, 53(3), 130-143.
Lynn, M., & Grassman, A. (1990). Restaurant tipping: an examination of three ‘rational’explanations.
Journal of Economic Psychology, 11(2), 169-181.
Lynn, M., & McCall, M. (2000). Gratitude and gratuity: a meta-analysis of research on the service-tipping
relationship. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 29(2), 203-214.
Lynn, M., Sturman, M.C., 2003. It’s simpler than it seems: an alternative explanation for the magnitude
effect in tipping. International Journal of Hospitality Management 22 (1), 103–110
Lynn, M., Jabbour, P., & Kim, W. G. (2012). Who uses tips as a reward for service and when? An exam-
ination of potential moderators of the service–tipping relationship. Journal of Economic Psychology,
33(1), 90-103.
Majid, K. A., Kolar, D. W., & Laroche, M. (2021). Support for small businesses during a health crisis.
Journal of Services Marketing.
Mayo Clinic. (2020). Early Prediction of Aggresive COVID-19 Progression and Hospitalization. https:
Parrett, M. (2006). An analysis of the determinants of tipping behavior: A laboratory experiment and
evidence from restaurant tipping. Southern Economic Journal, 489-514.
Post, Peggy. (1997). Emily Post’s Etiquette. 16th ed. New York: William Morrow and Co.
Saraiva, C. (2020) How a K-shaped Recovery is Widening U.S. Inequality. Washington Post. https:
Saunders, S. G., & Lynn, M. (2010). Why tip? An empirical test of motivations for tipping car guards.
Journal of Economic Psychology, 31(1), 106-113.
Seiter, J. S. (2007). Ingratiation and gratuity: the effect of complimenting customers on tipping behavior in
restaurants. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 37(3), 478-485.
Seiter, J. S., & Weger Jr, H. (2013). Does a customer by any other name tip the same?: The effect of
forms of address and customers’ age on gratuities given to food servers in the United States. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 43(8), 1592-1598.
Star, N. (1988). The International Guide to Tipping. New York: Berkley Publishing Group.
Summers, J. (2020). Timeline: How Trump Has Downplayed The Coronavirus Pandemic. NPR. https:
Tan, W., & Zhang, J. (2020). Good Days, Bad Days: Stock Market Fluctuation and Taxi Tipping Decisions.
Management Science.
Thaler, R., & Rosen, S. (1976). The value of saving a life: evidence from the labor market. In Household
production and consumption (pp. 265-302). NBER.
Viscusi, W. K. (1978). Wealth effects and earnings premiums for job hazards. The review of economics and
statistics, 408-416.
Walster, E., Berscheid, E., & Walster, G. W. (1973). New directions in equity research. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 25(2), 151.