GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Real change or performative anti-racism? Clinical psychology programs' efforts to recruit
and retain BIPOC scholars
Chardée A. Galán,1 Molly A. Bowdring,2 Irene Tung,3 Stefanie L. Sequeira,4 Christine C. Call,3
Shannon Savell,5 Cassandra L. Boness,6 Jessie Northrup,3 and Scholars for Elevating Equity and
Diversity (SEED)
1 University of Southern California, Department of Psychology
2 Stanford University, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
3 University of Pittsburgh, Department of Psychiatry
4 University of Pittsburgh, Department of Psychology
5 University of Virginia, Department of Psychology
6 University of New Mexico, Center on Alcohol, Substance use, and Addictions
Note: Drs. Galán and Bowdring share equal first authorship; Dr. Tung and Ms. Sequeira share
equal second authorship; Dr. Call and Ms. Savell share equal third authorship; and Drs. Boness and
Northrup share equal fourth authorship.
Author Note
The authors have no competing interests to declare. Correspondence concerning this article should
be addressed to:
Chardée A. Galán, Ph.D.
University of Southern California
3620 McClintock Ave,
SGM 903 Los Angeles, CA 90089
Email: chardeeg@usc.edu
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Abstract
Objective. The present study assessed perceptions of Clinical Psychology doctoral programs’
efforts to recruit and retain Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) faculty and graduate
students, as well as differences in such perceptions based on participants’: (1) position within their
program (i.e., graduate student versus faculty) and (2) race.
Method. Participants (n = 297) were graduate students and faculty from Clinical Psychology PhD
and PsyD programs who completed an anonymous online survey. The survey assessed: perceptions
of Clinical Psychology doctoral programs’ efforts to recruit and retain BIPOC graduate students and
faculty members; participants’ sense of belonging and perceptions of racial discrimination within
programs; and BIPOC participants’ experiences of cultural taxation and racism within their
programs.
Results. Faculty reported significantly greater perceptions of recruitment and retention efforts as
well as less perceptions of racial discrimination than did graduate students. Asian, Black, and Latinx
participants reported significantly less perceptions of recruitment and retention efforts and sense of
belongingness, as well as greater perceptions of racial discrimination than did White participants.
Experiences of cultural taxation were common among BIPOC participants, and approximately half
(46.60%) reported that they have considered leaving academia - and approximately one third
(31.37%) have considered leaving their program - due to experiences of racism in their program or
field.
Conclusions. Experiences of cultural taxation and racial discrimination are pervasive in Clinical
Psychology PhD and PsyD programs. Whether intentional or not, these behaviors contribute to
racially toxic environments and contribute to leaks in the mental health workforce pipeline.
Keywords. Psychology training, higher education, diversity, equity, inclusion
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Introduction
Despite significant advances in our understanding of child and adolescent mental health,
youth who are Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) continue to experience inequitable
access to and utilization of mental health services (Cummings and Druss, 2011; Cummings, Wen,
and Druss, 2011). These disparities have been observed across several disorders, including major
depression (Cummings and Druss, 2011; Merikangas et al., 2011), anxiety disorders (Merikangas et
al., 2011), autism spectrum disorders (Magaña, Lopez, Aguinaga, & Morton, 2013; Mandell et al.,
2009), and substance use disorders (Cummings et al., 2011), among others. While several factors
have been postulated to contribute to mental health service utilization, such as the stigma of mental
health (Nadeem et al., 2007) and provider biases (Burgess, Fu, & Van Ryn, 2004), this paper
focuses specifically on the limited diversity of the psychology workforce as a key contributor.
Meeting the mental health needs of BIPOC youth and their families requires a research and
clinical service workforce that is racially and ethnically representative of the population it serves.
The U.S. population is becoming increasingly diverse, with projections that BIPOC will constitute a
numerical majority, or a “majority-minority”, by 2043 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018). Unfortunately,
psychology has not been able to keep pace with these demographic shifts in terms of its ability to
recruit and retain BIPOC psychologists. According to the latest data, 4% of practicing psychologists
in the United States workforce are Asian, 4% Black/African American, 6% Hispanic, 84% White,
and 2% “other” (American Indian/Alaska Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, and two or more races)
(U.S. Census Bureau, 2018). Racial disparities in the academic workforce are also evident, as only
17% of psychology faculty are BIPOC compared to 83% who are White (Bichsel et al., 2019).
Barriers to building a racially diverse workforce often take the form of “leaks” along the
levels, these disparities increase at each “connector” along the pipeline from undergraduate to
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
graduate school, all the way to higher professional ranks (e.g., postdoctoral positions to full
professor positions) (U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 2019).
This paper focuses specifically on how Clinical Psychology PhD and PsyD programs contribute to
leaks in the mental health workforce pipeline through gatekeeping behaviors that exclude people of
color from entering the field and racist climates that push them out.
Faculty involved in applicant selection often attribute the lack of diversity among BIPOC
graduate students and faculty as stemming from limited racial diversity in the pool of applicants at
each stage of training and career. As noted by Galán and colleagues (2021) in their call to action for
an anti-racism in Clinical Psychology, “All too often, graduate training programs and job searches
(at all levels, including postdoc, non-tenure track, tenure track) expect that simply posting
application information will be sufficient to recruit an appropriately diverse candidate pool.”
Addressing pipeline issues in the mental health workforce requires active recruitment of BIPOC
scholars. These recruitment efforts can take various forms, such as sharing information about
graduate training and faculty positions with relevant organizations and listservs (e.g., Tribal
Colleges and Universities; APA Division 45 Society for the Psychological Study of Culture,
Ethnicity and Race). Besides active recruitment strategies, other factors that may influence a
program’s ability to recruit BIPOC faculty and students include perceived campus climate, existing
BIPOC representation in the program, and financial support (Griffin, Muñiz, & Espinosa, 2012;
Muñoz-Dunbar, & Stanton, 1999; Poock, 2007).
While recruitment is an important aspect of enhancing workforce diversity, the vanishingly
small percentage of BIPOC individuals in more senior positions suggest that the problem is not only
one of recruitment but also retention (e.g., 1% of full professors are Latinas compared to 5% of
instructors and 3% of assistant professors who are Latina; U.S. Department of Education, 2019). In
addition to the general challenges of academia faced by all scholars, BIPOC graduate students and
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
faculty at predominantly White institutions are also burdened by race-related stressors, including
experiences of racism and discrimination (Solórzano, Ceja, & Yosso, 2000; Stolzenberg et al.,
2019). Moreover, BIPOC faculty are routinely asked to undertake extra service responsibilities,
such as serving on diversity, equity, and inclusion committees or mentoring BIPOC graduate
students and junior faculty. Also known as “cultural taxation” (Padilla, 1994), these additional
service obligations are often invisible forms of labor that are undervalued and receive little or no
recognition in terms of tenure and promotion decisions (Samano, 2007). Collectively, these
practices communicate to BIPOC scholars that they are unwelcomed within academic departments
and organizations, contributing to heightened stress and decreased sense of belonging, and in some
cases, effectively pushing them out of academia. However, few studies have quantitatively
examined issues related to gatekeeping specifically in Clinical Psychology PhD and PsyD
programs. Given the role of these graduate programs in training the next generation of
psychologists, an empirical investigation of their gatekeeping practices is essential to understanding
factors contributing to the lack of diversity among child and adolescent psychologists. Further, over
the past year and a half, several Clinical Psychology programs have voiced a commitment to
advancing anti-racism and promoting racial equity; thus, there is a need to better understand where
we are as a field in terms of our current antiracism efforts in order to guide this momentum.
Present Study
Leveraging original data from an online national survey of graduate students and faculty in
Clinical Psychology PhD and PsyD programs, the present study sought to assess perceptions
of programs’ efforts to recruit and retain BIPOC faculty and graduate students. We additionally
examined graduate student and faculty perceptions of the cultural climate in their programs more
broadly, including their sense of belonginess and experiences of racial discrimination and cultural
taxation. For each of these assessments, we also aimed to examine whether findings differed based
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
on participants’: (1) position within their program (i.e., graduate student versus faculty) and (2)
race. We hypothesized that compared to White participants, BIPOC graduate students and faculty
would: (a) be less likely to believe that their program made intentional efforts to increase the
representation of BIPOC graduate students and faculty via active recruitment and retention
practices; (b) report a lower sense of belonging in their program; and (c) be more likely to report
perceiving racial discrimination within their program. Questions concerning personal experiences of
cultural taxation and racial discrimination were only asked of BIPOC participants1; no a priori
hypotheses were made regarding differences in experiences of cultural taxation and racism between
different BIPOC racial groups based on the dearth of research on this topic. Directionality of
differences based on position (student versus faculty) was not specified for any analysis, similarly
due to scarcity of extant research to inform predictions.
Method
Participants
Participants were 297 graduate students and faculty from Clinical Psychology PhD and
PsyD programs who completed an anonymous online survey. Individuals were eligible to
participate if they were: (1) graduate students currently enrolled in an APA-accredited Clinical
Psychology PhD or PsyD program, or currently completing their predoctoral clinical internship; (2)
faculty in an APA-accredited Clinical Psychology PhD or PsyD program, including tenured, tenure-
track, and non-tenure track faculty; (3) Directors of Clinical Training (DCT) in an APA-accredited
Clinical Psychology PhD or PsyD program; and/or (4) individuals who provided clinical
supervision for Clinical Psychology PhD or PsyD students within the program’s in-house clinic
over the past two years.
1 All participants were asked whether they have witnessed racism in their program. However, only
BIPOC participants were asked about personal experiences of racism and cultural taxation.
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Procedures
The University’s Institutional Review Board approved the study. An anonymous online
survey was created on Qualtrics to collect information regarding anti-racism efforts in Clinical
Psychology PhD and PsyD programs in the United States. To recruit participants, the survey was
distributed through social media (Twitter and Facebook), the Academy of Psychological Clinical
Science (APCS) listserv, and direct emails to Department Chairs, Directors of Clinical Training,
and Administrative Assistants in Clinical Psychology PhD and PsyD programs. Email recipients
were encouraged to share the survey link with eligible graduate students, faculty, and clinical
supervisors.
Interested participants who clicked the link were directed to an online survey hosted through
the University’s licensed Qualtrics platform. First, participants completed a brief, web-based
screener to confirm their eligibility. Individuals who met inclusion criteria then provided informed
consent and were directed to the study survey which took, on average, 25 minutes to complete. Data
were collected between April 2021 through August 2021. Compensation for participation was not
provided.
Analytic Sample
A total of 498 people visited the survey website between April 2021 and August 2021, and
352 met the criteria for enrollment and provided informed consent. Thirty five of 352 (9.9%)
provided consent but exited out of the survey before answering any survey questions, leaving a
sample of 317 participants. Three respondents were excluded from the present study due to not
identifying as faculty or graduate student (i.e., clinical supervisor only), and 17 participants ended
the survey prior to responding to at least one of the key variables of interest, leaving a final analytic
sample of 297 participants.
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
thirds of participants were graduate students (n = 202; 68.0%) and a third were faculty (n = 95;
32.0%). Participants were predominantly female (n = 234; 78.8%), heterosexual (n = 196; 66.0%),
and born in the United States (n = 258; 86.9%). Participants were disproportionately from Clinical
Psychology PhD programs (n = 267; 89.9%) and were affiliated with programs from diverse
geographic regions (urban: n = 143, 48.2%; rural: n = 51, 17.2%; suburban: n =96, 32.3%; other: n
= 7, 2.36%). More than half of participants reported that both of their parents graduated from
college (n = 173; 58.25%) and approximately a quarter indicated that neither of their parents had
graduate from college (n = 72; 24.24%). In terms of race, less than 1% (n = 2) of participants
identified as American Indian or Alaska Native, 10.44% Asian (n = 31), 8.42% Black/African
American (n = 25), 11.79% Hispanic/Latinx (n = 35), 2.36% Middle Eastern or North African (n =
7), 64.64% White (n = 192), 1.35% Other (n = 4), and less than one percent declined to provide
their race (n = 1). Based on the race and ethnicity prevalence in the sample, we created a five-
category race/ethnicity variable for subgroup analyses that included (1) Non-Hispanic White; (2)
Non-Hispanic Black; (3) Non-Hispanic Asian; (4) Hispanic/Latinx; and (5) Multiracial/Other.
Participants in the first three categories answered affirmatively to White, Black/African American,
or Asian, respectively, and “no” to all other race/ethnicity items. The Hispanic/Latinx category
includes any participants who identified as Hispanic/Latinx regardless of the race they endorsed.
Multiracial includes participants who selected more than one race (and did not endorse Hispanic),
while Other includes participants who self-identified as American Indian, Alaska Native, Middle
Eastern, North African, or Other (and did not endorse Hispanic). Due to significant heterogeneity in
the racial identity of participants in the Multiracial/Other category and the small sample size of each
group comprising the Multiracial/Other category (i.e., each less than 1%), analyses assessing
subgroup differences based on race excluded participants in this group.
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Measures
Perceptions of Program-Level Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Initiatives
Items included in the present report are listed in Tables 2-7. Although all questions had a
forced response, “prefer not to answer” was included as a response option for all items. Based on
the limited availability of validated measures for assessing diversity, equity, and inclusion
initiatives in graduate programs, study authors developed items to assess these efforts, drawing on
recently proposed approaches for advancing anti-racism in Clinical Psychology (Galán et al., 2021).
Generated items assessed perceptions of efforts made by Clinical Psychology doctoral programs to
recruit BIPOC graduate students and faculty members (e.g., “How often does your program use
active outreach and recruitment strategies to attract a racially diverse pool of graduate students?”).
Indices of programs’ efforts to retain BIPOC graduate students and faculty included: (1)
experiences of cultural taxation among BIPOC faculty and students (e.g., “As a faculty
member/graduate student who self-identifies as BIPOC, I have felt pressured to take on extra work
that is uncompensated because of my race.”); (2) programs’ response to highly publicized acts of
racism (e.g., “Following highly publicized or local traumatic racial injustice events, my department
has coordinated support and mental health resources to address these traumatic racial injustice
events.”); (3) promotion of anti-racist action (e.g., “The faculty and in-house supervisors in my
program have cultivated a culture in which individuals – particularly, White allies – are encouraged
to intervene after witnessing racial microaggressions or other oppressive actions in their
professional environment.”); and (4) provision of mental health support for BIPOC graduate
students (“I am aware of at least one mental health and resilience promotion resources at or near my
graduate institution that is accessible and free/low-cost for BIPOC students.”)
Additionally, to assess participants’ sense of belonging and perceptions of racial
discrimination within Clinical Psychology programs, we used selected items from the Psychological
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Sense of School Membership Scale (e.g., “Sometimes I feel as if I do not belong here”; Goodenow,
1993), the School Racial Conflict Resolution Scale (e.g., “I have witnessed overt racist acts in my
program”; Coleman, & Stevenson, 2013), and the School Racial Awareness and Assertiveness Scale
(e.g., “I have seen and heard stereotypes about other racial groups in my program”; Coleman, &
Stevenson, 2013). Constraints on survey length precluded the use of all items from these measures.
Survey items were piloted by current and past graduate students and faculty members who did not
participate in the final study. For full survey questions and response options, see OSF registration
Analytic Plan
conducting analyses, the distribution of all variables was inspected for skewness and kurtosis. Inter-
item correlations were computed for items relating to the same construct (e.g., recruitment of
BIPOC graduate students), and items that were correlated at or above r ≥ .70 were aggregated by
computing their mean. Although 297 participants responded to at least one of the key variables of
interest, some participants did not complete the entire survey. Additionally, “prefer not to respond”
was treated as missing data. The number of respondents for each item is reported in Tables 2-7.
To test our primary aims regarding programs’ efforts to recruit and retain BIPOC faculty
and graduate students, we computed descriptive statistics (i.e., frequencies, means, and standard
deviations) for all key variables. Descriptives were calculated for the entire sample, as well as
separately based on participants’ position in their program (i.e., graduate student versus faculty) and
participants’ race (i.e., Hispanic/Latinx; Non-Hispanic Asian, Non-Hispanic Black, Non-Hispanic
White). To assess differences in responses based on position and race, one-way ANOVAS were
computed for continuous variables and Pearson’s chi-square tests for binary variables. Significant
omnibus tests were followed by post-hoc pairwise comparisons to determine which racial groups
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
significantly differed from each other. Pairwise contrasts were not needed for subgroup analyses
based on position as there were only two groups (i.e., graduate student and faculty). We first
computed models without accounting for clustering of participants within schools. Subsequent
analyses accounted for clustering using multilevel mixed models; however, several participants
were excluded from these analyses as they declined to report the name of their school (12.46%;
n=37). The general pattern of findings remained consistent regardless of whether we accounted for
clustering. Analyses not accounting for clustering are reported in text to ensure that participants
who did not provide their school’s name were still represented in our findings. Results from
analyses accounted for clustering are provided in the online supplement (Tables S1-S7).
Significance cutoffs were set at p < .05 for all analyses. Analyses were conducted in SPSS 27.0
(IBM Corp, 2017) and R (Team, 2013).
Results
All variables had acceptable skew (values between +/- 2) and kurtosis (values between +/- 7)
(Kim, 2013; West et al., 1995). In only two instances did inter-item correlations meet the r ≥.70
threshold for combining items. We combined responses to “My program makes a serious effort to
recruit BIPOC graduate students” and “My program makes a serious effort to recruit BIPOC
faculty” by computing their average (r = 0.73). We also combined responses to “As a faculty
member/graduate student who self-identifies as BIPOC, I have felt pressured to take on extra work
that is uncompensated because of my race” and “As a self-identified BIPOC faculty
member/graduate student, I take on more service activities (e.g., committee assignments, diversity-
related work) than my colleagues because of my race” (r = 1.00).
Perceptions of Clinical Psychology Program Efforts to Recruit and Retain BIPOC Graduate
Students and Faculty (Tables 2-3)
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
We first sought to describe perceptions of programs’ efforts to intentionally increase the
representation of BIPOC graduate students and faculty via recruitment practices, as well as to
explore differences in these perceptions based on position and race. See Tables 2-3 for descriptive
statistics and subgroup analysis results. Approximately two thirds of participants (67.92%) agreed
(i.e., endorsed slightly agree mostly disagree, or strongly disagree) that that their program engages
in intentional recruitment of BIPOC faculty and graduate students. Compared to White participants,
Asian, Black, and Latinx participants were significantly less likely to believe that their program
makes a serious effort to recruit BIPOC faculty and graduate students. BIPOC participants did not
differ significantly from one another in their perceptions of programs’ recruitment efforts. Further,
when examining differences in perceptions based on position in program, graduate students were
significantly less likely than faculty to agree that their program engages in intentional recruitment of
Faculty (but not graduate students) also reported on how often their program uses targeted
outreach and recruitment strategies for BIPOC graduate student and faculty candidates.
Approximately half of respondents (50.70%) endorsed that their program engages in such efforts
more than half the time (i.e., “most of the time” or “always”) to recruit graduate students. 60.87% of
respondents endorsed such efforts were used to more than half the time to recruit BIPOC faculty
Next, we assessed perceptions of programs’ efforts to create a culture that supports the
retention of BIPOC graduate students and faculty. Faculty were significantly more likely than
graduate students to endorse awareness of mental health and resilience promotion resources
were most likely and Asian participants were least likely to report awareness of such mental health
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
students in terms of having the opportunity to receive mentorship by someone of their own race,
there was a significant difference by participant race, with White participants (92.81%) most likely
to endorse having had such an opportunity. Graduate students (but not faculty) also reported how
much they agreed with being comfortable talking to their faculty mentors about race-related topics,
with two fifths of participants (40.00%) endorsing disagreement. When examining differences in
perception by participant race, Asian graduate students were significantly less likely to endorse
feeling comfortable talking to their faculty mentor about race-related topics compared to White and
Turning to questions about programs promoting anti-racist action, 56.29% of participants
agreed (i.e., slightly agree, mostly agree, or strongly agree) that their program had created a culture
in which individuals are encouraged to intervene in response to racial microaggressions and other
oppressive actions. Graduate students agreed significantly less with this statement than did faculty
and Latinx participants were significantly less likely than White participants to believe that their
and Latinx participants did not significantly differ from one another in these perceptions.
Next, we examined programs’ responses to highly publicized and local traumatic racial
injustice events. 61.89% of participants indicated that their program publicly addresses the student
body to acknowledge these events using email or other communication methods more than half the
time; 20.98% of participants reported that their program acknowledges racial injustice events less
than half the time (i.e., “never” or “seldom”). While there were no differences based on position in
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
We also assessed other program responses to racial injustices, including coordinating mental
health resources, holding faculty meetings, and implementing other changes to minimize the
negative impact of these traumatic events on students’ emotional well-being and academic
trajectories (e.g., relieving research or clinical responsibilities). The majority of respondents
indicated that their program has rarely responded to highly publicized or local traumatic events in
these ways. For example, 76.89% of participants reported that their program alleviates professional
responsibilities following racial injustices less than half the time. When examining differences
based on participants’ position in program, compared to faculty, graduate students reported a lower
perceived frequency of alleviating professional responsibilities and holding faculty meetings to
participant race in perceived frequency of coordinating mental health resources or holding a faculty
Graduate Students and Faculty Sense of Belonging and Perceptions of Racial Discrimination
within Clinical Psychology Programs (Tables 4-5)
Next, we examined faculty and student sense of belonging and perceptions of racial
discrimination within Clinical Psychology programs. Graduate students and faculty did not
significantly differ from one another in their self-reported sense of belonging in their programs (see
lower sense of belonging in their programs than did White participants. Specifically, Asian
participants endorsed responses indicative of less belonging on all seven items assessing belonging,
5).
We also explored faculty and graduate student perceptions of racial discrimination within
their programs. Over half of participants (56.40%) disagreed that their program handles racial
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
conflict in an open and fair manner. When examining differences in perceptions based on position
in program, graduate students were significantly less likely than faculty to agree that their program
Approximately a quarter of participants (24.78%) indicated that they have witnessed overt
acts of racism in their program; there were no differences in these reports based on participant
position or race. About a third of participants (32.14%) indicated that they have seen or heard racist
stereotypes about their own race in their program, and around half (50.59%) reported perceiving
stereotypes about other races. Compared to faculty, graduate students were significantly more likely
When examining differences based on participant race, White participants were less likely than
Asian, Black, and Latinx participants to indicate that they have perceived racist stereotypes about
BIPOC Faculty and Student Experiences of Cultural Taxation and Racism within Clinical
Psychology Programs (Tables 6-7)
For the final set of analyses, we sought to assess BIPOC faculty and student experiences of
cultural taxation and personal experiences of racism (as opposed to general perceptions of racial
discrimination) within Clinical Psychology programs and academia more broadly. These analyses
were limited to BIPOC participants as White participants were not asked to respond to report on
these experiences. Over half of BIPOC participants (64.13%) indicated that they have felt pressured
to take on more service activities (e.g., committee assignments, diversity-related work) because of
their race than their colleagues (i.e., they endorsed “slightly agree”, “mostly agree”, or “strongly
agree”). Approximately a third of BIPOC participants (31.37%) reported that they have considered
leaving their program because of racism they have experienced. Nearly half (46.60%) reported that
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
they have considered leaving academia because of racism they have experienced in the field. There
were no significant differences between graduate students and faculty or between Asian, Black, and
Latinx participants in reported experiences of cultural taxation or racism.
Discussion
Racial inequities in access to and utilization of mental health services among children and
adolescents demand interrogation of the systems and practices that fuel these disparities
(Cummings, Wen, and Druss, 2011). We argue that limited diversity of the psychology workforce is
a key contributor to the underservice of BIPOC youth. As such, this study focused on assessing
factors related to the recruitment and retention of BIPOC graduate students and faculty in Clinical
Psychology doctoral programs.
Results yielded only tepid endorsement that programs are making serious efforts to recruit
BIPOC faculty and graduate students or that programs have fostered a culture of antiracism (e.g.,
encouraging individuals to intervene against microaggressions and other oppressive actions within
the professional environment, handling racial conflict in an open and fair manner). Significant
differences based on position and race were revealed, such that faculty and White participants were
more likely to report perceiving programs as making serious efforts in these domains compared to
graduate students and Asian, Black, and Latinx participants. In some instances, such as recruitment
efforts, differences based on position may derive from limited awareness of such efforts among
graduate students, pointing to a need for greater transparency between faculty and graduate students
about initiatives to promote diversity. It is also possible, however, that these differences are a
symptom of faculty, on average, not being in tune with the cultural shift called for by the next
generation of psychologists.
Asian, Black, and Latinx participants each endorsed less sense of belonging within their
programs than did White participants. Recognizing belongingness as a fundamental human need
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
(Baumeister & Leary, 1995), this should be of significant concern in efforts to retain BIPOC
graduate students and faculty. There are numerous factors that may contribute to diminished sense
of belonging among BIPOC graduate students and faculty, including limited racial diversity within
programs, experiences of racial microaggressions, and expected assimilation to White, patriarchal
standards of professionalism in academia (McCluney et al., 2021; Mirza, 2018).
While study findings suggest that programs are making efforts to proactively recruit BIPOC
faculty and students, the high rates of cultural taxation and racial discrimination reported in this
study underscore that simply admitting BIPOC students or hiring BIPOC faculty is not the same as
cultivating an inclusive, anti-racist climate. Although it is generally no longer acceptable to engage
in overtly discriminatory behavior, more subtle forms of discrimination, or racial microaggressions,
are pervasive, especially in academic spaces. Unfortunately, we did not collect data regarding the
most common types of racial microaggressions experienced by BIPOC individuals within Clinical
Psychology. However, examples documented in the broader literature on racial microaggressions
include tokenism (e.g., emphasizing the recent hire of BIPOC faculty as “evidence” of your
program’s commitment to diversity and inclusion while doing little to embed these principles into
program culture; Weber et al., 2018), environmental exclusions (e.g., only depicting photos of
White people in building art; Harwood et al., 2012), and assuming that people of a given race are
all alike (e.g., a teacher expecting student to be a spokesperson for their race; Rice, 2019; Williams
et al., 2021). Future research is needed to characterize how racial microaggressions specifically
manifest within Clinical Psychology programs.
Although racial microaggressions are sometimes dismissed as simple cultural blunders, as
noted by Williams and colleagues (2021), “Microaggressions, however, are not innocuous errors;
rather, they are a form of oppression that reinforces unjust power differentials between groups,
whether or not this was the conscious intention of the offender.” Racial microaggressions
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
communicate messages of exclusion and othering to BIPOC scholars, and these experiences have
been linked with negative mental and physical health and academic outcomes (Hurd et al., 2014;
Jackson et al., 2010; Steketee et al., 2021). Rather than focusing on advancing their research,
completing their coursework, and improving their clinical skills, BIPOC scholars may instead have
to contend with the psychological and physiological stress of coping with racial microaggressions.
Additionally, in the current sample, one third to nearly one half of BIPOC participants reported that
they have considered leaving their program or academia due to the racism they have experienced.
These findings underscore that toxic racial climates not only effect the health and well-being of
individual BIPOC scholars within our programs, but they also have significant, downstream
implications for the diversity of the mental health workforce.
Findings indicated that White participants were least likely to endorse having witnessed
race-based stereotypes being made within their program, suggesting a lack of attunement among
White graduate students and faculty to the harmful experiences endured by BIPOC colleagues. In
reflecting on current practices that are within our control as academics and providers to change, this
lack of racial awareness among White colleagues is a clear issue that warrants swift and intentional
remediation. Galán and colleagues (2021) provide several concrete recommendations for cultivating
inclusive, anti-racist programs, including trainings on how to identify and intervene in response to
racial microaggressions and frequent opportunities to engage in self-reflection and discussion
regarding race and racism. It is critical that included in these efforts are explicit discussions of
Whiteness and how it privileges White graduate students and faculty while pushing BIPOC scholars
out of our programs, and in some cases, out of academia altogether.
It is important to note that experiences of racism within academic settings only further
compound the stress of interpersonal and structural racism experienced within society more broadly.
Study results indicate that in general, Clinical Psychology programs have provided very limited
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
support to BIPOC students following highly publicized or local traumatic racial injustice events.
These findings demonstrate the ways in which academia tries to operate “business-as-usual,”
without consideration of the larger socio-political context and events that shape students’ complex
lives. Failing to recognize the ways in which BIPOC students and faculty may be affected by these
events functions as another type of racial microaggression that invalidates their lived experiences.
Programs that desire to improve in this area should refer to Galán et al. (2021), who provide several
recommendations for minimizing the detrimental effects that racial traumas can have on BIPOC
students’ emotional wellbeing and academic trajectories. For instance, they suggest providing
students the option of being relieved from clinical, research, or class responsibilities within two
weeks of a local or highly publicized and traumatic racial injustice event. Students at the University
of Washington drafted a template with suggested language that instructors can use to reach out to
Black students to offer such accommodations:
OA/edit?usp=sharing This email template can be modified for different racial groups and different
racial injustice events. Additionally, programs should consider how to best support not only BIPOC
students, but BIPOC faculty and staff as well.
Limitations
The current findings should be considered within the context of study limitations.
First, while we hope our sample of 297 participants is reflective of the broader field, we recognize it
is limited in size and may not be fully representative of unique experiences of all the graduate
students and faculty who did not participate. Second, this report focused specifically on Clinical
Psychology PhD and PsyD programs and does not capture the perspectives of students and faculty
in other mental health fields, such as Social Work or Counseling Psychology, which have
historically been more advanced in their commitment to inclusivity and social justice training
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
(Brown, 2021; Buchanan & Wiklund, 2020; Fouad et al., 2006). Third, as faculty were
disproportionately more likely to be White compared to graduate students, findings concerning
position in program may be conflated with participant race. Unfortunately, the small sample size
and limited participation of faculty in this study precluded us from disentangling the effects of
participant position and race. Relatedly, this study focused specifically on race and did not consider
other aspects of participants’ social identities, such as gender identity, sexual orientation, or
immigration status. Future studies incorporating larger sample sizes are needed for a more nuanced,
intersectional analysis. Finally, it is important to remember that eradicating mental health service
disparities will require a multipronged approach and increasing the diversity of the psychology
workforce is only part of the solution. We must continue to identify and address other factors
contributing to these disparities, including insufficient training in cultural humility in our graduate
programs (Galán et al., 2021), treatments that are not tailored to the diverse youth we seek to reach,
and lack of systems of care that are cost-effective and accessible.
Conclusions
Although several Clinical Psychology programs have been making efforts to recruit BIPOC
faculty and graduate students, there has been far less attention to ensuring that these individuals are
welcomed into warm, inclusive environments. Findings from this paper demonstrate that
experiences of cultural taxation and racial discrimination are pervasive in Clinical Psychology PhD
and PsyD programs. Regardless of whether these behaviors are intentional or not, their effects are
damaging nonetheless and contribute to leaks in the mental health workforce pipeline. These leaks
will not be resolved by quick fixes or Band-Aids (e.g., one-time trainings on racial
microaggressions), but rather necessitate a commitment to critically interrogating and eradicating all
forms of racism and systemic Whiteness that permeate Clinical Psychology programs. We must
hold our programs and one another accountable for making these changes to ensure that the next
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY
generation of researchers, practitioners, and educators are diverse as the children and families with
whom they work.
GATEKEEPING IN CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY