A Gamification Approach to Improving Interpersonal Situational
Awareness in Cyber Defense
1,2, 1,2,3 1,2 4
Torvald F. Ask Benjamin J. Knox Ricardo G. Lugo , Lukas Hoffmann , Stefan
2,4
Sütterlin
Department of Information Security and Communication Technology, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Gjøvik, Norway
Faculty of Health, Welfare and Organization, Østfold University College, Halden, Norway
Norwegian Armed Forces Cyber Defense, Norway
Faculty of Computer Science, Albstadt-Sigmaringen University, Sigmaringen, Germany
Corresponding author
Torvald F. Ask
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Department of Information Security and Communication Technology
Gjøvik, Norway
Østfold University College
Faculty of Health, Welfare and Organization
Halden, Norway
Email: torvaldfask@gmail.com / torvalda@hiof.no
Abstract
In cyber threat situations, the establishment of a shared situational awareness as a basis for
cyber defense decision-making results from adequate communication of a Recognized Cyber
Picture (RCP). RCPs consist of actively selected information and have the goal of accurately
presenting the severity and potential consequences of the situation. RCPs must be
communicated between individuals, but also between organizations, and often from technical
to non-/less technical personnel. The communication of RCPs is subject to many challenges
that may affect the transfer of critical information between individuals. There are currently no
common best practices for training communication for shared situational awareness among
cyber defense personnel. The Orient, Locate, Bridge (OLB) model is a pedagogic tool to
improve communication between individuals during a cyber threat situation. According to the
model, an individual must apply meta-cognitive awareness (O), perspective taking (L), and
communication skills (B) to successfully communicate the RCP. Gamification (applying game
elements to non-game contexts) has shown promise as an approach to learning. We propose a
novel OLB-based Gamification design to improve dyadic communication for shared situational
awareness among (technical and non-technical) individuals during a cyber threat situation. The
design includes the Gamification elements of narrative, scoring, feedback, and judgment of self.
The proposed concept contributes to the educational development of cyber operators from both
military and civilian organizations responsible for defending and securing digital infrastructure.
This is achieved by combining the elements of a novel communication model with Gamification
in a context in urgent need for educational input.
Keywords: Gamification, cyber defense education, shared situational awareness, cognitive
cyber warfare, sociotechnical communication
Introduction
The formal recognition of the cyber domain as a digital battlefield (NATO Cooperative Cyber
Defense Centre of Excellence, 2016) was an explicit response to the correlational effects of
societal digitalization and an increase in the digital attack surface. It served as a call-to-arms
for science-based cyber defense training and education in both civil and military sectors. NATO
members and allies need to continually adapt to meet the defense and security vigilance
demands required to form, protect and defend networks against existing and emerging cyber
threats. These threats target the gray zone between peace and war to influence populations and
divide opinion, undermine trust in societal institutions and exploit system vulnerabilities for
disruption or espionage (Fitton, 2016; Gardner, 2021). The high rates of innovation and
increased network- and technological interdependability that drive, and result from societal
digitalization (Zanenga, 2014) increases the complexity of the Socio-Technical Systems (STSs)
within which cyber security and cyberspace operations are conducted. In other words,
digitalization leads to the expansion of cyberspace and an almost unmanageable cyber threat
landscape that places demands on human cognition to adapt to survive.
Within organizations, cyber defense responsibilities are often divided among technical
personnel (referred to as analysts or cyber operators; CyOs) who are tasked with detecting,
analyzing, reporting and responding to cyber threats. Decision-makers ask critical ‘so-what’
questions based upon this reporting and assess the risk to mission before making time-critical
decisions concerning available courses of action. Due to STS complexity, CyOs encounter
many challenges spanning the cyber, physical, and social domains. When investigating a cyber
threat situation, CyOs must navigate a technological threat-landscape operating at speeds that
often are at odds with innate human cognitive abilities (Zachary et al., 2013). The information
that can be extracted about the status of cyber threats is subject to high levels of uncertainty.
Subsequently, CyOs must select (1) what information and (2) how to communicate it in a way
that supports decision-making and ensures mission success (Jøsok et al., 2016; Knox et al.,
2018). Communication problems have been identified as one of the major challenges facing
personnel working within cyber defense (Agyepong et al., 2020; ENISA, 2018). There are,
however, currently no common best practices for how these communication problems should
be addressed in neither cyber defense training nor education (Ask et al., 2021a).
Current approaches, be they military or civilian, to training or explaining human behaviors that
promote good cyber defense in organizations (e.g. awareness campaigns) have mostly been too
simplistic and tend to blame end-users for failure to comply with target behaviors (ENISA,
2018; McMahon, 2020). The extensive reviews reported on by the European Union Agency
For Network and Information Security (ENISA, 2018) suggest that policies and awareness
campaigns alone are not sufficient to induce necessary behavioral change for cybersecurity, and
that they sometimes are at odds with the productive goals of the organization. Moreover,
personality models (e.g. Big 5) and models of behavior (e.g. Theory of Planned Behavior) are
insufficient when trying to predict cybersecurity outcomes in the workplace because they ignore
context and workplace demands. That said, some components of behavioral models such as
‘self-efficacy’ and ‘coping’ appear to be relevant predictors (ENISA, 2018). As noted by
ENISA, “Organizations should strive for adherence (active participation) rather than
compliance - rapidly emerging threats require employees who are engaged and willing to step
up” (ENISA, 2018; 4). Thus, educational approaches that engage humans at both the individual
and group/organizational level, to actively pursue good cyber defense cognitions and behaviors,
will arguably make for a resilient organization in the face of emerging cyber threats. Currently,
there is a general lack of studies and interventions that simultaneously target cybersecurity
performance at both the individual and group level (Ask et al., 2021a).
As the task-related cognitive challenges associated with cyber defense become increasingly
complex (Jøsok et al., 2016; Zachary et al., 2013), and where outcomes are characterized by
failure intolerance, one could argue that the need for carefully selected and cognition-based
approaches to training and education increases with the complexity of these challenges. The
threshold for group-level human cognitive performance is dependent on how well the
processing-capabilities of the human brain matches the challenges of the group-task
environment. Thus, approaches that simultaneously integrate knowledge about the brain with
knowledge about the task-environment may be more efficient in training for optimal
performance. Neuroergonomic approaches to training are neuro- and thus user-centric and can
be implemented by (1) changing the working environment to fit the cognitive capabilities of
humans, (2) training specific cognitive capabilities that better fit the working environment, or
(3) a combination of the two. In the context of improving interpersonal communication for good
cyber defense decision-making, one would have to apply methods that train a collection of
specific human cognitive abilities (Jøsok et al., 2017; Knox et al., 2018) and in a sustainable
way (ENISA, 2018). Gamification methods optimize for sustained and flexible learning
(Howard-Jones & Demetriou, 2009; Lorenz et al., 2015) by hacking the human nervous system
through controlling attentional focus (Howard-Jones et al., 2016) in a manner similar to video-
games (Khoshnoud et al., 2020; Michailidis et al., 2018). This is necessary for continued
engagement (Cowley et al., 2008; Howard-Jones et al., 2016) and the neuroplastic changes
associated with learning (Cheng et al., 2020; Recanzone et al., 1992a, 1992b, 1993). We argue
that utilizing gamification methods can serve as a neuroergonomic approach that targets the
specific cognitive abilities needed for good cyber defense performance while making CyOs feel
engaged with the processes and goals related to the outcome of the training.
The intervention design proposed in this paper is motivated to help CyOs involved in defensive
cyberspace operations to improve knowledge transfer when communicating cyber threat
information. Developing a training environment founded in gamification has the potential to
fill this performance gap in socio-technical communication (Ask et al., 2021a; Knox et al.,
2018) in cyber-hybrid contexts through a process that is neuroergonomically designed to
improve engagement and change behavior. In the following sections, we will detail how
gamification approaches can be utilized in training and education for cyber defense. First, we
will give a brief overview of gamification mechanics and the considerations that must be met
to train cognitive abilities for cyber defense. Then we will review the cognitive processes and
abilities needed for achieving an interpersonal understanding of a cyber threat situation. This
will be followed by the proposal of a gamification design for cyber team training that can be
utilized to target the specific cognitive abilities and processes implicated in successful
communication for cyber defense.
Gamification Methods Used as an Educational Tool to Meet the Challenges
of Cyber Defense Training.
Challenges arising from threats in the cyber domain can be urgent or of a delayed nature, and
are often shared between organizations due to the interconnectedness between cyber assets. In
the case of threats to military organizations (e.g. from nation-state-actors), they will likely have
a strategic-level ambition. Research into Human Factors relating to cyber defense performance
is beginning to gain traction in a field that has primarily been dominated by technological
advancement (Gutzwiller et al., 2015). Of specific interest are cognitive aspects that can be
improved through learning processes and interactions. This includes applied research designs
aimed at cultivating the cognitive skills required to contend with varying challenges in the cyber
threat landscape. For example, defensive cyber personnel must be able to identify and counter
an adversary's intent and ability to a) operate under the threshold of ‘war’, and b) employ tactics
that we may yet not be aware of or able to see. In cyber defense, the constantly changing nature
of the cyberspace ecosystem leads to novelty, complexity, and uncertainty as well as
opportunity (Johnsen, 2019). Consequently, there is a high demand for teaching concepts that
explore ambiguity and challenge conventional methods that often fail to consider the
implications of a changing cyber ecosystem.
Attempts to create training environments that can reduce risks to own organizational endeavors
should focus on Generation X and Y relevant learning phenomenons as an alternative and
enhancement to rote techniques designed for the baby boomers (Ong, 2013). For example,
‘serious games’ are designed to support acquisition and/or skill development (Loh and Yanyan
Sheng, 2013), and certain video games encourage innate human pattern setting abilities as well
as strategic thinking and the application of tactics founded in distributed knowledge (Gee,
2003). In training scenarios, these effects allow for learners to build adaptive skills as they
enhance their current understanding of a situation by engaging in activities such as
experimentation, extrapolation, and explantation (Ward et al., 2018). This may well hold some
of the answers to how cyber-military training techniques can be modified to match adversaries
that have already synchronized their information, cognitive, kinetic, cyber and special
operations capabilities (House of Commons 2017; TRADOC, 2017).
Among game-based training approaches, gamification may serve as a neuroergonomic
approach that can be easily modified to train the cognitive skills required for cyber defense.
Gamification involves the incorporation of competition-, reward-, and ranking elements from
video games such as points, leaderboards, and badges in non-game contexts with the aim to
optimize learning through increased engagement (Rodrigues et al., 2019). As an approach to
learning, gamification has shown very good effects concerning learner motivation and learning
outcomes (Landers et al., 2015; Sailer et al., 2013) including those that involve incident
management across different organizations (Harter, Schmidt, Killham, & Agrawal, 2009). For
gamification-based training methods to be efficacious in a threat landscape that is prone to rapid
change (e.g. Johnson, 2019), one must include elements that specifically target skills that allow
for flexible and agile adaptation of cognitive processes according to changing task-demands
(Jøsok et al., 2016, 2017; Knox et al., 2017, 2018). One approach to scaffold adaptive skills is
to focus on complexity preservation in training (Ward et al., 2018; p45). This requires learners
to practice: 1) in varied contexts, 2) at boundaries of current knowledge and skills, 3) accessing
knowledge when it is useful or needed, 4) anticipatory thinking, and consider the implications
of the current situation for the future, and the alternative ways in which situations may evolve,
5) updating and re-configuring understanding on the fly, and 6) constantly juggling priorities
and goal conflict resolution.
In sum, a gamification approach for cyber defense training must include elements that preserve
the complexity needed to scaffold the adaptive skills needed to match situational change. This
requires a good understanding of the different cognitive processes involved in achieving both
an individual and shared situational understanding of a current cyber threat. The challenges
associated with these processes often change according to the individuals that are involved in
the acquisition and transfer of situational knowledge (Jøsok et al., 2016, 2017; Knox et al.,
2017, 2018).
Achieving Shared Situational Awareness for Cyber Defense Decision-
Making Rely on Having an Accurate Recognized Cyber Picture
During a cyber threat situation, cyber defense decisions must be grounded in an accurate
situational understanding to achieve defensive goals. Cyber defense decision-making is often
based on human-to-human communication, which requires communication partners to generate
a common and overlapping situational understanding of the cyber threat (Ask et al., 2021a;
Knox et al., 2018). Achieving a shared situational understanding can be subject to many
challenges that span the cyber-physical domains (Jøsok et al., 2016, 2017), and will often
require communication partners to apply a range of cognitive skills that will vary in effort and
deliberation depending on how much their individual backgrounds differ from each other (Knox
et al., 2018). For instance, when reporting on cyber threats, CyOs must establish a shared
situational understanding with decision-makers that may be considered “non-technical”.
Because a CyO’s understanding of a cyber threat situation rely on perceptual and sense-making
processes that are based on having technical insight, the knowledge structures (mental models)
they create to predict future situational states are not readily accessible, thus not immediately
transferable nor actionable, to a potentially non-technical decision-maker (Jøsok et al., 2016,
2017; Knox et al., 2017, 2018). Consequently, CyOs and decision-makers operate at different
levels of awareness which entail communicational challenges that may impede decision-
making if critical information is lost. To fully understand how this potential gap in competence
affects knowledge transfer, and how to design training elements to successfully bridge
communication between CyOs and non/less-technical decision-makers, one must understand
the processes involved in acquiring Situational Awareness (SA) for decision-making.
Situational Awareness for decision-making and performance
First proposed by Endsley (1988), SA is crucial in explaining decision-making and performance
that rely on cognitive processes such as attention and working and long-term memory (Endsley,
1995). The first stage (Level 1 SA) encompasses basic perceptual processes (i.e. monitoring,
cue detection, recognition) that then lead the operator to be aware of situational factors and their
states, such as technical systems or other operators and their situation, location, and conditions.
Awareness of situational factors then leads to the second stage (Level 2 SA) where previous
experiences are integrated with current perceptions to form an understanding of how the current
situation is influenced. The third stage (Level 3 SA) allows for understanding of current
situations and its factors, and predicts possible future states of the environment, including those
following the actions resulting from decision-making.
by Dr. Peter Lankton, May 2007 (Public License).
SA separates itself from similar concepts such as situational assessment and understanding,
situational assessment and sensemaking. Often interchanged with SA, situational assessment is
the process used to achieve and sustain SA knowledge (Endsley, 1995) and situational
understanding corresponds to Level 2 SA (Dostal, 2007). Sensemaking, on the other hand, has
more temporal aspects. While SA is usually an instantaneous process with perception,
comprehension and creating future prediction models, sensemaking is a more effortful action
that focuses on creating an understanding of prior experiences through deliberation and
integrating new information to explain outcomes (Klein et al., 2006).
Building on the framework of Endsley (1988), seven requirements have been suggested to
achieve full Cyber Situation Awareness (CSA) for cyber defense (Barford et al., 2009). These
requirements can be organized under Level 1-3 SA:
• Level 1 SA: (1) Awareness of the current situation, (2) awareness of the impact of the
attack, (3) awareness of adversarial behavior, (4) awareness of the quality and
trustworthiness of the CSA information.
• Level 2 SA: (5) Awareness of why and how the current situation is caused, (6)
Awareness of how situations evolve.
• Level 3 SA: (7) Assessment of plausible outcomes.
To achieve CSA during a cyber threat situation, having an accurate Recognized Cyber Picture
(RCP) is crucial. While general CSA can be considered as having awareness of the underlying
state of a specific cyber environment at any given point in time, RCPs consist of actively
selected and actionable information and is used to describe the actual circumstances of an
incident or threat, e.g. the severity of (un)known effects, especially for individuals who are
non/less-technical (Knox et al., 2018). Thus, a RCP is the visual or cognitive representation of
cyber threat-related incidents and activities. An RCP that is created by a CyO and intended for
a non/less-technical recipient must therefore be tailored to the recipient to achieve a shared
CSA.
Organizational structures introduce challenges to RCP communication between CyOs
and decision-makers
Organizations source their cyber security operations to internal or external Security Operation
Centers (SOCs) which are organizational units and teams working around the clock to defend
against cyber threats. SOCs typically form a hierarchical organizational structure with CyOs at
the bottom and decision-makers further up in the hierarchical structure, where cyber threat
information is ‘pushed up’ and decisions are ‘pushed down’ in the decision-making hierarchy
(Ask et al., 2021a; Staheli et al., 2016). In this context, RCPs need to be shared and
communicated across platforms and in differing modes. This asymmetry can be challenging for
decision-making if mental models and priorities differ between the personnel occupying
different hierarchical layers (Ask et al., 2021a). When attempting to communicate and share a
RCP to a peer or to a member of the hierarchy there is an explicit need for mutual Perspective
Taking and for acknowledging communication partner’s needs. When this fails to be applied,
critical information can get lost due to suboptimal communication flow leading to potentially
dire consequences for mission assurance (Knox et al., 2018; Rosen et al., 2008). In a recent
study surveying what information Swedish stakeholders (spanning national to local, and private
to public actors including providers of critical infrastructure) perceived as needed to meet their
RCP requirements, it was reported that none of the stakeholders listed awareness of adversarial
behavior as important (Varga et al., 2018). This may suggest a blind-spot in different decision-
making agents' mental models of what information is necessary to achieve CSA during a cyber
threat situation. In line with their training, CyOs may treat cyber threats as a technical problem
requiring technical problem solving. At some point, however, the threat will need to be
understood and treated as an operational or a strategic dilemma. The findings of Varga et al.
(2018) highlights an area where CyOs may face challenges when communicating RCPs to non-
/less technical personnel and explicates the importance of being mindful of how a
communication partner’s background and associated priorities affects their mental threat
models and situational understanding (Ask et al., 2021a).
Irrespective of rank, communication partners are required to engage in a two-way process of
locating and message framing to ensure that performance does not suffer as a cost of poor
interaction. Already today, and as a matter of urgency going forward, non-technical military
personnel in leadership positions require cyber-domain cognizance to support mission
planning, operations and decision-making (Knox et al., 2018). Gaining this understanding
demands trust in digital natives and effort to develop cyber-domain knowledge, skills and
abilities. It requires engagement in learning, and knowledge transfer with younger
soldiers/officers - often with less formal military competence - yet naturals in a digital-age able
to contribute to and guide operational planning and/or strategic analysis (Crilly, 2021). As such,
acknowledging a communication partner’s needs and requirements can lead to more effective
and closer aligned mental models in hierarchically challenged, complex, dynamic cyber-hybrid
operating environments. Consequently, in this temporal, novel and digitally-driven context
there is the opportunity to intervene with new combinations and perspectives on modes of
education and training for improved outcomes in training tasks (Landers et al., 2015).
The ultimate goal of a RCP is to ensure enough shared CSA is achieved so that decision-making
is born out of trust and understanding instead of authority, bias, or intuition driven by over-
confidence. Taking an understanding approach that is founded upon accurate calibration
between communication partners can minimize the risks of poor decision-making. Should a
network intrusion occur, the severity and potential consequences need to be accurately
presented via an RCP and accompanying brief. A cyber defense-associated STS may challenge
RCP presentation due to (1) the interconnectedness between decision-making agents and
between assets in both cyber and physical domains, (2) the uncertainty regarding the severity
of threats and adversarial behaviors, impact of decisions, and the future state of assets, and (3)
individual differences (e.g. technical competence, goals, priorities) between communication
partners (Jøsok et al., 2016; Knox et al., 2018). Thus, to accurately relay their understanding
through appropriate mode, method, and content of communication, CyOs may have to integrate
SA from several domains in the STS.
Hierarchical Meta-Situational Awareness (HMSA)
To generate an actionable RCP, CyOs need to acquire SA at the level of the cyber domain (the
CSA), and simultaneously integrate it with SA at the level of the social domain (Social SA;
SSA; Kola et al., 2020) because they need to be aware of how social situational factors and
challenges (different goals, priorities, knowledge, stresses) dictate how to tailor the RCP to their
communication partner (Jøsok et al., 2016; Knox et al., 2018). To increase SSA performance,
CyOs will need to understand, at some level, that they themselves are a system of internal
(emotional and cognitive) states that vary between contexts. These internal states relate to how
they understand and respond to different technical, physical, and social environments, including
how their technical knowledge is constructed and how it may differ from other people’s
knowledge. SA regarding interactions between one’s internal states and the environment is
achieved through a combination of complementary processes that are automatic, dispositional,
and meta-cognitive and interoceptive. Situational Self-Awareness (SSeA) entails automatic
processing of one’s actions to internalized standards and serves to update an individual on the
nature of their behavior in different contexts (Silvia & Duval, 2001). Dispositional Self-
Awareness (DSA) entails the extent to which an individual is consciously reflecting over their
own psychological processes and experiences and their relationship to others (Fenigstein et al.,
1975; Trapnell & Campbell, 1999). Self-Other Distinctions (SOD) entails understanding other
individuals’ mental and emotional states and how they relate to- and differ from one’s own,
which requires interoceptive and meta-cognitive abilities (Steinbeis, 2016). Together, SSeA,
DSA, and SOD allows an individual to understand their internal states, how they relate to each
other, and how they relate to their interactions with the environment. Sometimes physical-
domain assets are affected by cyber-domain threats which require Physical SA (PSA; Schauer
et al., 2018), and subsequently, Hybrid SA (HSA; Schauer et al., 2018) to predict how decisions
will affect cyber and physical systems based on the interconnectedness between physical and
cyber assets.
To be consciously aware when monitoring and regulating the cognitive processing of situational
elements to generate SA for increased SA-related performance is dependent on a meta-
cognitive process called Meta-SA (MSA; Endsley, 2019; Sethumadhavan, 2011). We argue that
being able to consciously transact knowledge between different domains of SA in an STS
implies establishing a context-dependent hierarchy of SA (a MSA hereon referred to as
forms of SA and MSA converge on STS-level HMSA at increased levels of hierarchical
communication. a HMSA shows the contextual hierarchy of SA in an STS. b The HMSA hierarchy can be
organized in SA levels according to the framework proposed by Endsley (1988). c Based on the HMSA, CyOs
must apply various cognitive processes to generate the RCP. SA = Situational Awareness. SSA = Social Situational
Awareness. HSA = Hybrid Situational Awareness. SOD = Self-Other Distinction. SSeA = Situational Self-
Awareness. DSA = Dispositional Self-Awareness. PSA = Physical Situational Awareness. CSA = Cyber
with BioRender.com.
Endsley (1988), Level 1 MSA entails establishing SA at the individual/self- (SSeA, DSA, SOD)
and asset- (PSA and CSA) level and perceiving the elements that separate them as domains of
awareness across a SA environment. Level 2 MSA entails understanding how individual-level
and asset-level SA interact to form inter-individual (SSA) and inter-asset level (HSA) SA.
Level 3 MSA entails acquiring the ability to predict STS-level future states (STS-level HMSA)
based on integrating the understanding of how elements identified by inter-individual and inter-
asset level SA influence each other in the STS. Thus, to facilitate a shared CSA between
individuals, CyOs must mentally and flexibly transition between cyber and physical, and social
communicate a RCP (Jøsok et al., 2016; Knox et al., 2018).
Implicit in HMSA is the notion that to share domain-specific SA at level 1 or level 2 in the
HMSA hierarchy, SA at an above level is required, but to utilize an integrated SA at any level
for RCP communication, having level 3 HMSA is required. This is because CyOs must
understand and predict which and how elements identified in their HSA will change the state
(e.g. strategic- and tactical-level goals) of a communication partner based on their SSA and
how this affects the STS (Jøsok et al., 2016). As the CyO transitions from lower-to-higher levels
in the HMSA hierarchy, the number of cognitive processes required to be successful at each
level increases along with cognitive effort (Knox et al., 2017, 2018). Similarly, video games
often include levels or stages at increasing difficulty, where the player must learn new skills
and often combine them to succeed. Being aware of the different levels of HMSA could inform
level design (difficulty) in gamification-based cyber defense training.
The information in the current and above sections can be summarized as follows: SA is required
for decision-making to be successful (Endsley, 1988). Decision-making in cyber defense is
based on human communication aimed to achieve a shared SA which requires RCPs to be
accurate (Knox et al., 2018). RCP sharing is subject to challenges from multiple domains in the
STS (Jøsok et al., 2016; Knox et al., 2018) which requires SA in each of these domains. MSA
improves SA-performance but (by definition) requires both explicit knowledge of the cognitive
processes involved in acquiring SA as well as the ability to willfully apply the cognitive skills
involved in those processes (Endsley, 2019; Sethumadhavan, 2011). Thus, to improve and
sustain defensive cyber operation mission performance it is necessary to train defensive cyber
personnel in attaining HMSA-related cognitive skills.
Challenges may occur when attempting to apply HMSA in gamification design. The theoretical
bodies of work implied in all the individual and social factors contributing to SA are vast, but
what entails achieving HMSA for a given CyO will be specific to their immediate and extended
working environment (Ask et al., 2021a). Identifying core factors that are applicable across a
broad range of working environments may be necessary for good gamification design.
All systems and their associated situations are reducible to a subset of systems and situations.
This is also true for cognitive and situational factors affecting STS-related SA (e.g. technical
competence allows for deeper SA in cyber systems, which at the extremes are reducible to the
quantum level). In addition to being practically infeasible, trying to account for all
systems/situations may cause loss of predictive power if the conclusion is that ‘everything
influences everything’. Operating from a purposefully limited set of systematic or situational
elements while preserving complexity when incorporating gamification elements in training is
ideal.
Knowing about HMSA may reveal when and how to adapt cognitive strategies to achieve
communication goals. However, expecting cyber defense personnel to acquire deep knowledge
of-, and to consciously apply- the various psychological constructs associated with all levels of
HMSA is hardly neuroergonomic in training if this information is too condensed. Thus,
requirements for knowledge-complexity at each level of difficulty in gamification-based
training should be reduced to the minimum level needed for a) training adaptive cognitive
agility to ensure mission success (Hutton et al., 2020; Ward et al., 2018), and b) easily allowing
difficulty modifications according to trainee expertise to sustain motivation and engagement.
Adapting the theoretical elements implicated in HMSA to a format that is practical and
applicable for gamification can be challenging. An intuitive and simplified framework for
identifying the cognitive processes required for achieving and utilizing SA at each context-
dependent level may be required.
Communicating the RCP: The Hybrid Space framework and the Orient,
Locate, Bridge process
interconnectedness between the cyber and physical domains, and the tension between strategic
and tactical goals in decision-making and action during defensive cyber operations (Jøsok et
al., 2016). The HS framework can be used to understand the cognitive efforts implied in flexible
cognitive challenges associated with context shifting, the HS shows how communication can
get increasingly complex when relayed between agents that are located in different quadrants
competencies (e.g. between a CyO that is oriented towards the cyber domain and decision-
maker who is oriented towards action in the physical domain). Achieving HMSA for RCP
communication requires knowledge of your own competencies and associated mental states,
how they differ from your communication partner, and how to adjust Communication Style and
message content (Knox et al., 2018). Communication across the HS between different
individuals will thus require constant re-adjustment of message content and Communication
Style, depending on who the communicated information is intended for (Knox et al., 2018).
complicated relations. d Hierarchical structure, complex relations. C = Cyber. S = Strategic. P = Physical. T =
introduced to support socio-technical communication in cyber education (Knox et al., 2018).
consecutive step in the OLB process is associated with SA at increasing levels in the HMSA hierarchy. S =
strategic, T = tactical, P = physical, C = cyber. HMSA = Hierarchical Meta-Situational Awareness. SSA = Social
Situational Awareness. HSA = Hybrid Situational Awareness. SOD = Self-Other Distinction. SSeA = Situational
Self-Awareness. DSA = Dispositional Self-Awareness. PSA = Physical Situational Awareness. CSA = Cyber
The OLB model came from a cognitive engineering approach applied to communication
activities in cyber defense, and describes the steps needed to achieve the HMSA needed for
situation-specific successful communication in the HS. The model argues that communication
partners attempting to co-construct a shared mental model should apply specific techniques to
boost their shared CSA (Knox et al., 2018), which includes information-processing resources
such as working memory, cognitive flexibility, Meta-Cognitive Awareness, and Perspective
Taking (Morrow & Fischer, 2013).
In the context of HMSA for RCP communication, the Orient stage entails applying Meta-
Cognitive Awareness to observe one’s own internal states and location in the HS (e.g.
orientation towards cyber), including how one’s own CSA is organized in knowledge structures
(Level 1 HMSA). The Locate stage entails using Perspective Taking to locate a communication
partner in the HS (e.g. towards physical domain), including how their level of technical
expertise differs from one’s own, as well as their information needs, workload, goals, and
priorities (Level 2 HMSA). The Bridge stage includes integrating the information from stage 1
and 2 (Level 3 HMSA) to regulate one’s own cognitions and shape the flow and content of
communication such that a shared CSA and mental models can be achieved (Knox et al., 2018).
These and other cognitive skills and processes relevant for the OLB process will be discussed
in more detail below under the ‘Operationalization of Communicating the RCP’-section.
The Norwegian Defense Cyber Academy has taught and applied the OLB process to enhance
future CyOs’ communication skills. The OLB model argues that OLB processes can support
improved dyadic and multi-domain grounded communication, better regulatory behavior, and
cross cultural communication (Knox et al., 2018). To do this though, there is a requirement that
participants are willing to engage in cognitively tough activities that require trainers to develop
methods for conditioning, expectancies, goal-setting, and ensuring participant self-
determination. These are psychological theories that have been found to be highly relevant to
gamification (Landers et al., 2015; Landers 2014). Therefore, self-monitoring and self-
regulatory processes that add to the already existing cognitive workload, and which require
additional efforts to overcome existing habits, could be helped by gamification.
The OLB process helps in creating shared CSA through interdependent communication that
helps solidify the Team SA as described by the Team SA Model (Endsley & Jones, 2001). This
is done through four processes (Team SA requirements, devices, mechanisms, processes).
Firstly, the CyOs are required to share their understanding and communicate information that
is necessary (i.e. assessments and projections) for the team, and relaying information and
updating task conditions and capabilities through communication devices (technical aspects)
and modalities (verbal, non-verbal). This relies upon team members possessing shared mental
models to assist in interpretation and creating prediction models. This is imperative for efficient
communication and coordination of team members. Finally, Team SA is dependent on
processes that require active engagement from team members that includes checking team
performance, giving critical feedback, and being active in prioritizing and coordinating tasks,
and planning for multiple outcomes. Thus, Team SA model-associated processes can be
facilitated in gamification by incorporating the OLB model.
Gamification Support to the OLB Process
Gamification can be utilized as a tool to unlock communication potential as it promotes higher
levels of engagement, behavioral changes and stimulated innovation (Owen, 2017). In a
military training context, inspiration can be drawn from the US Navy who implemented
elements of game design, such as comprehensive narrative and varied feedback mechanisms,
to great effect in a Flooding Control Trainer for recruit training. The reported results included
a 50% decrease in decision-making errors, up to an 80% decrease in communication errors and
SA improved by 50% (Hussain, 2009). Similar applied interventions that endeavor to scaffold
and support the cognitive needs of junior and senior cyber-military personnel involved in
defensive cyberspace operations could encourage engagement in mutually beneficial actions.
Gamification-based training could include gamification elements aimed at getting participants
to know themselves better for improved self-orientation in hybrid environments (Jøsok et al.,
2016), Perspective Taking in order to locate and adapt to a communication partners’ strengths
or susceptibilities in order to bridge for grounded communication (Knox et al., 2018).
The OLB model describes the efficient communication of RCPs as a process requiring the
engagement of conscious cognitive efforts, i.e., it comes with an increased cognitive workload.
Perspective-taking and meta-cognition in a hybrid-space setting characterized by the need of
cognitive agility pose particularly high cognitive demands, notwithstanding potential
situational stress factors, and demand resource-intensive “cognitive readiness” (Fletcher, 2004).
Particularly in highly complex situations (cognitive load) or particularly eventless periods of
time (vigilance), self-regulatory skills are required to keep up the attentional levels needed for
the pursuit of communicative tasks. Self-Regulation is highly motivation-dependent
(Baumeister & Vohs, 2007), and social interaction requires cognitive processes draining
motivational and self-regulatory resources (Finkel et al., 2006). Gamification has been shown
to have enormous capabilities regarding the enhancement and maintenance of motivation and
thus performance in highly demanding tasks (Sailer et al., 2013).
Effective communication in defensive cyberspace operations demands perspective-taking skills
among communicating partners if they are to understand others’ information needs and task
demands in the form of mental workload. This Perspective Taking is influenced by momentary
cognitive states and susceptibilities requiring communication partners to have developed Meta-
Cognitive Awareness. When both partners’ mental models are synchronously constructed this
can support shared consciousness, and increased engagement leading to empowered execution
(McChrystal, Collins, Fussell, & Silverman, 2015). One of the key goals of gamification is to
increase ‘engagement’. Therefore, by gamifying an OLB training programme designed to
encourage shared mental models for increased engagement, it is possible that objective
measures such as a) Perspective Taking, b) Communication Styles c) improved meta-cognition,
and d) self-determination can be accelerated. This intervention targets the development of
specific psychological variables and uses them as tools to improve learning outcomes in dyadic
communication scenarios.
The goal of this training intervention is to use gamification elements to improve human-to-
human interaction. Thereby helping to ensure the accurate communication of RCPs and thus
reduce security risks related to the human factor in cyber defense. For example: for a CyO to
orient a peer, or someone in the hierarchical chain, with or without technical expertise, it will
involve preparing and communicating the RCP. This communication should accurately present
the severity and potential known or unknown consequences of the cyber situation and its impact
upon mission assurance.
The game mechanics incorporated in this training intervention include: narrative, points,
feedback, judgement of self, and dynamic difficulty adjustment:
In this intervention, the Cyber-Task scenario will deliver the Narrative and is able to tie
together the hybrid components of the task. The RCP is the visual or cognitive
representation of cyber related incidents and activities tied to the mission. From a
gamification perspective, understanding the RCP as a narrative opens space for it to be
gamified in training environments.
Points are given depending on objective or inter-subjective performance ratings
conducted in real-time or with short delays.
Feedback is given by game-partners (communication partners) and expert-judges. Score
changes are immediately evident at the beginning of each new game cycle (i.e.,
communicative challenge).
Judgement of Self (meta-cognition) is done via comparison of performance prediction
and retrospective performance assessment, both in relation to external inter-subjective
expert-ratings. Meta-cognitive accuracy is rewarded by points, irrespective of the task.
The participant is rewarded for accurate recognition of their own performance.
Dynamic Difficulty Adjustment (use of feedback loops to balance play) is incorporated
as the communication partner can anticipate the abilities of the operator (and vice versa),
read behaviors and make adjustments accordingly. This is incorporated to ensure that
the game can be shaped so that each player has an optimal experience thus ensuring no
loss of agency (Salen et al., 2004).
Operationalization of Communicating the RCP
five individual traits that were identified will be measured: (1 Meta-Cognitive Awareness, (2
Perspective Taking, (3 Communication Styles, (4 Self-Regulation, (5 Motivational structures.
Meta-Cognitive Awareness
Meta-cognition refers to ‘thinking about thinking’ and includes the components knowledge of
one’s abilities, SA, and behavioral regulation strategies. Individuals with high meta-cognitive
skills have more accurate and confident judgment of their own performance in relation to task
demands and are better able to accurately describe their strengths, weaknesses, and their
potential to improve. Meta-cognition is considered as having two dimensions: Meta-Cognitive
Awareness and meta-cognitive regulation. Meta-cognition is necessary in all three phases of
the OLB model. However, it was identified as a prerequisite for the Orient phase as an
individual is required to have “awareness of factors influencing one’s momentary mental state
and ongoing cognitive processes” (Knox et al., 2018; 353).
Perspective Taking
Perspective Taking describes the tendency to spontaneously adopt the psychological point of
view of others. This Perspective Taking is required to co-construct a shared mental model with
communication partners and constitutes the Locate in the OLB model. This requires the
operator to identify the communication partner in the STS, gaining information of the other
person’s SA by reflecting over their level of knowledge, skills, ability, and current mental state.
Perspective taking can be manipulated through experimentation. By initially assessing levels of
perspective taking, then passing incomplete information to participants and testing outcomes,
and by qualitatively manipulating the information of participants (i.e. nonverbal vs. verbal;
proximity: live vs. cyber).
Communication Styles
Communication skill is crucial to transfer of knowledge, and for decision-making. This skill,
or skills, constitute the Bridge aspect in the OLB process. While meta-cognition relates to
domain and skill knowledge, understanding how specific Communication Styles influence
other participants could have great impact on decision-making in peers or command structures.
This includes expressiveness and preciseness of communications, emotionality of the message,
or using manipulation in communication. Communication can be manipulated at different
levels during experimentation.
Self-Regulation
As a related concept to meta-cognition, Self-Regulation (SR) serves to regulate cognition. SR
is defined as the regulation of cognition, emotions, behavior, and environment (Efklides, 2008).
SR has been shown to contribute to performance across varying domains, particularly in sport
(Toering et al., 2009) and academic achievement (Zimmerman, 1990).
Motivational structure (intrinsic/extrinsic)
Motivation is defined as ‘a driving force responsible for the initiation, persistence, direction,
and vigor of goal-directed behavior (Coleman, 2003), and includes the biological and
achievement needs. Recent theories have been developed to include other aspects of motivation,
intrinsic as well as extrinsic factors, and situational factors and is referred to as an ‘organismic’
approach where individuals are involved proactively with their environment and feel
connectedness, competence and autonomy (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Vallerand, 2007; Vallerand et
al., 1987; Vallerand & Losier, 1999).
Design of an OLB-Based Gamification Approach to RCP Communication
In this section, we will use the information discussed in the previous sections to propose an
foster the (meta-)cognitive skills required for achieving HMSA to improve communication for
CSA and Shared Mental Models.
validated questionnaires: e.g. MCAI (Schraw & Dennison, 1994), SRQ (Aubrey et al., 1994), REQ (Gross & John,
2003), IRI (Davis, 1983), CIS (de Vries et al., 2013), SIMS (Guay et al., 2002). S = Step (1-5). P = Participant (1,
2 & 3). SAM: Self-Assessment Mannequin (judgement of self; performance predictions and retrospective
performance assessment). SITREP = Situational report. OLB = Orient, Locate, Bridge.
Step 1 (S1): Pre Cyber Task
Prior to the start of the intervention all participants complete a battery of trait questionnaires.
The questionnaires assess traits influencing communication and decision-making styles with
relatively high stability over time and situations. Amongst others, these questionnaires assess
the operators’ cognitive problem-solving style, ability to take others’ perspective, belief in own
capabilities, and typical Communication Styles. These trait variables have the potential to assist
with the interpretation of quantitative empirical findings and can potentially flag individuals
with sub-optimal communication style, or more outlying trait tendencies.
Gamification mechanics: In Step 1 there are no gamification mechanics.
Step 2 (S2): Operator (P1) engages in Cyber Task
A collection of scenario based Cyber-Tasks with a variety of technical difficulty levels can be
retrieved from a cyber range scenario database and implemented. The Cyber-Tasks are
randomly allocated to cyber operator participants. There will be ‘balancing’ to match
participant competence levels. The interdependent Cyber-Tasks are solved by a (single) CyO
and involve processes such as penetration testing, attack / defense, capture-the-flag, malware
forensics, and incident response. Before the CyO (P1) commences the Cyber Task he/she will
answer a SAM relating to performance prediction/judgement of self.
Gamification mechanics: The initial Judgement of Self (SAM) occurs in this step as a
performance prediction. However, points are awarded in S4 after the retrospective SAM. Points
are awarded for Cyber-Task performance based on expert defined performance measures. In S2
the players are introduced to the Narrative.
Step 3 (S3): OLB process on completion of S2
After completing (coming as far as possible) the Cyber-Tasks within the designated time-frame,
there is a requirement for dyadic communication. The RCP must be reported by the CyO (P1)
following the OLB logic consisting of a perspective-taking adjustment of the given technical
information under consideration of the psychosocial, tactical, strategic, and cyber-physical
situational needs of the recipient. The information conveyed in Step 3 can be in verbal or written
modality and constitutes a situational report (SITREP).
Gamification mechanics: the cognitive processes occurring during the OLB process are key
functions to defining the outcome for the participants. As such, OLB supports and shapes the
Narrative, and can be seen as a game component just without tangible reward. The reward
comes in the form of Points, Feedback and Judgement of Self in S4.
Step 4 (S4): SITREP
The quality of the exchanged information will be assessed via quantitative and qualitative
analysis of the exchanged SITREP by experts, including P1 or P3s perceived usefulness of the
RCP as a reflection of the performance of the sender. There are two types of recipients of the
SITREP:
a peer-operator (P2) simulating a handover of tasks amongst equals, and
a higher-ranking non/less-technical decision-maker (P3).
Gamification mechanics: S4 has three game mechanics: Points, Narrative, and Expert
Feedback.
Step 5 (S5): Cyber Task continuation
The recipient (P2/P3) must also follow OLB logic. Depending on the desired goal of each
intervention the recipient may be a participant in the experiment, or placed into the scenario
a) Recipient as peer-operator (P2) participant: P2 task performance will be analyzed in
context with the quality markers of the previous OLB-outcome (the expert SITREP
analysis from S4) along with assessing the subjective benefits from the received
SITREP (Self-Efficacy and entitlement to judge) for the subsequent task (assessed
before and after engaging with the task).
b) Recipient as higher-ranking less/non-technical leader/decision-maker (P3) participant:
P3 perceived SA and entitlement to judge will be assessed along with the leader’s
decision made in response to the SITREP. This response will be evaluated and scored
for quality and degree of goal achievement (as defined by the guidelines of the scripted
scenario).
Following the making of a (recorded) decision, P3 engages with the CyO and provides
instructions and feedback regarding the work done and gives advice on future action (simulating
that the same CyO (P1) would continue the task). This feedback will then be rated by P1 (who
is the creator of the SITREP, but also receiver of the feedback).
Gamification mechanics: this final step involves Points, Feedback, Narrative and Judgement
of Self.
HUMAN FACTOR (P1 HUMAN FACTOR (P2 and P3
SITUATIONAL CONTEXT
manipulations) manipulations)
Time pressure Conflicting information Task demands/complex
Detrimentality of environmental
Performance pressure Expertise and pre-existing knowledge
conditions
Stress level / working memory Organisational deficit in cyber
Stress level / working memory load
load domain cognizance
These independent variables represent several possibilities to choose from.
STEP (S) APPROACH SCORING
Players are unaware of any
conditioning and scoring but are
shown a live scoreboard that is
always present in players view
S1 (before) (rankings manipulated by
experimenters) but are told that a
‘Champion’ is declared at the end
and their scores entered in
database.
(0-100 points, based on expert
Completion of Cyber Task in
S2 judgments’ assessment of
technical terms.
completion/advancement).
For each milestone achieved
Time pressure:
players are rewarded with 10
Each task has several milestones.
points
Working memory load (1-5
multiplier)
Increased information through
performance achievements
(performance-related staircase
algorithm).
Judged by observer (expert) on
S3 & 4 Accurate transfer of knowledge. objective measures (max 100
points).
Self–judgements of performance
and meta-cognitive accuracy
(controlled with self-assessments:
S1 & S4) (-100 to 100 points).
S5 Reward OLB (Max 100 points)
After judgement of performance
from previous 4 rounds, P1 asked
Extra Gamification aspect Risk Taking if he/she wants to cut time for
more points (public ranking).
(weighted scores x 100 points).
SUMMARY
Communication efficiency is a crucial human factor in cyber defense and therefore a risk factor.
The goal of human-to-human communication in cyber threat situations is to achieve a shared
SA so that cyber defense decisions are based on having accurate information. RCPs are used to
describe the actual circumstances of a cyber incident and are often communicated from
technical to non/less-technical personnel. Formulating and communicating the RCP requires
deliberate application of cognitive skills to integrate SA from both technical and social domains
in the STS such that RCPs are actionable to the recipient. Currently there is some research, but
so far nothing has been applied in formal cyber defense education and training scenarios.
Existing research models for efficient communication in cyber context, such as the OLB model,
imply a high degree of self-regulation to avoid suboptimal performance between
communicating partners. One of the best ways to increase self-regulation is to maximize
motivation, and gamification is known to be a good neuroergonomic way to motivate, and may
thus improve cyber defense performance through better modes of communication. This
proposal suggests an intervention design for a peer-to-peer- and peer-to-rank dyadic
communication situation that could be facilitated by a cyber range capability for training
military personnel (and the wider cyber defense community). It includes the gamification
elements of a) narrative, b) scoring c) feedback d) judgment of self. Implementation should
provide empirical data for further modification and validation.
Funding
This intervention design was proposed as part of the Advancing Cyber Defense by Improved
Communication of Recognized Cyber Threat Situations (ACDICOM; #302941) project.
ACDICOM is funded by the Norwegian Research Council.
The Norwegian Cyber Range (NCR) is an arena for cybersecurity testing, training, and exercises: