The Use of Media in Indonesian Language Learning for SMP/MTSN Students
Ummi Kultsum/19016062
kultsumummi11@gmail.com
Indonesian language subjects are compulsory subjects at every level of education in
Indonesia. Indonesian language learning is carried out starting from the elementary school, junior
high school, high school, and university level. Indonesian language learning activities at each
level take place in various ways. It is important for someone to understand learning Indonesian
for their survival. According to Yulia et al, (2012) contextual learning is a learning activity that
relates learning material to the reality of the student's world, so that students are able to make
connections between their knowledge and their application in real life. All Indonesian language
learning materials are expected to be applied in real life.
According to Mulyadi, et al, (2018) today's learning activities rely on skills and active
learning processes. Students are required to be more active in learning that is carried out by using
their skills. The main support for Indonesian language learning activities is by using learning
media. Therefore, learning media is an important forum. The use of technology including media
in education according to Ramadhan, et al, (2019) allows a variety of new ways to connect with
others and access information about education, and has consequences in formal teaching.
According to Arsyad (in Jaya, et al, 2013) media is a tool used to convey or deliver
teaching messages. Media is anything that can transmit messages, stimulate students' thoughts,
feelings and desires so as to encourage the learning process to occur in them. Educational media
is a set of tools or complementary used by teachers or educators in order to communicate with
students or learners. These tools are called educational media, while communication is the
delivery system. Hamalik (in Jaya, et al, 2013) conveyed that the use of learning media in the
teaching and learning process can generate motivation and stimulate students as in the
psychological realm and student understanding.
Ramadhan, et al, (2019) mentions that media allows students to interact in the most
modern and innovative ways but not too formally in educational activities. Ease of accessing
technology makes it easy to use media. Of course this affects education. According to Javorsky
(in Ramadhan, et al, 2019) education must reflect real change and consider various ways that can
support the demand to provide quality conditions for human existence in the context of social
transformation processes. With the ease of technology in accessing media, the realization of
changes for the better for the world of education can be realized.
However, behind the ease of learning through media, there are facts on the ground that
the use of learning media is not optimal. According to Novelti, et al, (2018) teachers rarely use
multimedia in learning, thus making students less enthusiastic in learning. Teachers do not do
innovative learning such as using various media to make students motivated in the learning
process. Likewise, the limited ability of Indonesian language teachers to use learning media, plus
teachers often come in late, and let students leave class, this makes learning less meaningful and
not in accordance with learning objectives.
Apart from that, there are various types of learning media. ranging from media to
hardware and software. The entire media used serves as a support for learning activities. Part of
the software and hardware is also divided into various kinds such as audio media, image or
visual media, audiovisual media, video and so on.
An example of media for learning Indonesian is picture media. According to Fitri, et al,
(2016) picture media is one of the techniques in learning that can be used as a variation in
writing skills. Image media is one of the most basic forms of communication media. Pictures
don't just serve as entertainment. But more than that, images have a very large function. One of
these is conveying ideas to others, as well as respect and several other benefits. In addition,
Subana and Sunarti (in Fitri, et al, 2016) state that images are imitations of goods (people,
animals, plants, and so on). The image becomes a two-dimensional visual medium on a non-
transparent field. Pictures can be used by teachers as a place to provide explanations so that they
are more concrete than if they were only described in words. Through pictures, teachers can
translate abstract ideas into a more realistic form.
Image media has its own types, for example serial images. According to Hizati, et al,
(2018), serial picture media are media used in visual learning that provide a series of pictures
about something so that the explanation is more concrete than described in words. Through
picture series, teachers can translate abstract ideas that are more realistic and easier to stimulate
students' imagination.
One of the media that can be used for learning Indonesian according to Handayati, et al,
(2013) is song media, this media is a tool that uses magnetic tape in the form of a cassette or
compact disk that only produces audio without images. These tapes and compact discs must be
played using an audio cassette or CD player. In the learning process, media songs in the form of
song lyrics that are played to students are used as learning aids in writing short stories. This song
media is classified as audio media because it uses sound and vibrations from magnetic devices to
convey messages.
In addition to those described above, other types of media are audiovisual media.
According to Hartidini, et al, (2018) audiovisual media are media that have sound and image
elements. This media has a better type of ability, because it includes both types of media, namely
audio media and visual media. These two media are combined into a learning platform that
makes it easier to understand the subject matter. According to Arsyad (in Hartidini et al, 2018)
audiovisual-based media is visual media that contains the use of additional sound to produce it.
Sudjana and Rivai (in Hartidini et al, 2018) state that audiovisual media are several pieces of
equipment used by teachers in conveying concepts, ideas and experiences that are captured by
the human senses of sight and hearing.
This audiovisual media has several advantages. This was conveyed by Arysad (in
Mulyani, et al, 2019) that there are six advantages of audiovisual media, namely, (1) it can
complement the basic experiences of students when they read, discuss, practice, and others; (2)
can display impressions that are a substitute for the natural environment and can even show
objects that are not normally visible; (3) can describe a process accurately that can be presented
repeatedly; (4) encourage and increase motivation; (5) can shape students' attitudes and behavior;
(6) contains values that can invite thought and discussion in groups of students, (7) can be used
in large groups or small groups, heterogeneous groups or individuals, and (8) can shorten the
picture of normal events (efficient in terms of time).
Associated with all the media that have been described. These various media can be used
to support Indonesian language learning activities, including for junior high school students.
Through a variety of existing learning media, it is easier for junior high school students to access
information about education. Students who use media for learning needs can increase the
effectiveness of the learning process. At this stage the existing technology has achieved the
appropriate objectives by students. However, the reality in the field is that the media for learning
Indonesian has not been fully used effectively for junior high school students. Difficult access
factors, costs, and so on make the use of learning media not fully used by students.
This is in line with the questionnaire that has been distributed to thirty SMP/MTSN
students from various regions who are respondents. There are 23 students of SMP 8 Padang who
became respondents, 1 student of MTSN 42 Jakarta who became respondents, 1 student of SMP
4 Padang who became respondents, 1 student of SMP 91 Jakarta who became respondents, 1
student of MTSN 2 Pesisir Selatan who became respondents, 1 student of SMP Muh 1 Godean
Yogyakarta was the respondent, 1 SMP 2 Payakumbuh student was the respondent, and 1 SMP 1
Yogyakarta student was the respondent. Based on the statements submitted, each of them got the
following results.
The first statement, "Teachers use media in learning Indonesian" 70% agree, 26.7%
strongly agree, and 3.3% disagree. The second statement, "The learning media you use is
hardware" 73.3% agree, 16.7% disagree, 6.7% strongly agree, and 3.3% disagree. The third
statement, "The learning media you use is software" 76.7% agree, 13.3% strongly agree, 6.7%
disagree, and 3.3% disagree. The fourth statement, "Learning media makes it easier for you to
understand Indonesian language subject matter" 73.3% agree, 20% strongly agree, and 6.7%
disagree. The fifth statement, "You prefer the use of learning media in the form of hardware"
63.3% agree, 26.7% disagree, 10% strongly agree. The sixth statement, "You prefer the use of
learning media in the form of software" 66.7% agree, 20% disagree, 13.3% strongly agree. The
seventh statement, "The use of learning media affects your understanding of Indonesian language
learning materials" 70% agree, 30% strongly agree. The eighth statement, "Your learning results
are better if learning uses a variety of media" 76.7% agree, 20% strongly agree, and 3.3%
disagree. The ninth statement, "There are obstacles in using media in learning Indonesian" 50%
disagree, 43.3% agree, and 6.7% strongly agree. The tenth statement “The use of learning media
from teachers is very limited” 66.7% agree, 30% disagree, and 3.3% disagree.
Through the results of the questionnaire that has been filled out by SMP/MTSN students,
it can be explained that learning Indonesian by using learning media has been carried out by the
teacher. The learning media used by students is software rather than hardware. This is evidenced
by the results of using software as much as 76.7% while the results of hardware use 73.3%.
Students who filled out the questionnaire agreed that the learning media made it easier for them
to understand Indonesian language learning materials. This is evidenced by 73.3% agree.
Students agree that the use of learning media in the form of software is preferred. This is
evidenced by 66.7% agree while 63.3% choose to like learning media with hardware. Students
who filled out the questionnaire agreed that the use of learning media affected their
understanding of Indonesian language learning materials. This is evidenced by 70% choosing the
agree option. 76.7% chose the option to agree with the statement that student learning outcomes
are better if learning uses a variety of media. The results for the statement that there are obstacles
to the use of media in Indonesian language learning are 50% agree. Finally, 66.7% of students
agree that the use of learning media from teachers is very limited.
It can be concluded that the media has been used for learning Indonesian, the use of
learning media commonly used and favored by students is software. Learning media helps
students in understanding Indonesian language learning, of course this affects student learning
outcomes. Although learning media have been used to improve students' understanding, their use
is still very limited. The learning media has not yet found its full function to support the student
learning process. Suggestions for the future, it is hoped that the use of learning media for
Indonesian language learning will be improved, diverse media will certainly make it easier for
students to understand the material. However, the exploration of the use of this media must be
improved by teachers for Indonesian language learning materials so that the function of learning
media can be fully achieved.
Reference :
Fitri, Y., Syahrul, R., & Tamsin, A. C. (2016). Pengaruh Model Pembelajaran Kooperatif Tipe
Think Write Berbantuan Media Gambar terhadap Keterampilan Menulis Karangan
Argumentasi Siswa Kelas X SMA Negeri 5 Padang. Jurnal Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia,
5(2), 548-555.
Handayanti, W., Syahrul R., & Afnita. (2013). Keefektifan Penggunaan Media Lagu dalam
Media Lagu dalam Pembelajaran Menulis Puisi Siswa Kelas IX SMPN 6 Lubung Basung.
Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia, 1(2), 164-240.
Hartidini, S., Syahrul, R., & Ratna, E. (2018). Pengaruh Pembelajaran Strategi Inkuiri
Berbantuan Media Audiovisual Terhadap Keterampilan Menulis Karangan Argumentasi
Ssiwa Kelas X SMA Negeri Lengayang Kabupaten Pesisir Selatan. Jurnal Pendidikan
Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia, 1(7), 63-69.
Hizati, A., Syahrul, R., & Arief, E. (2018). Pengaruh Model Problem Based Learning
Berbantuan Media Gambar Berseri terhadap Keterampilan MenulisTeks Eksplanasi Siswa
Kelas VIII SMP Negeri 12 Padang. Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia, 7(1),
183-190.
Jaya, S., Syahrul, R., Ermanto. (2013). Peningkatan Keterampilan Menulis Puisi Melalui Media
Gambar Siswa Kelas X. 1 SMA Negeri 2 Kota Sungai Penuh. Bahasa, Sastra, dan
Pembelajaran, 1(2), 87-95.
Mulyadi, Atmazaki, Syahrul, R, & Agustina. (2018). The Development of Interactive
st
Multimedia E-Module on Indonesia Language Course. In: 1 International Conference on
Innovation in Education (ICoIE 2018) (pp.291-295). Atlantis Press.
Mulyani, R., Syahrul R. (2019). Pengaruh Model Pembelajaran Kooperatif Tipe Think Talk
Write (TTW) Berbantuan Media Audiovisual terhadap Keterampilan Menulis Teks
Persuasi Siswa Kelas VIII SMP Negeri 8 Padang. Jurnal Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra
Indonesia, 8(3), 374-382.
Novelti, Syahrul, R.. Ermanto, & Agustina. (2018). Developing an Instructional Model Assisted
Audio Visual Media. Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research,
Volume 263.
Ramadhan, S., Sukma, E., & Indriyani. (2019). Teacher Competence in Utilizing Digital Media
Literacy in Education. Journal of Physics: Conference Series.
Yulia D., A, Syahrul, R, & Ratna, E. (2012). Peningkatan Keterampilan Menulis Argumentasi
Siswa Kelas X Smk N 1 Batusangkar. Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia, 1(1), 339-
345.