This is a pre-print that has been submitted for peer review.
Exploring Autistic Adults’ Psychosocial Experiences Affecting Beginnings, Continuity,
and Change in Camouflaging Over Time: A Qualitative Study
Authors and Affiliations
Beatrice Rui Yi LOO, Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore (Joint First Author)
Truman Jing Yang TEO, Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore (Joint First Author)
Melanie JiaMin LIANG, Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore
Dawn-Joy LEONG, Autistic Consultant, Independent Researcher and Multi-Artist, Singapore.
Diana Weiting TAN, School of Education, Macquarie University, Australia; School of Psychological Science,
University of Western Australia, Australia; Telethon Kids Institute, Australia
Sici ZHUANG, School of Psychological Science, University of Western Australia
Laura HULL, Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College London
Lucy A. LIVINGSTON, School of Psychology, Cardiff University and Social, Genetic & Developmental
Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London
Will MANDY, Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College London
Francesca HAPPÉ, Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience, King’s College London
Iliana MAGIATI, Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore; Dr. Magiati is now at the School
of Psychological Science, University of Western Australia. (Senior Author)
Abstract
Many autistic people develop camouflaging strategies to mask or compensate for their
underlying autism-related differences in order to get by in predominantly non-autistic societies.
Autistic adults have described camouflaging as a “lifetime of conditioning to act normal”,
suggesting that camouflaging develops over the autistic person’s lifespan. Yet, very little is so
far known about the course of camouflaging motivations and behaviours over time or the
psychosocial factors that may influence autistic people’s camouflaging trajectories. In an
exploratory qualitative study within an Asian sociocultural context, we interviewed 11
Singaporean autistic adults in depth about their camouflaging experiences throughout their
lives. We aimed to better understand the beginnings, continuity and changes in their
camouflaging motivations and strategies over time, and related psychosocial influences.
Interviews were transcribed verbatim and thematically analysed. Twenty-six themes were
identified, and were organised across four phases - pre-camouflaging, beginnings, continuity,
and change over time. The earliest camouflaging motivations were predominantly relational,
linked to a negative self-identity shaped by adverse social experiences. Strategies were
increasingly complex and better integrated into one’s sense of self over time, or more
selectively engaged in. Our findings highlight the role of psychosocial pressures precipitating
camouflaging. They also emphasise the need for both individual psychological and societal-
level changes to move from pathologizing autistic differences to acceptance, understanding, and
inclusion, so as to reduce psychosocial pressures on autistic people of all ages to camouflage.
Lay Abstract
Over their lifetimes, many autistic people learn to hide their autism-related differences
in order to forge and maintain relationships, find work and live independently in largely non-
autistic societies. This masking of autistic differences is otherwise known as camouflaging.
Autistic adults have described camouflaging to be a “lifetime of conditioning, [training] to act
normal”, involving “years of effort and practice”. Yet little is known about why and how
autistic people first start to camouflage, or why and how their camouflaging behaviours
continue or change over time. We interviewed 11 Singaporean autistic adults who shared their
camouflaging experiences throughout their lives. We found that autistic adults’ earliest
motivations to camouflage were largely related to the desire or need to connect with other
people. They were also motivated by wanting to reduce or avoid difficult social experiences
(such as being teased, bullied, or socially isolated), and linked to the adults’ developing
negative beliefs about themselves. Autistic adults shared that their camouflaging behaviours
became more complex, and some actually became a part of their self-identity over time. Autistic
adults also learnt to be more selective with camouflaging as they grew older, for example hiding
their autism only in some contexts but not others. Our findings suggest that people should not
pathologise or stigmatise autistic differences, as this may put pressure on autistic individuals to
camouflage to fit into a largely non-autistic society. There is a need to move toward acceptance,
understanding, and inclusion, to reduce the pressure on autistic people to hide their autism and
many aspects of who they truly are.
Introduction
Autism is a lifelong neurodevelopmental condition characterised by difficulties,
differences, and strengths in social communication and interaction, intense and highly-focused
interests and behaviours, and atypical sensory reactivity and preferences (APA, 2013). It is
highly heterogeneous in terms of its behavioural and cognitive presentations, the extent of co-
occurring medical and mental health conditions, levels of intellectual functioning and
independence, and outcomes in adulthood (Howlin & Magiati, 2017; Kuo et al., 2018; Lord et
al., 2015; Lord et al., 2020). Autistic people are on average significantly more likely than non-
autistic people to experience social vulnerability and isolation, including bullying,
discrimination, and ostracism (Griffiths et al., 2019; Schroeder et al., 2014). Consequently,
autistic people often report poorer quality of life, well-being, and independence than their non-
autistic counterparts (see Magiati et al., 2014).
Several recent studies have suggested that some autistic people learn to cope with these
challenging social experiences by developing strategies to “mask” or “camouflage” their autism.
Camouflaging in autism has been defined as the use of strategies by autistic individuals to
minimise the visibility of their autistic traits and associated differences or difficulties (Hull et
al., 2017). Recent research has identified three broad types of camouflaging strategies (Hull et
al., 2017; Livingston et al., 2019; 2020). Masking involves hiding one’s autism-related
characteristics (e.g., minimising self-soothing behaviours). Although masking strategies do not
necessarily support active two-way social participation, they enable autistic people to blend in
and hide their autism (Hull et al., 2017; Livingston et al., 2019; 2020). Compensation is more
cognitively demanding than other strategies as it involves learning and generating new social
behaviours to fill the social and communication “gaps” between autistic and non-autistic people
(Hull et al., 2017; Livingston et al., 2019). Compensation may be shallow, for instance laughing
when others laugh after a joke without necessarily understanding why the joke was funny; or
‘deeper’, such as applying learnt social rules to interpret why a joke was funny, although the
person camouflaging might not have intuitively understood this (Livingston & Happe, 2017).
Finally, assimilation involves making attempts to avoid or manage the discomfort an autistic
person may often feel in social situations, without letting others notice that discomfort (Hull et
al., 2018).
Broadly, autistic people camouflage to adapt to their predominantly non-autistic social
environments for two main reasons: for interpersonal reasons (e.g., to form social relationships,
increase social reputation, and/or reduce negative social experiences, such as bullying, social
rejection, or stigma; see Bargiela et al., 2016; Cage & Troxell-Whitman, 2019; Livingston et al.,
2019; Pearson & Rose, 2021); and/or for conventional purposes (e.g., getting a project done at
work or school, or maintaining employment; see Cage & Troxell-Whitman, 2019; Hull et al.,
2017; Livingston & Happé, 2017). These motivations highlight that many autistic people are
acutely aware of the social demands in non-autistic social environments, and often feel
pressured to camouflage to meet these social demands (Milton, 2012; Sasson et al., 2017).
Despite camouflaging bringing several potential benefits to autistic people, such as
enabling them to form relationships and find employment (e.g., Cage & Troxell-Whitman,
2019; Livingston et al., 2019), it has also consistently been described as stressful (Cage &
Troxell-Whitman, 2019), physically and mentally exhausting (Bradley et al., 2021; Cook,
Crane, Bourne, et al., 2021; Hull et al., 2017), confusing and detrimental to one’s self-identity
(Leedham et al., 2019), and a potential barrier to timely and accurate autism diagnosis (Bargiela
et al., 2016; Begeer et al., 2013) and appropriate support (e.g., in the workplace; Livingston et
al., 2019). Cross-sectional self-report questionnaire studies to date have found that increased
camouflaging behaviours are associated with a range of poorer mental health outcomes in
autistic people, including depression, anxiety, and suicidality (Beck et al., 2020; Bernardin,
Lewis, et al., 2021; Cassidy et al., 2018, 2020; Hull, Levy, et al., 2021). Autistic people have
also often pinpointed camouflaging efforts as a major contributor to autistic burnout,
characterised by chronic exhaustion, loss of skills, intensifying of one’s autism-related traits,
reduced tolerance to stimuli, and overall reduced functioning (Higgins et al., 2021; Raymaker et
al., 2020).
Continuity and Change in Camouflaging Across the Lifespan
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-5 (DSM-5; APA, 2013)
describes autism as a lifelong condition present since the early developmental period and
recognises that autistic presentations may be hidden by strategies acquired by the autistic
individual over time to cope with the social, communication, and sensory challenges of non-
autistic environments (APA, 2013). While most camouflaging research to date has been with
autistic adults, there is increasing qualitative (Bernardin, Mason, et al., 2021; Halsall et al.,
2021; Cook et al., 2018; Tierney et al., 2016) and quantitative (Bernardin, Lewis, et al., 2021;
Corbett et al., 2021; Hull, Petrides, & Mandy, 2021) evidence that autistic children and
adolescents, as young as seven years old (Dean et al., 2016), also engage in camouflaging.
Masking autistic features during childhood and adolescence has also been suggested as a
possible reason why some autistic individuals, especially women, are only diagnosed later in
life (Gould, 2017). Autistic people have described camouflaging as a “lifetime of conditioning,
[training] to act normal” (Cage & Troxell-Whitman, 2019), involving “years of effort” and
practice (Leedham et al., 2019), suggesting that camouflaging develops over the autistic
person’s lifespan, likely beginning in childhood.
With regards to camouflaging motivations, some autistic adults have reported that social
motivations were more common in childhood and adolescence than in adulthood (Hull et al.,
2017). Indeed, the most common reasons for camouflaging reported by autistic adolescents in a
large survey study were to gain social acceptance and to avoid negative social experiences or
perceptions (Bernardin, Lewis, et al., 2021). In contrast, camouflaging for conventional reasons,
in both educational and employment settings, was more commonly described to occur in
adulthood than in childhood (Bargiela et al., 2016; Cage & Troxell-Whitman, 2019; Hull et al.,
2017), suggesting possible changes to social experiences, identity, or motivations for
camouflaging over time.
Little is known about continuity and change in camouflaging strategies over time. Late-
diagnosed autistic women have recounted initially being passive and compliant in their primary
school years as a way to blend in and hide their differences (Bargiela et al., 2016). Additionally,
an observational study found that school-aged autistic girls often play in close proximity to their
peers but not always in active engagement with them (Dean et al., 2016), suggesting that some
autistic girls (and potentially boys) may engage in early camouflaging strategies that involve
hiding one’s autistic characteristics. In autistic adults, a variety of camouflaging strategies have
been described, including masking, shallow and deep compensation, and assimilation (Hull et
al, 2018; Livingston et al., 2020). In a novel study using Interpersonal Process Recall
methodology, Cook, Crane, Hull, and colleagues (2021) identified 38 camouflaging behaviours
used by autistic adults in daily interactions, some of which overlapped with those identified in
previous camouflaging research, while others were newly reported, such as the use of
deferential engagement (e.g., apologising or offering excuses for social missteps or poor social
performance), minimising social risks, and reciprocal social behaviours. Yet, very little is
known about what drives the emergence and development of different camouflaging behaviours
over time, as to the best of our knowledge, no study to date has systematically explored autistic
people’s camouflaging beginnings and trajectories. In qualitative studies to date, autistic adults
have not been invited specifically to recall and reflect on their earliest motivations to
camouflage or how these motivations have evolved in their lives over time, though one study
revealed qualitative themes related to how camouflaging strategies may have changed over
time (Livingston, Shah, and Happé, 2019). Furthermore, the psychosocial circumstances or
experiences that may have influenced the emergence and trajectory of camouflaging behaviours
in autistic people have yet to be systematically explored.
The Present Study
In the present study, we explored the emergence of and developmental trajectories in
camouflaging motivations and strategies over time through in-depth qualitative interviews.
Psychological processes and social circumstances and experiences may differ - some factors
may remain central to an autistic person’s camouflaging experience over time, while the
influence of others may change across different periods of their life (Bronfenbrenner, 1994;
Lehman et al., 2017). Drawing from a dynamic biopsychosocial framework (Lehman et al.,
2017), we explored intra-individual and sociocultural influences on the beginnings and
development of autistic camouflaging over time. Exploring camouflaging developmentally and
within a psychosocial framework may help to identify (i) early risk or protective psychological,
developmental, and/or social experiences and (ii) specific periods or social contexts in which
autistic people are more likely to experience pressures to camouflage. Such knowledge and
understanding could in turn help reduce the pressure on autistic people to camouflage, and/or
alleviate the costs to their mental wellbeing when engaging in camouflaging behaviours.
Thus, the present qualitative study aimed to investigate the following research questions:
(1) What are autistic adults’ earliest recollections of the emergence of their
camouflaging behaviours? And what individual psychological and sociocultural experiences/
circumstances motivated them to start camouflaging?
(2) In what ways do autistic adults’ camouflaging behaviours and motivations remain
stable or develop and change over time? And more specifically, what individual characteristics
or social contexts/ psychological experiences influenced continuity and change in their
camouflaging motivations and strategies over time?
Further, whilst the present study is not a direct investigation of the cultural effects on
camouflaging, we explored these questions by interviewing Singaporean autistic adults within
an Asian sociocultural context, whereas most, if not all, studies to date have been conducted in
predominantly Western countries (mostly in the UK, US, and Australia). Thus, the themes and
subthemes derived may also provide some insights into the potential influences of one’s broader
socio-cultural environment on camouflaging motivations.
Method
Participants
Participants (i) were at least 21 years old , (ii) reported having received a formal autism
diagnosis by a qualified professional in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, and (iii) reported
having engaged in or currently engaging in camouflaging behaviours on a brief screening
question before the interview. Individuals who did not have adequate capacity to provide
informed consent, could not verbally describe their experiences in English, or reported
experiencing acute mental health difficulties currently or within the last six months were not
included in the study.
Participants were recruited via personal and professional contacts of the study
investigators, social media, support groups for autistic adults in Singapore, and by contacting
autistic participants from a previous study by the last author who had given consent to be
contacted about future studies. Interested participants completed a brief pre-screening
questionnaire to ensure they met the above-mentioned inclusion criteria. Eleven autistic adults
The age when a person is legally considered an adult in Singapore, where this study took place, by common law
is 21 years old.
Individuals who responded “yes” to a screening question asking if they had experienced significant stress, severe
emotional distress, abuse in a current relationship, or thoughts of harming themselves in the last six months were
excluded from the study. This was because the student interviewers (first and second authors) were not trained or
qualified to manage possible high-risk information being shared. Only two autistic adults who expressed interest in
the study were excluded for this reason, and appropriate contacts for services and supports were provided to them.
Participants’ Characteristics (N = 11)
N or Mean (SD) [Range]
Gender
Male 9
Female 2
Ethnicity
Chinese 10
Malay 1
Age (years) 30.3 (7.2) [22-45]
Age at diagnosis (years) 18.5 (11) [3-44]
Autism diagnosis
Autism 3
Asperger’s Syndrome 6
Autism Spectrum Disorder and 2
Asperger’s Syndrome
Highest education level attained
Apprenticeship/College/Diploma 5
Undergraduate degree 5
Postgraduate degree 1
Employment status
Student 4
Unemployed 1
Full-time employment 6
Autistic traits
AQ-Short Total Scorec (min-max 80.3 (11.2) [69-97]
score range 28-112)
Camouflaging Behaviours
CAT-Q Total Score (min-max score 102.9 (11.2) [81-116]
range 25-175)
a Singapore is a multi-ethnic society and citizens comprise four main racial groups: Chinese (76%), Malay (15%), Indian (7%),
Participants were allowed to select as many diagnoses as applied to them. Two participants indicated a diagnosis of Autism
Spectrum Disorder in addition to their diagnosis of Asperger’s Syndrome.
cAQ-Short = Autism-Spectrum Quotient (Short Form; Hoekstra et al., 2011); CAT-Q = Camouflaging of Autistic Traits
Questionnaire (Hull et al., 2018).
Materials and Measures
Demographics, Autistic Traits, and Camouflaging Measures
Then, they completed the 28-item Autism-Spectrum Quotient Short (AQ-Short;
Hoekstra et al., 2011; total score range 28-112; higher scores indicate greater autistic traits; see
.97 and a specificity of .82 (Hoekstra et al., 2011) in differentiating autistic from non-autistic
people; all participants’ self-reported ratings were > 65.
Finally, participants completed the Camouflaging Autistic Traits Questionnaire (CAT-
Q; Hull et al., 2018) to confirm that participants have engaged in at least some camouflaging
behaviours. The CAT-Q comprises 25 items and has a total and three-factor subscale scores –
Compensation, Masking, and Assimilation. Each item is rated on a 7-point Likert scale from 1
(strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree; total score range 25-175; higher scores indicate more
camouflaging). The CAT-Q was initially validated in a sample of autistic (n = 306) and non-
autistic adults (n = 400) with the full scale demonstrating excellent internal consistency (α =
.94) and good test-retest reliability in an autistic subsample (n = 30) over three months
(Pearson’s r = .77; Hull et al., 2018).
Interview Guide
To develop the interview guide, we first extensively reviewed the camouflaging
qualitative research published to date to identify gaps in the existing literature and pinpoint
pertinent aspects of an autistic individual’s camouflaging experiences to be further explored in
depth with regards to the beginnings, continuity, and change in autistic camouflaging over time.
Next, the first, second, and last authors, in consultation with and with guidance from our autistic
consultant (fourth author, XX), developed a draft interview guide which they discussed and
refined several times before obtaining inputs from and finalising with the other authors.
The interview guide was organised into two parts. In Part 1, participants’ earliest
recollections of camouflaging motivations and strategies were explored; in Part 2, participants
were invited to recollect and reflect on their trajectories of camouflaging over time, specifically
how their camouflaging has remained the same or changed over time and across different social
contexts during their childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Each of the two interview parts
contained an opening question that was broad and open-ended, followed by prompting
questions to facilitate greater detail of experiences and perspectives, used flexibly if and as
needed (see Appendix 1 for the opening questions and sample follow-up questions within each
main interview segment).
Procedure
This study was granted ethical approval by the [name of university withheld for blind
peer review] (Ref. Number S-19-363).
Three days before the interview, participants were emailed a link to the main interview
questions so that they could prepare if they wished to. We also asked if they required any
accommodations that we could reasonably provide during the interview (e.g., interview room
lighting, map directions, visual printouts of the questions). On the day of the interview,
participants gave informed consent and completed the self-report measures before being
interviewed.
Interviews were conducted in a quiet and private room at a training psychology clinic by
the first and second authors guided and supervised by the senior author. As camouflaging is a
highly personal experience and the interview potentially touched on sensitive or distressing
past/ current social experiences, breaks were offered whenever needed. Interviews lasted no
longer than 90 minutes (range 60-90 minutes), and all were recorded and transcribed verbatim.
Finally, participants were debriefed and provided with an information sheet detailing
mental health resources and local services from which they could seek support if needed.
Participants received $30 Singapore dollars for their participation via electronic transfer or in
grocery vouchers and were additionally reimbursed up to $20 Singapore dollars for
transportation costs.
Thematic Analysis
All 11 interviews were transcribed verbatim, and the data were then coded and
interpreted following the six phases of reflexive thematic analysis by Braun and Clarke (2006;
see also Braun & Clarke, 2019). As there are currently no specific empirical data or theories
that describe the developmental trajectories of camouflaging in autistic individuals, transcripts
were analysed through an inductive process, where codes and themes were generated and
derived from descriptions in the data, rather than grounded in any pre-established theoretical
framework. Themes were identified semantically and explicitly, but some a priori organisation
was applied in the way the themes were structured into the two main domains of the study’s
research questions (Motivations/ Pressures; Strategies) and across time/ trajectory (pre-
camouflaging, beginnings, continuity, and change). Some a priori terminology was also used
(i.e., the masking, compensation, and assimilation terms/ constructs identified by Hull et al,
2018; Livingston et al., 2019) when the identified data themes were consistent with these terms.
In terms of the researchers’ positionality, XX is an autistic researcher and artist and her
lived experience of being autistic may have influenced her positionality. All researchers have
received professional training in psychology. Some of the authors have lived or are living in
Singapore and thus their positionality may have been influenced by their experiences of its
sociocultural context (XX, XX, XX, XX, XX, XX). The authors have consulted with the autistic
consultant, XX, on the process and goals of the current study and view autism through a social
model of disability, which could steer us towards identifying themes that consider psychosocial
influences on and consequences of autistic individuals' camouflaging behaviour and trajectories.
In the first cycle of coding, and guided by the study’s broad research questions, the first
five interview transcripts were initially independently coded by XX and XX. Following this,
data extracts and corresponding initial codes were discussed extensively between XX and XX
and then reviewed and discussed in detail with XX until consensus was reached. After further
consultation with XX, the coding scheme’s themes were provisionally finalised. These were
then applied to the remaining transcripts in the second cycle of coding, again independently
coded by the two first authors and discussed extensively with the last author until consensus
was reached. Any further themes derived from the remaining manuscripts were integrated into
the coding scheme, which was revised as necessary to ensure that the coding represented the
primary content of all interviews comprehensively and parsimoniously. Before finalising the
coding of the interviews, another consultation took place with XX to ensure relevance,
accuracy, and clarity.
Community Involvement
The interview guide was developed in consultation with the fourth author (XX), an
autistic researcher, advocate, and multi-artist, who shared her own experiences and perspectives
on her camouflaging trajectory, as well as her understanding of other autistic adults’ shared
experiences, and who provided input and guidance on the ethical appropriateness, relevance,
and clarity of the interview guide and questions for autistic adults. As summarised in the section
above, XX also provided her input and thoughts on the themes derived from our thematic
analysis which guided the revisions and final decisions with regards to the coding scheme.
Results
The interview guide was organised into questions focusing on motivations and questions
on strategies, and so thematic analysis was carried out within each of these two domains.
Themes
derived from the thematic analysis along the four developmental stages (pre-camouflaging,
beginnings of camouflaging, continuity of camouflaging over time, and change in camouflaging
over time).
Overall Thematic Map of all Themes Relating to Camouflaging Motivations and Strategies
Note. The thematic map depicts themes derived across four stages of camouflaging over time (black arrow left to right: pre-camouflaging,
beginnings, continuity, and change). The two domains (motivations and pressures; strategies) are represented by coloured rectangles.
Pre-Camouflaging
I was alright being different. Most participants (n = 9) recalled a phase in their
childhood, mostly their preschool or early primary school years when they were “alright being
different”. While many could recall feeling that they were in some ways different from others,
most reported that they did not find their social differences impairing or concerning – “I didn’t
see the lack of interaction as a downside” [P02]. Others expressed a liking for being left to their
passions and interests, that they “just weren’t bothered at all” [P06], while another participant
said that “bullying left [him] isolated, which [he] was actually pretty happy with [being left
alone]” [P04].
Some participants also recalled viewing their differences positively, expressing a
distaste for what their peers were interested in, and for the expectations that were placed on
them to be like others. A participant explained, “I don’t like being normal, doing what everyone
else is doing. That’s boring. So sometimes I purposely did something different, I liked that”
[P09].
I didn’t know I was autistic. All but two of our participants were diagnosed with
autism in adolescence or adulthood. Many reported that their parents were unaware of their
autism or autism in general. For some, their intense interests were understood as an indication
of exceptional intellect when they were children. A late-diagnosed participant recounted, “when
I was in kindergarten, my parents kind of thought that I was going to be some genius kid
because I was so far ahead. [...] they saw my special interest as just another thing that maybe
smart kids are interested in” [P01]. Labels such as “bookworm” or “nerd” [P04] were neutral or
sometimes positively perceived and did not place pressure on our participants to change the way
they were through camouflaging.
Motivations and Pressures to Camouflage
Beginnings of camouflaging: I started camouflaging because…
I began to feel inferior. Not knowing they were autistic when they were younger meant
that most of our participants did not initially understand the reasons why they felt different
from others, and this was detrimental to their self-confidence and self-image over time, leaving
many feeling inferior to others. While some labels in the earlier years, usually in late primary
school (i.e., ages 9-12 years), were more neutral or even somewhat positive in connotation
(e.g., bookworm, genius kid), participants reported increasingly feeling like they were the ones
that were “abnormal”, “wrong”, and this was what prompted them to try to “fix” things through
camouflaging.
Not to pass off as stupid, I just laughed along, like smile, laugh along, as if I understood
what they’re saying, but actually I didn’t understand anything they were saying. [P03]
There was also a motivation to camouflage to stay out of people’s attention and not
stand out in order to get by. At some point, most participants said they were made aware that
their behaviours were not considered “normal”. They would “try not to be noticed” [P02] and
attempted to behave in ways that would reduce ridicule or punishment from others. One
participant diagnosed in childhood recalled that “the foundations of my camouflaging was that
I didn’t want people to know [I was autistic]” [P11].
I wanted friends. Most participants (n = 7) expressed that a desire to form and maintain
friendships played a part in precipitating their earliest attempts to camouflage. Having
experienced that behaving as they naturally would, “autistically”, often resulted in them being
excluded from social groups, many recalled beginning to hide their autistic behaviours in order
to fit in and be accepted.
I wanted to join them and I wanted to be accepted. I wanted to belong. [P03]
In the same vein, seven participants reported one of their earliest social motivations to
camouflage was to avoid getting ostracised by their classmates during their primary or
secondary school years. Many participants recounted how they were frequently teased and
bullied, often for behaving “autistically”. Camouflaging was a strategy they employed to
protect themselves, to “stop the bullying and at least have some friends so [they] wouldn’t feel
so depressed” [P03].
I was told to. More than half of the autistic adults in our study recalled being pressured
to camouflage because adult figures in their lives (e.g., parents, teachers, therapists) told them
“to be more like others” [P01]. Some participants were pressured to hide their autistic
characteristics due to the negative reactions of adults if they behaved otherwise, for example,
they reported receiving comments such as “don’t embarrass me” [P03], “you’re strange” [P05].
Autism was stigmatising. Two participants described experiencing stigma attached to
being autistic in Singapore, and this seemed to be more relevant in adolescence or adulthood
following diagnosis. One described how his family would “try so hard to normalise [him]…
partly because of the Asian culture of [saving] face” [P03], where the colloquial term “saving
face” refers to the avoidance of being humiliated or disgraced. Another suggested that “even
today, people think that autism is like an attitude problem” [P06]. There was often a lack of
understanding surrounding autism, and frequent collective negative attitudes about autistic
people motivated them to start camouflaging.
Continuity: I continue to camouflage because…
I still want friends. Camouflaging for social connections and friendships continued to
be a motivation in adult life. Some described already having a handful of friends or a best
friend. Yet even with close friends, some participants also described a motivation to
camouflage at times, so that “[their] friends’ lives become easier”, because “if I [the autistic
person] rely on others to accommodate [me] too much, they [non-autistic friends] will start to
move away. It’s not their fault also, everyone has limited energy” [P08].
I’m still told to hide my autism. For a handful of participants, their families continued
to remind them of socially appropriate behaviours when they were observed to display
behaviours that were deemed to be ‘autistic’ and socially inappropriate.
And actually, the telling you what to do (by my parents) even spilled into adulthood
also. Like especially before social events. [P03]
Autism is still stigmatising. As adults, most of our participants described the continuing
persistent stigma attached to being autistic. One participant explained the strong emphasis on
conformity in Singaporean culture and compared their experience of societal attitudes towards
conformity and diversity in Singapore versus the UK, explaining that “people here [in
Singapore] are more judgemental and more prejudiced. If we do not really behave in a way
that’s the norm, people immediately call you out on that. In the UK, they didn’t really care
what you do, as long as you mind your manners” [P01].
Camouflaging has become a part of me now. Camouflaging evolved to become much
more natural and automatic for many adults (n = 7) in our study. One participant likened this
process to “learning how to ride a bike, like procedural memory” [P08]. One participant
explained that camouflaging had become so ingrained that it was difficult to stop or reduce
despite feeling positive about being autistic.
I became overly positive of autism, to the extent that it became like, what I call,
Asperger’s Supremacy. [...] Actually, surprisingly I think it {referring to Asperger
Supremacy} didn’t do that much. […] On one hand, I was thinking autism is superior
but on the other hand, the old habits {referring to camouflaging} continued to carry
through without being questioned. [P10]
Change in motivations to camouflage: I now camouflage because…
I want romance too. Three participants reported a desire for romantic connection that
emerged as a motivation for camouflaging, and all three reported camouflaging within their
romantic relationships, which was especially demanding and exhausting. They “enjoyed being
in the company of [their partners], but at the same time [they were] also drained” [P01].
It just makes my life ‘easier’. More than half the participants explained that
camouflaging makes their adult lives more manageable in some ways. Adopting a pragmatic
and seemingly resigned view of why they now camouflage in their adult years, some
participants explained that “it’s just easier for one person to try and adapt instead of waiting for
society to adapt to you” [P05]. For some participants, being their autistic selves led to more
conflict, while autism disclosure led to pressures to tediously explain autism and its
complexities and nuances to others. One participant shared his frustrations as such – “I cannot
be explaining what autism is to every single person I meet, right? I have more productive things
to do. So then, what I do is still make the decision to camouflage” [P08]. Getting by through
the use of camouflaging was described to be at times less effortful and a more pragmatic option
as compared to having to educate or explain one’s differences to other people.
I want to leave a good impression. In adulthood, participants also shared concerns
about their first impressions and reputation amongst their more distal community (e.g.,
acquaintances, university schoolmates). One participant shared that “the biggest reason why
[they] camouflage” is that “over time [they] get more accepted by the generally large
community” and considers this a “victory” won [P02]. Participants strived to build a good
reputation and leave positive first impressions on others, particularly in new social settings.
Junior college was supposed to be a new start for me [...] Basically I was trying to
make myself give off a positive, or at least a neutral impression, so that I don’t come off
as annoying at the start. [P06]
I need to get things done. Most of our participants commonly felt the need to
camouflage for practical/ functional purposes in adulthood, as more formal demands in college/
university or work emerged. Camouflaging was to them their best option for working with
others and completing assignments, particularly when having to work in a team.
You need to work with people, and you need to interact with people. You can’t just be
yourself and expect people to be able to be okay with that. [P01]
Camouflaging keeps me safe. Two participants mentioned that, as adults, camouflaging
served to prevent possible conflict and reduce autistic people’s vulnerability in interpersonal
situations, and also to prevent at times unwelcome sexual advances by masking and putting up
a front. For example, one participant said that they engaged in camouflaging more after
realising that “when others realise you take things at face value, they take advantage of you”
[P06].
Changes in motivations and pressures to camouflage: I now camouflage less
because…
I now embrace being autistic. Many participants (n = 7) described a shift towards
accepting their autistic identity. In particular, some expressed feeling “proud to be autistic” and
“having better self-esteem”, taking the view that “society, our family shouldn’t expect us to
hide, and people should just allow us to be ourselves” [P03]. This same participant noted that
“this attitude” of being “proud to be autistic” only strengthened after “connecting with other
autistics” in his adulthood [P03]. Another noted that “receiving my autism diagnosis was
definitely the first step towards accepting myself as I am” [P05]. Participants shared an
increased comfort with being different and a reduced desire to camouflage.
Accepting their autistic identity also included an affirmation of the unique and
individual strengths of their autism. One example given was that “people say one thing and
mean another. Technically, it’s a deficit that I don’t perceive those hidden meanings, but I like
that that’s how I see things. I feel that is a better way” [P09]. Rather than “always being
worried about hiding” [P11] their social communication differences and difficulties, some
participants described gradually choosing to invest time and energy into honing the strengths
they have identified within themselves, some of which they attribute to being autistic.
I decide if and when I want to camouflage. Some participants reflected on developing
increased autonomy over whether or not, when, with whom, and how they camouflage over
time. One described having “learnt different ways to camouflage and then decided which [they]
wanted to use” [P09]. After years of camouflaging, some others then “decided that [they] didn’t
want to do it anymore” [P03, P05]. In fact, some individuals talked about integrating disclosure
alongside their camouflaging strategies, choosing to disclose in some situations with particular
groups of people, but not disclosing and instead camouflaging in other contexts. One autistic
adult shared that, although he generally preferred not to “label himself [as autistic] unless
necessary” [P06] in official documents such as job applications (i.e., camouflaging in a sense),
he had still privately disclosed his autism to his professors to receive accommodations in
university.
Others accept and accommodate my needs. Most participants (n = 10) mentioned that
over time they found others who were “not just accepting, but appreciated the things that come
with being autistic”, such as being “very logical and less emotionally charged” [P09], which led
to less camouflaging with these friends. Often, friends who understood and validated their
needs would plainly “tell [them] or model the way” when “[they] didn’t know half the
unwritten rules of social interactions” [P08] such that they felt comfortable enough not to have
to camouflage as much around them.
Camouflaging Strategies Over Time
Beginnings: Earliest camouflaging strategies.
Masking was the earliest camouflaging strategy. Most participants (n = 7) described
masking (Hull et al., 2017) as their earliest/ first strategy to camouflage their differences, even
if they did not yet explicitly associate these differences with being autistic. Masking involved
simple strategies initially which participants devised for themselves to follow, such as
inhibiting talking about their passions or making their self-soothing stimming behaviours less
visible to others. These earlier masking strategies allowed participants to “blend in subtly so no
one would notice me, like putting a very big metal sheet in front of me” [P11].
Compensation. Participants reported a variety of compensatory strategies, such as
showing more interest than they truly felt in social interactions or others, copying others’ social
or communication mannerisms, and, most commonly, purposefully regulating their eye contact,
which “was one of the first things that [they] learnt” [P09]. One participant hoped “that reading
the newspaper will at least give [him] some topics to talk about”, which he used to strike up
conversations in school [P03]. Early compensation strategies described by our participants
tended to be less flexible and applied similarly across various circumstances (akin to ‘shallow’
compensation in the framework proposed by Livingston and Happé, 2017).
Assimilation through escape/ avoidance. Most often in a school context, almost half
the participants (n = 5) chose at times to remove themselves from and avoid being involved in
difficult social situations, which served the purpose of hiding their discomfort and distress at
being in social situations.
I just took a lot of offs [days off - sick leave] from school. But I’m just pretending.
Because I was just too tired of trying to do this day in, day out. Trying to face people
day in, day out. [P06]
Continuity: Early camouflaging strategies I continue to use.
Masking. Masking persisted into later phases of life particularly in formal work
contexts, but also in social contexts. Participants described continuing to mask regularly, such
as by inhibiting stimming behaviours or making efforts to speak less extensively about their
interests.
When I feel the urge to talk, then I try not to talk, I try to sit there and do my own work.
[P03]
Compensation. Participants described growing more accustomed to using different
compensation strategies, and that their compensation strategies became more complex, less
effortful, and more flexible over time.
When social interaction comes I will always try to see how the person talks and
behaves. Their thinking process also. I dive right deep into that. [...] And react to it
accordingly. I have developed this over time because I like to process a lot. How can I
avoid this in the future? Is it something that I have done, or something about me that
they are just picking out? So that allowed me to evaluate people more, how they behave,
and react accordingly. [P11]
Assimilation through escape/ avoidance. Some participants continued to use escape or
avoidance as a way to conceal and manage their discomfort and to cope with the toll of trying
to fit in and constantly hide their autism in social interactions, for example, “going to the toilet
and just staying inside for 15-20 minutes to recharge” [P01]. Some avoided social situations as
they were aware of their emotional needs, and took intentional breaks from social interaction
when needed, minimising the visibility of their differences to others by preventing a meltdown.
Change: How my camouflaging strategies developed or changed over time.
Masking became more complex over time. While earlier masking involved hiding
oneself by fading into the background, more complex masking strategies emerged in adulthood.
Instead of scripting responses, for example, one autistic adult described adjusting personas to
suit various contexts – he was “flamboyant” and outgoing with close friends but assumed
another distinct personality with colleagues and acquaintances, “a more aloof kind of persona
so they don’t push themselves too much on you” [P04].
Compensation became more complex over time. About a third of our participants
explicitly talked about using a deliberate combination of various sources of information (e.g.,
logic, tone of voice) to develop and employ ‘deeper’ alternative cognitive routes to process and
understand social situations. Participants also recounted using what they recognised as
strengths of being an autistic individual to facilitate the use of some compensation strategies.
One participant shared that “I notice patterns and use these patterns to tell my friends about
their thinking patterns and insecurities, and that wins friends” [P06]. Identifying patterns to
make sense of social behaviour and others’ thoughts, “like a formula” [P09], was also
commonly mentioned, suggesting deeper and more sophisticated compensation strategies over
time.
I sometimes choose disclosure over camouflaging now. In direct opposition to
camouflaging, disclosing one's autistic diagnosis was a change that emerged only in adulthood
for our participants, although it should be noted that many were diagnosed late in adolescence
or adulthood and it is possible that a different pattern could be found for people diagnosed as
children, who may be more used to disclosing their autism earlier on in their lives. Five autistic
adults talked about opting for disclosure, and they all shared positive outcomes of disclosing
their autistic identity, such as increased understanding and accommodation of their needs
amongst friends and colleagues. One participant [P04] decided to be honest about being autistic
at job interviews so that he would not “have to worry about everything” and found that “the
interviews actually went okay”. He took the time to explain his need for support in social
situations sometimes, such as “[needing] to set up some sort of structure for collaborative work
and make sure everyone sticks to the structure”. Another participant worried about the outcome
of letting classmates know of their diagnosis, but shared their surprise in the following quote:
I am so glad that my psychologist encouraged me to tell the class I was autistic because
they went out of their way to include me in everything. […] They were very patient, to
the point where I jokingly called them my “fellowship”... they were literally a case of
“safe space”. [P07]
I now select environments to suit my needs. Lastly, many participants also described
more carefully selecting their social or formal environments now to better suit their needs,
playing to their strengths rather than their difficulties. This reduced the need to camouflage in
these environments, as participants were often more comfortable to be their authentic selves.
One participant concluded that “a research job is probably one of the few places you can wear
more casual clothes”, which suited his sensory needs [P05]. Another learnt to “negotiate with
[his] boss not to get him to front too many customers”, such that he would do so “only when
there was no one else to do it” [P10].
Discussion
This study aimed to explore the beginnings, continuity, and change in camouflaging
motivations and strategies through in-depth qualitative interviews that invited participants to
recall and reflect on their camouflaging experiences throughout their lives.
Beginnings: The Emergence of Early Camouflaging Behaviours
Often during preschool or early primary school years, most participants described
initially not feeling a need or pressure to camouflage, with some being unaware of their
differences, preferring to spend time alone, or not initially facing pressures from their caregivers
to adjust their behaviours, as their social differences at the time were perceived by their parents
as personality differences or as a sign of intelligence and superiority.
Yet, for many autistic adults, motivations to blend in, which were largely social in
nature, soon emerged during the later primary or early secondary school years and settings. In
contrast to their earlier comfort with being different, many participants began “pretending to be
normal” as feelings of inferiority to their peers developed. Participants’ accounts suggested that
these earliest emerging motivations to camouflage were linked to a negative self-identity they
developed as a consequence of distressing and adverse social experiences. They described being
bullied and ostracised because of their social differences or for their seemingly “unusual”
interests, sharing experiences common to many other autistic people (e.g., Cappadocia et al.,
2012; Griffiths et al., 2019). Parents’ and teachers’ constant urging to “be more like” their peers
and to act and interact like them, were commonly reported by participants. Drawing from the
biopsychosocial conceptualisation of health and disease (see Bolton & Gillett, 2019; Engel,
1977), this pathologizing and stigmatisation of autism and autistic differences, alongside
consistent negative responses from others, can negatively impact an autistic person’s
construction of their self-identity (Humphrey & Lewis, 2008; Zahavi, 2010, as cited in Huang et
al., 2017). Our participants reported internalising negative labels, such as being “stupid” and
“abnormal”, since childhood. As these experiences in childhood increasingly signalled to the
autistic child that their social or behavioural differences were a negative aspect of their identity,
camouflaging seemed to emerge as a “remedy” to hide these “negative” differences, to manage
or reduce social rejection and its associated emotional distress. Indeed, camouflaging can be
conceptualised as a stigma-management strategy involving the concealment of one’s autistic
identity in response to autism-related stigma (Botha et al., 2020; Cage & Troxell-Whitman,
2019; Pearson & Rose, 2021; Perry et al., 2021). The emergence of the earliest camouflaging
Integrated Trajectories of Camouflaging Behaviour Over Time and Their Associated
Psychosocial Influences based on our participants’ interview data
Camouflaging Continued and Evolved Over Time, Becoming More “Complex”, “Deeper”
and More “Integrated” to an Autistic Adult’s Identity
Camouflaging Became More Complex and Deeper Over Time
Our participants told us that masking, compensation, and assimilation strategies emerged
as their earliest camouflaging strategies, with masking being the most common early strategy;
these strategies continued but also evolved over time for some of our participants to become
their autistic strengths, for example, acute visual processing, sensitivity to patterns, and good
recall, to make sense of novel social situations over time, to more accurately interpret others’
social cues, create social rules and systems, and to adjust their autistic behaviours accordingly.
This process of learning to camouflage by using autistic strengths was viewed positively by
participants in our study; developing a more sophisticated and flexible form of camouflaging
was often coupled with more perceived “success” of camouflaging over time and a feeling of
camouflaging becoming “easier” and less effortful.
Autistic adults in a study by Schneid and Raz (2020) also considered that a “deeper”
form of camouflaging - involving seeking and understanding the meaning of social interactions
– was better than “imitation” as in shallow camouflaging (e.g., laughing when others laugh
without understanding why), which to them represented a coerced way of blending into the
social environment. Our findings are consistent with those of Schneid and Raz and suggest that
learning to identify and use autistic strengths may facilitate camouflaging with deeper
understanding, and consequently could be viewed as a useful social “skill” that could be
acquired over time. It is possible that such an approach to camouflaging may be less taxing and
potentially less linked to autistic burnout and poor mental wellbeing, although this hypothesis
needs to be empirically investigated.
Camouflaging Became More “Integrated” to an Autistic Adult’s Self-Identity Over Time
Autistic adults in our study often considered their earliest camouflaging attempts as
confusing, effortful, and largely prescribed by authority figures, similar to experiences shared
by other autistic adults in the literature (e.g., Bargiela et al., 2016; Hull et al., 2017). At the
same time, many of our participants (7 of 11) also described camouflaging as becoming more
integrated into their autistic self-identity over time, as detailed by the theme “Camouflaging has
and “automatic”, resonating with experiences of autistic adults in other qualitative studies
(Bradley et al., 2021; Cage & Troxell-Whitman, 2019; Cook, Crane, Bourne, et al., 2021; Miller
et al., 2021). Many of our participants viewed this as an adaptive change from their earlier much
more pressurising and taxing camouflaging efforts. One participant put it this way,
“camouflaging is not about masking or pretending, […] it’s just a natural me being me in a way
that fits in with other people, but without losing my true self. It’s something that neurotypicals
attain at a very early age”. This shares a striking similarity to impression management by non-
autistic people, which involves adjusting self-presentations in different social contexts and for
different social purposes, but without the sense of compromising one’s core “true” sense of self,
a view that has been expressed by other autistic adults (Schneid & Raz, 2020), however
empirical investigations attempting to explore overlaps and differences between camouflaging
and impression management are currently lacking and needed.
However, some autistic adults may not experience automatisation of camouflaging
behaviours and may instead find it a constant struggle to know how to camouflage and do so
successfully (Cook, Crane, Bourne, et al., 2021; Livingston et al., 2019). Camouflaging may
even become increasingly difficult with age (Miller et al., 2021), and some autistic individuals
may have a reduced capacity to camouflage due to experiences of autistic burnout from
accumulated life stressors (Higgins et al., 2021; Raymaker et al., 2020). Alternatively, for those
who are able to camouflage automatically and unconsciously, this could potentially lead to a
loss of sense of self when their ‘masked’ and true selves become so intricately intertwined with
one another (Miller et al., 2021). Integrating the above studies’ findings with our own, there
appears to be a large variation in autistic adults’ camouflaging experiences and attitudes, with
some viewing camouflaging as akin to impression management and able to get better at it with
practice, but others finding it a continual challenge and/or detrimental to their identity. Such
variation may relate to the extent to which one engages in camouflaging, the type of
camouflaging (e.g., superficial social behaviours, hiding fundamental aspects of oneself), or the
outcome (e.g., degree of success) of camouflaging attempts.
Of note, all our participants were of Asian ethnicity (10 of 11 were Asian Chinese) and
had resided in Singapore for most of their lives. According to Hofstede’s (2011) Model of
Cultural Dimensions, the Singaporean society subscribes to a largely collectivist culture
(“Hofstede Insights”, n.d., para. 3), where people identify foremostly as belonging to an in-
group (e.g., country, family, organisation), and where society values maintaining group
harmony over one’s individuality, such that the transgression of norms can lead to feelings of
shame. Growing up and being socialised in a more collectivist society, it is perhaps not
surprising that camouflaging was viewed by several autistic adults in our study as a skill to
“improve”, since this may have led to social reward or reduced social rejection (i.e., being
“good” at camouflaging was beneficial to them). While this cultural context may have
contributed to participants considering some camouflaging behaviours as adaptive and
necessary, it is possible that sociocultural pressures have bred, to some extent, internalised
ableism for some of our participants (Silverman, 2019) - that they have internalised believing
that social acceptance is possible only for autistic people who are able to “fix” themselves to fit
into “typical” society’s moulds. As camouflaging is often a socially motivated behaviour,
exploring broader sociocultural influences in motivations for camouflaging across different
societies/ countries will likely be a worthwhile future research endeavour in better
understanding the more distal sociocultural correlates of camouflaging.
Camouflaging Reduced Over Time
Lastly, a key change in adulthood for some participants was a shift towards choosing
disclosure of their autism over camouflaging at times and experiencing reduced pressure to
negative association between age and CAT-Q scores, and Livingston et al. (2019), who report
on a subgroup of autistic people who use fewer compensatory strategies over time). Reduced
camouflaging over time may also be related to autistic adults more actively seeking out
environments that are more suited to their needs and authentic selves, akin to accommodation
described by Livingston and colleagues (2020). When an autistic person communicates their
inner differences and needs to others, while clarifying others’ misconceptions and
misunderstandings, their autistic differences become legitimised, paving the way for them and
for others to accept autism as a different identity, without stigma (Schneid and Raz, 2020).
Many participants described that this change was linked to a shift towards embracing a
more positive self-identity over time – as captured by the theme “I now embrace being autistic”
- in addition to increased appreciation of autism as diversity not deficit, greater self-compassion,
and re-evaluating others’ standards of social “normalcy”. This is consistent with Cage and
Troxell-Whitman’s (2020) finding that a stronger autistic identity was linked to greater autism
disclosure, which in turn led to reduced engagement in camouflaging. Participants in our study
did not always explicitly detail how this positive autistic self-identity developed over time,
although parts of this process were attributed to (a) individual psychological changes, and (b)
positive social experiences that increasingly reinforced their self-worth as an autistic person.
Relating to individual psychological changes, some participants shared that obtaining their
autism diagnosis in later life was a key experience that helped them begin a gradual process of
greater self-acceptance. All but two of our participants were late-diagnosed in adolescence or
adulthood, and for a majority, their diagnosis marked the beginning of understanding the
reasons for, and accepting, their differences, and then also understanding and identifying with
the strengths of being autistic, in line with the process of identity-building described in recent
studies of late-diagnosed autistic women (Bargiela et al., 2016; Leedham et al., 2019). In
relation to positive social experiences, about half of our participants described finding an “inner
circle” of friends – people who knew of their diagnosis, accepted them for who they were, and
with whom participants did not feel the pressure or need to camouflage. Indeed, autistic people
have reported developing a positive sense of identity due to their ability to maintain trusting and
authentic relationships with others (Cribb et al., 2019). Furthermore, all participants in our study
who had disclosed being autistic generally reported obtaining accommodations and supports at
school or at work, and increased emotional support and understanding of their differences and
difficulties by peers. This fits with findings from a study by Sasson and Morrison (2019) that
non-autistic people’s first impressions of autistic adults improved with diagnostic disclosure and
with increased autism knowledge. Overall, our findings echo recent qualitative studies that
suggest that the transition to reduced camouflaging over time stems from a process of self-
acceptance (aided by an autism diagnosis for some) and other-acceptance (Bradley et al., 2021;
Cook, Crane, Bourne, et al., 2021). The quote by participant [P07] presented earlier that talking
to their classmates about being autistic resulted in them becoming a “fellowship” and a “safe
space” for them aptly sums up the potential positive impact an autistic person’s surrounding
community can have.
Strengths and Limitations of the Present Study
Our participants formed a self-selected group of autistic adults; while many autistic
adults often experience high rates of mental health difficulties and distress (Hollocks et al.,
2019; Cassidy et al., 2018), individuals who reported having experienced significant acute
emotional distress, or thoughts of harming themselves or others currently or in the past six
months were not included in this study. Most of our participants were also ethnically Chinese
(the majority ethnic group in Singapore), in tertiary education or currently/ previously
employed. Lessons learnt from this sample and their social experiences speak to how pressures
to camouflage may be reduced and/or how the personal costs of camouflaging may be
attenuated, but may not be directly generalisable to other autistic people in different contexts.
Future camouflaging research should include autistic individuals with more diverse social and
emotional experiences to further shed light on important risk factors that may predict poorer
camouflaging outcomes, such as experiencing elevated depressive or anxiety symptoms and/or
suicidal ideation, or a diminished sense of self.
To the best of our knowledge, our study was the first to focus specifically on
investigating the beginnings, continuity, and change in camouflaging through inviting adults to
recall and describe in detail their earliest camouflaging memories and the trajectory of their
camouflaging behaviours over time. However, our adult participants at times found it difficult to
clearly recall childhood experiences of camouflaging and to explicitly describe underlying
personal characteristics or processes involved in the apparent changes in camouflaging
behaviour or attitudes. There may also be some partiality when recalling potentially distressing
events surrounding social rejection or “failure” due to self-enhancement tendencies (Lalande &
Bonanno, 2011) that may bias participants’ accounts of past camouflaging experiences. Future
research will therefore benefit from more direct interviews with children and young people with
subsequent follow-up designs, to further build our understanding of how camouflaging and its
impact may evolve over time, and to elucidate the associated influences of these changes. Our
interview methodology was able to tap on what autistic adults thought about their camouflaging
efforts, but of course less conscious camouflaging (e.g., unconscious social mimicry) would not
be reported - discrepancy approaches (comparing social behaviour and underlying socio-
cognitive processing) have been suggested as an alternative method to study camouflaging and
compensation (e.g., Livingston et al, 2019).
Implications and Recommendations for Clinical Practice and Social Change
Our results extend previous research (e.g., Cage & Troxell-Whitman, 2020) by showing
that building a strong and positive autistic identity may reduce autistic people’s felt pressure to
camouflage and may afford autistic people a greater sense of autonomy over whether, when,
with whom, and for which purposes, they may choose to engage (or not) in camouflaging
strategies (see also theme “I decide if and when I want to camouflage”). Having a positive
autistic identity also appeared to be related to our participants’ experiences of self-reported
greater comfort and ease with one’s experiences of camouflaging, and it would be important to
further and more systematically investigate the relationship between a stronger positive autistic
identity and whether this may buffer from the negative impacts of camouflaging. Timely
psychosocial support for autistic people of all ages, focusing on navigating a new autistic
identity, identifying and building trusting and authentic relationships with others, and engaging
constructively and helpfully with the autistic community for support and validation post-
diagnosis, may facilitate a more positive self-identity and strengthen autism self-acceptance
(Cage et al., 2018). This then reduces the pressure to camouflage, and/or may protect against
experiencing poorer mental health, burnout, or a loss of self when having to camouflage in
certain contexts.
Yet, research has shown that people living with concealable stigmatised identities
sometimes still express a preference to continue hiding their identity to secure acceptance,
although hiding a stigmatised identity can, conversely, reduce feelings of authenticity and
belonging (Davidson & Henderson, 2010; Newheiser & Barreto, 2014). This captures the
dissonance and dilemma that autistic people may face when “choosing” between camouflaging
and disclosure. Autistic people should be aided to identify and select individuals, groups, and
communities of people who would accept and support them when made aware of their
diagnosis, which could reduce the commonly felt fear and uncertainty of the outcomes of
disclosure (Huws & Jones, 2008; Johnson & Joshi, 2014). In particular, this could involve
facilitating their relationships with autistic peers and facilitating introduction to an autistic
community, given that many autistic individuals report being more comfortable and authentic
around other autistic people (Crompton et al., 2020). Psychosocial supports and services could
focus on supporting autistic people to strategically, yet accurately and confidently, present
themselves as autistic to others, rather than focusing merely on skills-based interventions (e.g.,
social skills training) as many interventions currently do (Kandalaft et al., 2013; Nuernberger et
al., 2013). In this way, it may be possible to use both disclosure and camouflaging strategies as
impression management at different times to educate and increase others’ understanding of
autism and form authentic connections, while retaining a strong sense of identity as an autistic
person.
Summary and Conclusions
Psychological and social experiences shape how autistic individuals perceive their
autistic identity, and their consequent motivation to mask being autistic (or not) through
camouflaging strategies. Although initial relational and functional motivations to camouflage
still remained, we observed a recalled trajectory of reduced motivation to camouflage over time
in our participants’ narratives due to greater self-acceptance, and through acceptance, support,
and accommodations from others. Our findings suggest that some autistic people use
camouflaging strategies in conjunction with disclosure, depending on the social context in
which they find themselves, to gain the utility of camouflaging while keeping costs to one’s
self-identity and well-being low. We hope that this study will prompt future age cohort
comparisons and prospective longitudinal research on how social camouflaging starts,
continues, and changes over time. Such work can help inform psychological and social efforts
directed towards alleviating the pressures and demands on autistic individuals to camouflage.
These efforts may need to focus on reducing autism stigma, growing acceptance, tailoring
support, and encouraging accommodation of the needs of autistic people in their families,
schools, community, and work settings, as well as strengthening autistic self-identity in
psychological work with autistic people from childhood onwards and throughout their lives.