Privatizations Spark Socialist Backlash:
Evidence from East Germany’s Transformation
Anselm Hager, Moritz Hennicke, Werner Krause and Lukas Mergele
December 30, 2021
Abstract
The fall of the Berlin Wall marks one of the largest transformations of the
20th century. At its core, the year 1990 brought two new systems to Eastern
Europe: capitalism and democracy. Yet, to this day, Eastern Europeans show
distinctly negative attitudes toward the Western world order, and democratic
and market institutions across the region are far from perfect. What explains
this unsuccessful transformation? This paper points to the rushed privatization
of East European economies as one plausible driver of citizens’ discontent with
capitalism and democracy. Using micro-level data from East Germany, we show
that firm privatizations led to a marked resurgence of the successor of the former
Socialist Unity Party as early as 1994. We argue that this effect is likely due to
perceived injustice: Socialist voting thrived whenever firms were sold to Western
elites, which local residents took as a sign that capitalism is not meritocratic.
Anselm Hager is an assistant professor international politics at Humboldt-Universit¨at in Berlin.
Moritz Hennicke is a PhD Candidate in economics at Universite libre de Bruxelles and Cergy Paris
Universite. Werner Krause is senior researcher at the Institute of Social Sciences at Humboldt-
Universit¨at zu Berlin. Lukas Mergele is a senior researcher at the ifo-Institut. We are indebted to
Andreas Stegmann, Hanno Hilbig and Steffen Mau for generous feedback.
1 Introduction
On November 9, 1989, the Berlin Wall fell, leading to one of history’s largest trans-
formations. As tens of thousands of East Berliners flowed into West Berlin, Eastern
Europe witnessed the collapse of socialism. One year later, most countries of the East-
ern Bloc had implemented democratic elections and begun the process of transforming
command economies into capitalist ones. The advent of democracy and capitalism was
widely welcomed and has since led to a profound improvement in standards of living
(World Bank, 2021).
Yet, thirty years later, Eastern Europeans continue to hold distinctly negative
attitudes toward both representative democracy and capitalism (Karp and Milazzo,
2015). Countries like Poland, Hungary, and Russia have departed from core democratic
principles (Frye et al., 2019; Haggard and Kaufman, 2021), and Eastern European
market economies are plagued by corruption and misguided state interference (Fazekas
and King, 2019; Griewald, 2018). How did the merging of the so-called second and
first world go wrong? Why did the introduction of capitalism and democracy backfire,
leading to widespread discontent with the new world order?
This paper hypothesizes that Eastern Europe’s discontent with capitalism and
representative democracy is partly the result of large-scale privatizations in the early
1990s. First, privatizations were conducted in a nontransparent, top-down and, at
times, corrupt manner. They thus arguably sowed mistrust toward the new political
system. Second, sales of formerly state-run firms mostly benefited (Western) elites.
Privatizations thus plausibly undermined support for capitalism and its supposed ben-
efits of rewarding merit, not status (Benabou and Tirole, 2006). The result of both
channels, we contend, was growing frustration with the new world order.
To empirically trace these theoretical arguments, we draw on untapped firm-level
data on privatizations from the early 1990s in East Germany. After mass protests and
the falling of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the German Democratic Republic was subsumed
by the Federal Republic of Germany in 1990. All formerly state-owned East German
firms were given to a public trust, the Treuhand, which was fully owned by the Federal
Republic of Germany. The Treuhand was charged with selling the firms to willing
investors or shutting the companies down. During this process, a fraction of the firms
in the portfolio of the agency were given back to former owners through court decisions,
so-called restitutions. Important for our case: The former ruling East-German Socialist
Unity Party was never completely abolished, but mostly renamed and reorganized
itself as the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS). The party did begin to espouse
democracy, but it also continued to embrace socialism. As such, the party was widely
interpreted as a ‘wolf in sheep’s clothing,’ particularly in the early days. Whether
pro-democratic or not, the survival of East Germany’s Socialist Unity Party offers
us the unique opportunity to cleanly measure pro-socialist preferences and discontent
with the new world order—before and after privatizations were implemented.
Using a difference-in-differences design, we show that privatizations led to a marked
resurgence of the former Socialist Unity Party between 1990 and 1994. Municipali-
ties which experienced only privatizations opposed to municipalities which experienced
only restitutions became 1.5 percentage points more likely to vote pro-socialist. Pri-
vatizations, in other words, backfired as early as 1994, setting East Germany on a
fraught electoral trajectory. We buttress the integrity of this estimate by i) testing
for non-parallel trends in pre-treatment periods, ii) demonstrating that the results
hold both at the municipality- and at the district-level, and iii) showcasing a number
of robustness tests, controlling i.a. for out-migration and job loss.
Why did privatizations lead East Germans back to the former Socialist Unity
Party—the party which had opposed democracy and capitalism for decades? We
compare the effect of privatizations to restitutions. In the case of restitutions, firms
were given to former owners with historic ties to the region. By contrast, regular pri-
For detailed treatments of the party’s post-1990 history, see Behrend (2006); Bergsdorf (2008);
Bortfeldt (1992); Gerner (1994); Jesse and Lang (2008); Knabe (2009); Neugebauer (2013).
Kellermann (2021) finds that Treuhand activities predict “radical voting” in 2017.
vatizations were mostly given to Western corporations and their owners without any
ties to East Germany. Consistent with the meritocracy channel, we find that only pri-
vatizations, not restitutions, sparked pro-socialist voting. We provide further evidence
by investigating the effect of management buy outs. These buy outs were literally the
only way in which East Germans could acquire formerly state-owned firms themselves.
In support of the meritocracy channel, we find that “regular” privatizations (which usu-
ally benefited West German elites) but not management buy outs positively affected
pro-socialist voting. These findings thus showcase that antipathy toward Western
elites—popularly argued to have ‘unfairly benefited’ from privatizations—was likely
behind the socialist revival in East Germany.
Moreover, we revisit the hypothesis that privatizations were implemented in a non-
transparent, corrupt manner and thus undermined support for the new democratic
mode of governance. To test this channel, we test for heterogenous effects in local
branches of the agency with high-profile corruption cases. We do not find evidence
that privatizations sparked socialist voting more significantly where corruption was
rampant.
We also rule out two plausible alternative channels. First, it is well-known that
privatizations caused significant job loss. The accompanying frustration and hardship
may then have sparked a desire to bring back socialism. We do not, however, find
any evidence that the positive effect of privatizations on pro-socialist voting was more
widespread in municipalities, which experienced greater job loss in the course of the
privatization program. Second, we show that the effect is not driven by emigration.
In particular, we do not find that privatization efforts drove anti-socialist voters out of
municipalities, thus explaining a revival of the former socialist unity party. The two
null findings thus corroborate the argument that privatization revived pro-socialist
voting via a broader channel, namely, by sowing mistrust toward capitalism.
Our study contributes to two major literatures across the social sciences. First,
we add to a broad debate on the interplay of capitalism and democracy. It is often
argued that capitalism strengthens democracy and vice versa (Acemoglu et al., 2019;
Almond, 1991; Fukuyama, 1992). We partly question this link, at least in the context
of transformations from socialism to capitalism. When both systems, capitalism and
democracy, are introduced at the same time, there seems to be a positive imprint
of privatizations on pro-socialist voting. The driver behind this negative effect is
the perceived injustice of how economic assets are distributed in capitalist systems.
Citizens of socialist states are used to relatively low levels of inequality. The perceived
benefits of democratic governance thus fade in comparison to new forms of economic
inequality, where “foreign” elites took over most firms.
Second, we add to a literature on large structural transformations, particularly the
fall of the Berlin Wall. Much has been written about the determinants of the fall of
the Iron Curtain (Hager and Krakowski, 2021; Kuran, 1991; Opp and Gern, 1993). We
also know that socialist rule, in East Germany and elsewhere, left a deep imprint on
its citizens (Alesina and Fuchs-Schu¨ndeln, 2007; Burchardi and Hassan, 2013; De Vries
and O’Brien, 2021; Neundorf, 2010; Neundorf and Pop-Eleches, 2020). Analyses on
the immediate repercussions of the transformation and, in particular, privatization
are relatively scarce, however. While the economic repercussions of privatization have
received some scrutiny (Barberis et al., 1996; Collier and Siebert, 1991; Mergele et al.,
2020), we are the first to show that privatization efforts led to an immediate resurgence
of the former Socialist Unity Party as early as 1994. As such, we fill an important gap
that explains the (semi-)successful transformation of Eastern Europe into democratic
and capitalist societies.
2 Theoretical Background
How can the privatization of a socialist economy revive socialist preferences and voting
behavior? In what follows, we study the case of East Germany and lay out two
political channels for how privatizations may have sparked pro-socialist voting. The
first channel hones in on the intransparent, top-down, and partly corrupt manner
in which privatizations were implemented, which plausibly eroded trust in the new
political system. The second channel picks up on the fact that firms were largely sold
to (Western) elites, which likely undermined support for capitalism and the popular
narrative that it rewards effort. Before delving into both political mechanisms, we
first set the stage by describing the economic status quo of the early 1990s in East
Germany.
2.1 The Privatization of East Germany
The German Democratic Republic (henceforth, GDR) was established in 1949. Inter-
estingly, East Germany’s constitution originally instituted democratic governance and
also protected private property (Article 20). But, starting in 1952, the GDR began
to collectivize virtually all companies, including the agricultural sector. State-owned
firms were given precise quotas on what and how much to produce. Leaving aside ram-
pant inefficiencies, in theory, profits accrued to everyone, given that the state owned
the means of production. Political power was in the hands of the Socialist Unity Party,
which periodically confirmed its popular mandate in rigged elections.
In 1990, the GDR was incorporated into West Germany, following the peaceful
revolution of 1989 (Gray et al., 1996). Formerly state-owned East German companies
therefore simply switched state owners. In particular, East Germany’s firms were
transferred into a public corporation called the Treuhand. On July 1990, the Treuhand
owned around 8,500 companies, a number which further increased over time due to
split-ups of firms. Initially, the firms collectively employed 4.1 million people or roughly
one in four inhabitants of the GDR. In light of Germany’s capitalist constitution, the
German government signed a law, which tasked the Treuhand with privatizing all
There are undoubtedly alternative potential channels that link privatizations to socialist voting,
namely, migration and job loss. We revisit these channels in Section 5.3 and provide evidence that
they are not active in our setting.
East German companies. Paragraph 1 of the Treuhand-law stated: “Nationally owned
property is to be privatized.”
The Treuhand’s privatization efforts resulted in one of three major outcomes. First,
an East German firm could successfully be sold to a private entity (henceforth, privati-
zation), which was the desired outcome for the Treuhand. Of the total number of firms,
roughly 57 percent were successfully privatized (see Section 3.1). Second and related,
firms could be restituted to former owners, which had been expropriated during the
Third Reich or one of the GDR’s expropriation campaigns (henceforth, restitution).
This special case of privatization happened in roughly 15 percent of all cases. Third,
an East German firm could be shut down because there was no buyer and the German
government saw no strategic need to keep it open (henceforth, liquidation). 28 percent
of firms ended up in liquidation.
2.2 The Politicization of the Privatization Campaign
While German reunification was popular, the Treuhand was not. Protests against
privatizations began as early as 1990. The famous Monday demonstrations, which
helped bring down the GDR in the late 1980s (Lohmann, 1994), changed their focus in
1990 and started protesting against the Treuhand. In Leipzig steelworkers protested
against layoffs and demanded that the German government invest 90 million Euros
to keep the company afloat. In Eisenach, workers of the local automobile manufac-
turing plant blocked highways after the Treuhand decided to close the plant in 1991,
which affected 4,500 employees. Overall, between 1990 and 1993, 1,032 protests took
place—the majority of which opposed the privatizations pursued by the Treuhand.
All German translations are by the authors.
Note that East German firms could also remain in government ownership (henceforth, nation-
alization). A small number of firms, around 260, were nationalized or remunicipalized. We do not
take this form of transformation into account as it was only applied to public services firms, such
as utilities. For the low number of cases, we cannot expect to identify a local effect on pro-socialist
voting.
The protests ultimately culminated in the unsolved assassination of the Treuhand’s
chairman, Detlev Rohwedder, on April 1, 1991.
Two major critiques were leveled against the Treuhand. These critiques, to our
mind, make it plausible that the Treuhand’s privatization efforts led some voters to
become skeptical of the new democratic and capitalist order and ultimately led them
back to the former Socialist Unity Party.
2.2.1 Privatizations unfairly benefited the West
The first major critique leveled against the Treuhand was that it unfairly benefited
West German companies and individuals. This critique came in two variants. First, the
Treuhand was criticized for not only shutting down non-profitable firms, but for also
liquidating profitable firms so as to benefit West German companies. A famous case in
point was the closing of the potash factory in Bischofferode, Thuringia. Established in
1909, the mine was one of the few internationally successful firms of the GDR. In 1991,
the Treuhand decided to merge the company with a West German competitor, K+S,
which was headquartered just 30km to the west of Bischofferode. K+S then decided
to close the mine. While it is unclear just how profitable the mine was, miners and
local residents argued that the closing was akin to a “killer acquisition.” That is, K+S
bought and then closed the mine in order to remove competition from its backyard. To
prevent the liquidation, the miners went on a public hunger strike. Their slogan was
“Bischofferode is everywhere,” suggesting that the Treuhand sold out East Germany
to benefit West German companies. Not surprisingly, Goschler and B¨oick (2017) find
that in a sample of 238 East Germans, 52 mention the term “liquidation” when asked
what terms they associate with the Treuhand.
Second, the Treuhand was criticized for prioritizing West German investors, even
when East Germans put in a competitive bid. 51 percent of companies were sold
to West German investors, especially the largest and most productive ones (Mergele
et al., 2020). In some instances, the sales price amounted to a symbolic 1 Deutsch
Mark. In other cases—as in the example of Karl Zeiss Jena—the German government
sold the company and put an additional subsidy of 2.4 billion Deutsch Marks on top.
Another case in point is the VEB Fleischwirtschaft (meat industry) in the city of
Greifswald. In 1990, the director and technical manager of the firm, Walter Kienast
and Gerhard Dobbratz, wanted to take over the company using a management buyout.
Yet, despite knowing the company inside out and obtaining credit approval from a
local bank, the Treuhand sold the company to a West German investor. This does
not imply that management buyouts did not take place. Indeed, roughly 3,000 firms
were sold to East Germans (see below). That said, management buyouts mostly took
place in small companies. By contrast, large companies—which generated significant
public attention—were almost exclusively sold to West German investors. Again, the
aforementioned survey by Goschler and B¨oick (2017) finds that 18 percent of East
Germans associate the Treuhand with the term “sell out,” underlining the impression
that privatizations did not benefit East German residents.
Both narratives—the liquidation of profitable East German companies to aid West
German companies as well as the nearly-exclusive sale to West German investors—
arguably led to a profound disenchantment with capitalism amongst East Germans.
That is, capitalism was partly advertised to East Germans as a system that rewards
effort; a system where the government works to achieve fair competition between
firms and individuals. For instance, Germany’s then-chancelor, Helmut Kohl, gave a
famous speech on October 4, 1990, where he said: “the unification treaty has laid the
foundation for growth and prosperity in all of Germany. What remains essential is that
we [...] hold onto what has proven successful for over forty years: a free economic and
social order that opens up opportunities for achievement”. This theoretical proposition
stood in contrast to the first impression (some) East Germans had with capitalism:
Companies were not sold to individuals who put in the best bid, but to investors
who came from the right side of Germany. The supposed benefits of capitalism also
counteracted the idea that profitable businesses should be able to compete and not be
shut down such that West German companies had less competition.
2.2.2 Privatizations were nontransparent and top-down
The second major critique leveled against the Treuhand was that its decision-making
did not follow core democratic principles, including transparency and equality. This
critique, too, had two distinct dimensions. First, there was a widespread feeling that
the Treuhand’s decision making was nontransparent and, partly, corrupt, which be-
lied ideals about democratic transparency and accountability. Indeed, survey evidence
shown in Goschler and B¨oick (2017) finds that 24 out of 238 East Germans predomi-
nantly associate the Treuhand with the term “fraud,” underlining the impression that
privatizations did not benefit East German residents. A lucid example for this critique
was the sale of the VEB Kombinat Minol, an oil refinery in Leuna, Saxony-Anhalt.
Rather than engage in an open bidding process, the company was sold to a French
competitor under much political pressure (more momentarily). It later became clear
that bribes in the order of 47 million Euros were paid. The corruption was largely as-
cribed to the nontransparent decision-making of the Treuhand. In addition, frequent
corruption scandals undermined the perceived fairness of the Treuhand’s decision mak-
ing. Another infamous example was the leader of the Treuhand’s Halle branch. The
director sold properties below value to pre-selected buyers and received more than 4.5
million Deutsch Mark in kickbacks. In other cases, Treuhand employees were paid ex-
cessively high salaries. For example, the lawyer Karl Tynek received up to 25 million
Deutsch Mark for the liquidation of 29 companies, according to contemporary media
reports.
The Treuhand was thus criticized for pursuing privatizations in a top-down manner,
which belied democratic ideals that the median voter is in charge. The aforementioned
example of the VEB Kombinat Minol oil refinery is a succinct example for this critique.
The oil refinery was a prime case of a relatively profitable East German firm. Rather
than sell it to the highest bidder, however, German chancellor Helmut Kohl and French
president Fran¸cois Mitterrand lobbied to sell the company to Elf Aquitaine, a french
oil conglomerate. The sale was advertised as a symbol for France’s investment in
East Germany. As a result, despite other potential interested investors and popular
demands to keep the company German-owned, the company was ultimately sold to
the French competitor. The sale thus countered the democratic ideal of having the
people decide.
Both critiques—the intransparent decision-making as well as lobbying from the
top against popular demands—may arguably have sparked dissatisfaction among East
Germany with the new democratic ‘experiment.’ East Germany, to recall, was not
democratic, despite contrary claims in its constitution. Elections were not free and
there was, practically, only one party to vote for, the Socialist Unity Party. German
reunification, thus, brought democracy to East Germany. Indeed, democratic gover-
nance was an explicit reason for reunification. As then-chancellor Helmut Kohl, in a
speech to East Germans in 1991, stated “self-determination means [...] that we respect
your opinion. We do not want and we will not patronize anyone. We respect what you
decide for the future of the country.” The Treuhand, so the popular narrative went,
discredited these ideals by i) letting officials overrule popular will when deciding how
to privatize, and ii) by conducting (some) privatizations in an intransparent, corrupt
manner.
(cid:176)
54 N
(cid:176)
53 N
Berlin
(cid:176)
52 N
(cid:176)
51 N
(cid:176)
50 N
(cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176)
10 E 11 E 12 E 13 E 14 E 15 E
(cid:176)
54 N
(cid:176)
53 N
Berlin
(cid:176)
52 N
(cid:176)
51 N
(cid:176)
50 N
(cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176) (cid:176)
10 E 11 E 12 E 13 E 14 E 15 E
Privatized firms (%) 0 25 50 75 100
Liquidated firms (%) 0 25 50 75 100
Notes: The Figures map the percentage of local firms, which were privatized (1) or liquidated (2),
separated into five bins. The unit is the East German municipality, harmonized at the 2002 geometries.
3 Design
To explore whether the privatization of East Germany’s economy sparked disenchant-
ment with the new Western world order, thus reviving pro-socialist voting, we draw
on unique micro-level data. We make use of the fact that privatization, liquidation,
and restitution decisions took place to varying degrees in municipalities, which affords
in that the former Socialist Unity Party was never banned (it was merely renamed and
reorganized in 1990), which affords us with a reliable measure for pro-Socialist voting.
As stated, the party did begin to espouse democracy by 1990, though scholars disagree
on how sincere this transformation was, particularly in the early days (see Footnote
1). But, most importantly, the party continued to embrace socialism. Whether pro-
democratic or not, the survival of East Germany’s Socialist Unity Party therefore offers
us the unique opportunity to cleanly measure pro-socialist preferences and discontent
with the new world order—before and after privatizations were implemented. In what
follows, we introduce our data sources as well as our empirical strategy.
3.1 Data
3.1.1 Treatment: Privatizations and Liquidations
Our explanatory variable is the share of companies in East German municipalities,
which were privatized, liquidated or restituted by the privatization agency. The start-
ing point of our data collection is an administrative list of the entire universe of Treu-
hand firms by the BvS, the legal successor of the Treuhandanstalt, obtained through a
Freedom of Information Request (Bundesanstalt fu¨r vereinigungsbedingte Sonderauf-
gaben, 2016). We match this list with another registry and biannual surveys conducted
since April 1991, both by the SOESTRA institute. Using these data sources, Mergele
et al. (2020) demonstrate that the surveys are representative for the whole universe of
firms in terms of privatization status and federal state.
The data set includes the municipality identifier for 92 percent of all Treuhand-
owned firms. Using municipality identifiers is complicated by the fact that munici-
palities were merged, redrawn and recoded dramatically in the 1990es. We make use
of the cross-walk of German municipalities by the BBSR across time and transform
all our data sources with population weights to end of year 2002 territorial status
(Bundesinstitut fu¨r Bau-, Stadt- und Raumforschung, 2020).
Using municipality codes, we calculate the share of companies in a given munici-
pality, which were i) privatized, ii) liquidated, or iii) restituted. The resulting variables
thus capture the intensity of the Treuhand privatization efforts across municipalities.
the data are not only highly granular, but there is also significant geographic variation,
that the Treuhand managed at least one firm in more than 33% of the 4,746 East
German municipalities.
Our combined data sources allow us to identify the month, when the privatization
only a negligible fraction (5.4%) of privatization decisions were taken in 1990. For
this reason we use the 1990 Federal general election on the 2nd of December as our
pre-treatment baseline and focus on the 1994 Federal general election in October as
our first post-treatment outcome year.
We construct two samples based on our treatment variables: First, we use only
municipalities where the privatization agency had at least one company in its portfolio.
Second, we use all municipalities assuming that there was no Treuhand activity and
therefore 0 privatizations, liquidations or restitutions. Both samples assume that firms
not in our survey are missing at random to rule out selection bias in the former and
imputation bias in the later. As mentioned above, Mergele et al. (2020) provide some
reforms since 1990.
supportive evidence of this assumption.
3.1.2 Outcome: Socialist voting
In the theoretical section, we hypothesized that the privatization of East German firms
would lead residents to become disenchanted with capitalism and democracy, making
them susceptible to the old socialist system. To the best of our knowledge, there are no
geo-coded public opinion surveys capturing antipathy toward the new Western system.
Fortunate for our case, there was a historic peculiarity in East Germany, which we can
exploit: Unlike in other countries of the Eastern Bloc, the East German Socialist
Unity Party was never banned. Rather, it renamed and reorganized itself in 1990 as
the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS). As such, one can plausibly interpret a vote
for the PDS as a vote for socialist ideals or, put differently, a vote against the new
Western system. This holds particularly true in the early elections in 1994 and, to a
lesser extent, in 1998—which is why we focus on this early time period (more reasons
below).
To measure pro-socialist voting, we collected municipality-level election results
across five elections. In particular, we relied on official election statistics of the Ger-
man federal elections in 1990, 1994, and 1998. We do not include later elections
We should note that the Socialist Unity Party, which gave up its monopoly of power in 1989, was
taken over by reformist forces from within the party, which pushed the party to rename itself into PDS
in February 1990 and began to espouse democracy. Moreover, the PDS did expel some prominent
pre-1989 leaders from its ranks. That said, the PDS remained the legal, ideological, and moral heir
of Socialist Unity Party’s legacy. The PDS also took over the Socialist Unity Party’s apparatus, and
many former GDR regime supporters remained members of the PDS. A notable example is the PDS’s
later leader, Gregor Gysi, who came from a nomenklatura GDR family. For details, see the cited
literature in Footnote 1.
One particular challenge in collecting the voting data are administrative changes. East German
municipalities were subject to numerous territorial reforms, which mostly consisted of merging or
dissolving smaller municipalities. In total, out of the 16,727 East German municipalities that existed in
1990, 3,674 were subject to territorial changes of which 90% (3,314) were dissolutions and subsequent
because the PDS joined forces with a West-German party by the 2005 federal election.
In addition, to assess differences in socialist voting before the Treuhand privatized
firms, we collected the election results of the March 1990 East German elections to
the Volkskammer (the GDR’s main parliament) as well as results from the regional
elections of state parliaments in October 1990, which were all held on the same date.
We make use of this data—as well as the 1990 federal election—in order to test for
pre-treatment differential trends in socialist voting between municipalities which later
experienced more or less activity by the privatization agency (difference-in-differences
comparison).
3.1.3 Control variables
We use a battery of control variables throughout various specifications, which arguably
predict socialist voting and, perhaps, privatizations decisions. First, we digitized a
novel firm and production plant census in 1987, compiled at the district-level by the
joint statistical offices of the East German Federal states after unification (Amt, 1987).
We use a pre-unification measure of labor productivity and railway infrastructure to
capture the degree of economic development of production and infrastructure from the
census. Second, we use the share of employment in agriculture in 1989 from Rudolph
(1990) and the KPD vote share in 1933 from King et al. (2008).
3.2 Estimation
To examine the effect of privatizations on pro-socialist voting, we make use of a
difference-in-differences design (DiD) using two-way fixed effects (TWFE). In par-
ticular, we estimate the following equation:
mergers with other municipalities and 10% (340) have been splits of existing municipalities. To ensure
the comparability of the election results over time, we therefore took the 2002 territorial organization
as our point of reference. Using the cross-walk by the BBSR we summarize votes at the year 2002
using population weights (Bundesinstitut fu¨r Bau-, Stadt- und Raumforschung, 2020)
We thank Andreas Stegmann vor generously sharing this data at the municipality level with us.
1 1
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Socialist = β Privatized × ν + γ Liquidated × ν
i,t t i t t t
(1)
t=−3,t(cid:54)=−1 t=−3,t(cid:54)=−1
+λ X × ν + λ X + ν + δ + (cid:15) ,
1 i t 2 i,t t i i,t
where i indexes municipalities and t denotes elections. The outcome Socialist is
the vote share of the former Socialist Unity Party, the Party of Democratic Social-
ism (PDS). (As a robustness check, we also aggregate the data at the district-level.)
Privatized and Liquidated are the continuous treatment variables, which depict the
shares of firms in a given municipality that were privatized or liquidated. Our main
sample comprises only municipalities with at least one Treuhand firm. As privatization,
liquidation and restitution shares therefore sum up to one, the share of restitutions
constitutes the base category. Since these measures are time-invariant, we interact
each of the two measures with ν — dummy variables representing the elections under
study. The data encompasses three elections in the pre-treatment period (general and
state elections before 1994) and two elections in the post-treatment period (general
elections in 1994 and 1998). We estimate dynamic coefficients of two pre-treatment and
two post-treatment elections, referencing the 1990 general election in unified Germany.
Next, δ and ν serves as municipality and time fixed effects, respectively. By using
i t
two-way fixed effects, we control for any time- or municipality-invariant confounders.
X indicates a vector of pre-treatment control variables and X are time varying con-
i it
trols. In our main specification, we introduce state dummies. In this way, we control
for the possibility that – due to the federal structure of the German political system
– municipalities in different East-German states are featured by diverging trends that
are not captured by the municipality fixed effects. Furthermore, we also control for the
size of the electorate in the East-German Volkskammer election and, again, interact
this variable with time. In this way, we account for the possibility that smaller and
larger municipalities are featured by differing trends. Finally, (cid:15) is the error term. We
i,t
cluster the standard errors at the unit level to account for the fact that the error terms
are plausibly correlated within municipalities. Since the size of municipalities differs
considerably (from small villages to large cities), we weigh the regression according to
the size of the electorates.
3.3 Parallel Trends
Difference-in-differences designs are able to recover average treatment effects on the
treated under the assumption of parallel trends. That is, municipalities / districts that
later saw many firms being privatized by the Treuhand should have similar trends in
socialist voting prior to the Treuhand becoming active as compared to areas, which
did not experience many privatizations. To corroborate this assumption, we analyze
three different pre-treatment elections: the 1990 federal election, the 1990 state-level
elections and the 1990 (free) election to the East German parliament. (We cannot
use elections from the GDR before 1989 to assess parallel trend given that they were
neither free nor fair.)
Municipalities
−1
−2
−3
TTTTTTTTTrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeeaaaaaaaaatttttttttmmmmmmmmmeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnttttttttt
Districts
−5
−10
TTTTTTTTTrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeeaaaaaaaaatttttttttmmmmmmmmmeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnttttttttt
East G. Regional Federal Federal Federal
Gen. Elec. Elec. Elec. Elec. Elec.
1990 1990 1990 1994 1998
)%(
erahS
etoV
tsilaicoS
Liquidations Privatizations
socialist vote share on the share of privatized / liquidated firms in a given municipality / district,
following equation 1. The black line indicates the beginning of firm privatizations / liquidations after
1990.
4 Results
privatizations and liquidations by the privatization agency raised the vote share of
the former Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) in the 1994 general election. On
the other hand, restitutions to former owners through court cases as the omitted base
category, led to lower vote shares. The upper panel shows the regression estimates
if we make use of municipality level data. Here, we do see a positive and significant
effect of privatizations and liquidations on the socialist vote share. We also aggregate
the data at the district level. Aggregation comes at the expense of power, but with the
potential gain that districts in East Germany are more homogeneous in demographic
characteristics than municipalities and are typically characterized by less commuting
across borders. Again, we find a positive and statisitically significant effect for the 1994
general election. The coefficients in both specifications also imply substantially large
effect sizes. At the municipality level, privatizations and liquidations caused an average
increase of 1.5 percentage points as opposed to municipalities with only restitutions.
At the district level, the effect is even more pronounced with an estimated size of 5
percentage points. There is thus credible evidence that privatization and liquidation
as opposed to restitution led to a socialist backlash.
Using the sample including all municipalities, the coefficients of the shares are esti-
mated with additional variation along the extensive margin. We can therefore include
of this regression. Despite the fact that restituted firms, too, were privatized, we see
no meaningful rise in socialist voting. If anything, the effect is negative, suggesting
positive affect toward restituted owners. This piece of evidence is interesting since
restituted firms also suffered from economic repercussions. Still, socialist voting did
not go up.
What can explain the complete opposite effects of privatizations and restitutions?
Our preferred explanation why privatizations may have sparked socialist voting is by
undermining residents’ belief that capitalism is a meritocratic system. Recall that
restituted firms were given to individuals, who had formerly owned the company and
thus had historic ties to the region. Some of these individuals were former Jewish
or aristocratic owners, which had been expropriated during the Third Reich. While
many expropriated individuals came from the West, they did have a connection to the
land and East Germany more broadly. As such, they arguably had more “merit” in
obtaining a company compared to West German investors without any connection to
the land.
4.1 Robustness
As noted above, using fixed effects at the unit and the time level already controls for
all time- or unit-invariant differences in our main sample. To further ensure that the
our models with additional covariates. Concretely, we add five control variables that
capture economic and structural differences between the units under study. First, we
add a municipality’s spatial distance to the inner-German border and to the closest city
with at least 20,000 inhabitants to the regression equation. Second, we control for the
productivity of a municipality’s work force before re-unification. For that purpose, we
use the value of produced goods divided by the number of employees in manufacturing
in 1987. Next, East-German municipalities are featured by different infrastructure-
related factors. To control for these differences, we use the total number of direct
railway connections of production plants per municipality. In addition, we control for
the share of the agricultural sector 1989 of total value added from Lichter et al. (2021).
We also include two political variables in our regression equation. For one, it might
be possible that different municipalities are featured by different traditions of socialist
voting. For that reason, we also control for the vote share obtained by the Communist
Party of Germany (KPD) in 1933 (Lichter et al., 2021). Lastly, we add voter turnout
to control for the possibility that our results are only due to higher abstention rates
in areas that were strongly affected by the Treuhand’s activities.
hensive set of controls. Reassuringly, we do not observe substantial differences to the
liquidation share has a significant impact on the PDS’s vote share in the pre-treatment
period. This lends further support to the non-existence of relevant pre-trends affecting
the vote share of the PDS in 1994.
5 Mechanism
We have estimated a positive effect of the Treuhand’s privatization efforts on socialist
voting. What mechanisms give rise to this effect? Why, in other words, did privatiza-
tions create socialist backlash? In the theoretical section, we put forth two channels.
First, we argued that privatizations were (at times) implemented in a nontransparent,
corrupt manner and may thus have reduced trust in the new political system. Sec-
ond, we argued that privatizations were perceived to unfairly benefit West German
investors, thus undermining support for capitalism, which was advertised as a system
that rewards merit. We revisit both channels in turn.
5.1 Nontransparent and top-down decision-making
Did privatizations spark socialist voting because the decisions whether and how to
privatize were undertaken in a nontransparent and corrupt manner? To devise a test
for this proposed channel, we scrutinize whether we see a more pronounced socialist
backlash in regions where corruption has been most visible for East-German citizens.
Perhaps the most infamous case was the Treuhand’s Halle branch in the state of
Saxony-Anhalt. The branch saw a number of high profile cases where firms were sold
off to insiders or significant kickbacks were paid. Indeed, this local Treuhand branch
was sometimes labelled “Ganoven GmbH Halle” (English: Crooks Inc., Halle). Do we
see more pronounced electoral backlash in the Halle region as compared to the rest of
East Germany?
To assess this question, we interact our treatment variables (privatization or liqui-
dation) with a measure of the share of firms that were administered by the Treuhand’s
eral election. Neither at the municipality nor at the district level, we observe that the
treatment effects were particularly pronounced in the Halle region. If anything, the
coefficients show in the opposite direction, but none of the interaction terms reaches
common levels of statistical significance. We have thus little reason to believe that
our identified treatment effects are more pronounced in areas where the Treuhand was
particularly corrupt.
Branch
DV : Socialist Voting
Municipalities Districts
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
Privatizations x 1994 General Election 1.594 7.218
(0.338) (1.524)
∗∗∗ ∗∗
Liquidations x 1994 General Election 1.369 7.169
(0.343) (2.224)
Privatizations x 1994 General Election x Halle −1.049 −5.148
(0.745) (7.043)
Liquidations x 1994 General Election x Halle 0.426 −3.928
(0.854) (12.102)
Observations 7,306 559
R 0.937 0.970
Adjusted R 0.921 0.958
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.05; p<0.01; p<0.001
OLS regression results following equation 1.
Two-way fixed effects models controlling for state
trends and size of the 1990 electorate.
5.2 Privatizations unfairly benefited the West
We examine whether pro-socialist voting was differentially affected by how the enter-
prise was privatized. To this end, we split the share of privatizations into those firms
which were ”bought out” by the respective management and those which were sold.
In the former cases, companies’ existing managers acquired a large part, or all, of the
respective companies. Such a management buy out (MBO) was virtually the only
way East-German themselves could come into possession of a company. We substract
the share of firms sold due to MBOs from our privatization indicator and add it to
1994 general election. Consistent with the idea that electoral support for the PDS was
triggered by the perceived “undeservedness” with which West German buyers acquired
East German firms, the effects for management buy outs are close to zero and not
statistically insignificant. To our mind, these results corroborates the channel that
East Germans felt privatizations were unfair, belying capitalist ideals of merit.
DV : Socialist Voting
Municipalities Districts
∗∗∗ ∗∗∗
Privatizations (w/o MBOs) x 1994 General Election 1.660 7.509
(0.329) (1.431)
MBOs x 1994 General Election 0.670 −1.596
(0.419) (1.952)
∗∗∗ ∗∗
Liquidations x 1994 General Election 1.374 5.405
(0.329) (1.865)
Observations 7,306 559
R 0.937 0.972
Adjusted R 0.920 0.962
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.05; p<0.01; p<0.001
OLS regression results following equation 1.
Two-way fixed effects models controlling for state
trends and size of the 1990 electorate.
A further piece of evidence can be gleaned from a public opinion survey conducted
right after the height of privatization decisions. In 1994, the Allbus institute asked
a representative sample of Germans to what extent they agreed with the statement
‘the fate of East Germans depends on whether they try hard.’ Answer choices ranged
the Appendix. Consistent with the proposed channel that the post-1990 privatizations
belied the narrative that capitalism is meritocratic, East Germans gave an average of
2.3 points. West Germans, by contrast, were significantly more likely to agree with
the statement (3.1 points). The evidence finds further support in the survey reported
in Goschler and B¨oick (2017) who consistently find that East Germans associated the
Treuhand with terms such as “injustice” and “rip-off.”
5.3 Ruling out alternative explanations
Having pointed to one plausible channel, we want to briefly revisit two alternative
(economic) channels for the positive effect of privatizations on socialist voting.
Job loss First, privatizations led to significant job loss and mass layoffs. The resulting
economic hardship may then have led people to move to the Party of Democratic
Socialism. To explore this alternative explanation, we inspect whether the treatment
effects are stronger in municipalities that experienced particularly stark job loss. Using
the number of employees from the first and last waves of the firm surveys, we are able to
measure the change in total employment in privatized, restituted and liquidated firms.
Using this information, we can then compute the share of employment lost over time
from the early until the final stage of the privatization program. We then distinguish
between areas that suffered drastic employment losses and areas where this was not the
case. In particular, we construct a dummy variable using the mean employment loss
within the areas under study. At the municipality level, the average employment loss
was 62.5% between 1990 and 1994. At the district level, the corresponding value was
71%. We interact this dummy variable with our treatment indicators to investigate
whether firm liquidations and privatizations had different effects depending on the
the firm privatizations/liquidations by an area’s employment losses. By and large, we
do not observe major differences between areas that were hit more or less hard by
mass layoffs. For both levels of analysis, the socialist vote share develops positively in
response to both firm privatization and liquidations.
Migration Second, privatizations may have led individuals opposed to socialism to
leave their municipalities. In particular, it is well known that large numbers of East
Germans (particularly women and well-educated individuals) moved to West Germany
after the 1990 transformation. These individuals may have been more opposed to
socialism and, at the same time, more likely to leave once privatizations took place. If
this were the case, our main models would potentially be the result of compositional
changes within the electorate, not changes in preferences. To test for this channel,
we again use a three-way interaction: We calculate the change in the size of the
electorate in 1994 as a share of the 1990 electorate. As with the employment loss
measures, we then divide our sample at the average of this variable and run separate
analyses for both subsets (median values are -2.15% at the municipality level and -
2.62% at the district level). We then interact this binary variable with our treatment
indicators to investigate whether the resulting treatment effects are moderated by a
find no significant differences between municipalities (or districts) that were affected
by different levels of population changes between 1990 and 1994. Hence, these results
do not lend support to the claim that the estimated effects are predominantly driven
by citizens moving away from the former territory of the GDR.
6 Conclusion
This paper has provided evidence that the transformation of East Germany’s com-
mand economy into a capitalist one created a marked socialist backlash. In particular,
municipalities that experienced firm privatizations or liquidations became more likely
to vote for the transformed Socialist Unity Party. We argued that this effect is likely
due to perceptions about inequity: Residents perceived privatizations to unfairly ben-
efit (Western) elites, which undermined the promise that capitalism is meritocratic.
To buttress this point, we showed that pro-socialist voting experienced a less marked
resurgence whenever firms were restituted, i.e., given to owners who had former ties
to East Germany. We further substantiated this finding by showing that manage-
ment buy outs –the only possibility for East Germans to acquire firms– did not spark
pro-socialist voting. Our results offer three points for reflection.
First, our study complements the broader debate on historical legacies, in par-
ticular, the imprint of communism on political attitudes. Our study highlights the
importance of studying the process of transformation itself in order to explain how
past institutions predict the development of political attitudes (Mau, 2019). In so
doing, we also point to marked variation in socialist attitudes within East Germany.
In other words, it is not the case that all of East Germany showed high levels of pro-
socialist sentiment or backlash. Rather, there was succinct variation in socialist voting,
which is a function of economic privatizations and liquidations.
Second, our study underlines the role of preferences for equality in explaining polit-
ical behavior (Alesina et al., 2004). East Germany undoubtedly benefited from turning
its command economy into a capitalist one. Standards of living rose dramatically and
East Germans were free to vote as they please. Even so, we find that the privati-
zation of the economy led to a socialist backlash. And, importantly, we argue that
this backlash can partly be explained by perceived inequality: East Germans felt that
privatizations were not fair—not everyone had the same chance of becoming an owner
of capital. Indeed, as early as 1994, East Germans were significantly less likely to
This perceived inequity, in turn, led some residents back to the former Socialist Unity
Party.
Third and related, we found that economic factors—noticeably job loss—are un-
likely explanations for the effect of privatizations on pro-socialist voting. This finding
matters for at least two reasons. First, it showcases the relevance of “cultural” expla-
nations for political attitudes (Norris et al., 2004). That is, it was not job loss that
drove voters to the socialist party, but perceived inequity. The fact that privatizations
and liquidations led to similar effects is further evidence for this finding. The socialist
backlash, at least in the context of East Germany, was more the result of perceived
unfairness than hard economic facts.
In closing, we should point out at least two ways to expand on our research. For
one, our empirical evidence is limited in that we examined one case: the former Ger-
man Democratic Republic. It would therefore prove fruitful to also assess the imprint
of economic privatizations on other post-communist parties, including the the Czech
Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia or the Communist Party of the Russian
Federation. Second and related, such an analysis would also allow one to distill impor-
tant scope conditions. In our setting, Western elites played a pivotal role, including in
the decision-making of the Treuhand. It is therefore worth asking if one would uncover
similar socialist backlash due to privatizations in, say, the former USSR or in Poland,
where Western elites played a less pronounced role. Related, East Germany was unique
in that it had a Western counterpart, the Federal Republic. Scrutinizing whether this
institutional setup can help explain socialist voting would be highly interesting and
could be done by comparing across cases in Eastern Europe.