THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 1
Understanding Responses to an Organizational Takeover:
Introducing The Social Identity Model of Organizational Change
Neela S. Mühlemann1*, Niklas K. Steffens2, Johannes Ullrich1, S. Alexander Haslam2, and
Klaus Jonas1
1 Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2 School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Accepted
November 24, 2021
Author Note
We have no known conflict of interest to disclose.
Due to a confidentiality agreement between the research team and the participating
organization, the data underlying the analyses reported in the paper cannot be made publicly
available. All other materials, survey measures, R scripts, and additional analyses and results
are available on the Open Science Framework:
Parts of this paper were presented at the 4th International Conference of Social
Identity and Health, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 13-14, 2018 and at the 10th Work,
Organizational and Business Psychology Group Meeting of the German Association of
Psychology, Dresden, Germany, September 13-15, 2017.
* Correspondence should be addressed to Neela Mühlemann, Department of Social
and Organizational Psychology, Binzmuhlestrasse 14, 8050 Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail:
n.muehlemann@psychologie.uzh.ch.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 2
Abstract
This paper presents a Social Identity Model of Organizational Change (SIMOC) and tests this
in the context of employees’ responses to a corporate takeover. This model suggests that
employees will identify with the newly emerging organization and adjust to organizational
change more successfully the more they are able to maintain their pre-existing social identity
(an identity maintenance pathway) or to change understanding of their social identity in ways
that are perceived as constituting identity gain (an identity gain pathway). We examine this
model in the context of an acquisition in the pharmaceutical industry where 225 employees
were surveyed before the implementation of the organizational change and then again 18
months later. In line with SIMOC, pre-change identification predicted post-change
identification and a variety of beneficial adjustment outcomes for employees (including job
satisfaction, organizational citizenship behavior, lower depression, satisfaction with life, and
post-traumatic growth) to the extent that either (a) they experienced a sense of identity
continuity or (b) their supervisors engaged in identity leadership that helped to build a sense
that they were gaining a new positive identity. Results showed a negative impact of pre-
change organizational identification on post-change identification and various adjustment
outcomes if both pathways were inaccessible, thereby contributing to employees’ experience
of social identity loss. Discussion focuses on the ways in which organizations and their
leaders can better manage organizational change and associated identity transition.
Keywords: organizational change, social identity, leadership, continuity, adjustment
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 3
Organizations engage in major change activities such as restructures, mergers, and
acquisitions for a variety of reasons including achieving growth, diversification, or
economies of scale (Ellis et al., 2009). Yet from the perspective of employees, these major
changes are often perceived as a “critical life event” (Jimmieson et al., 2004, p.11). Indeed,
Marks and Mirvis (2001) suggest that mergers and acquisitions (M&As) can even be
experienced as traumatic events, and that this is especially true in the case of hostile
takeovers. In such cases, organizational change processes have a significant negative impact
on employees’ organizational behavior, cognition, and affect, and thus on organizations’
functioning following the change (for reviews see Cartwright & Schoenberg, 2006; Hogan &
Overmyer-Day, 1994; Ullrich & van Dick, 2007; Ullrich et al., 2005). Beyond this, several
studies have indicated that organizational changes can also have a negative impact on
employees’ health and well-being (Amiot et al., 2006; Makri et al., 2012; Väänänen et al.,
2004; van Dick et al., 2006). Such findings have led researchers and practitioners to ask what
processes lead to these outcomes and what leaders can do to ameliorate them (for a review
see Cartwright & Schoenberg, 2006; Graebner et al., 2017). In this paper, we aim to explain
how employees adjust to organizational changes by introducing and testing the Social
Identity Model of Organizational Change (SIMOC).
Theoretical Background to SIMOC
One approach that provides a useful framework for exploring these issues is the social
identity approach (SIA; Giessner et al., 2012; Haslam, 2004; Ullrich & van Dick, 2007; van
Knippenberg et al., 2002), which comprises social identity theory (SIT; Tajfel & Turner,
1979) and self-categorization theory (SCT; Turner, 1985; Turner et al., 1987). Social identity
theorists have applied the SIA to a range of organizational contexts — including those of
organizational change — and argued that individuals define themselves not only as
individuals (i.e., in terms of their personal identity) but also in terms of group memberships
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 4
bound up with organizational life (i.e., in terms of their social identity; Ashforth & Mael,
1989; Haslam, 2004). Social identity can be defined as “that part of an individual’s self-
concept which derives from his [sic] knowledge of his membership of a social group (or
groups) together with the value and emotional significance attached to that membership”
(Tajfel, 1978, p. 68). The social identity approach further suggests that once individuals
categorize themselves in terms of group memberships and relevant groups are internalized
through the process of identification, individuals’ behavior, attitudes, and feelings will be
determined by these group memberships (Haslam et al., 2000; van Knippenberg, 2000).
In work contexts, individuals often experience their organization as providing them
with a valued social identity of this form. More specifically, when people identify with an
organization, that organization becomes a central part of their self-concept. In line with the
social identity approach, organizational identification can be defined as “the perception of
oneness with or belongingness to an organization, where the individual defines him or herself
in terms of the organization(s) in which he or she is a member” (Mael & Ashforth, 1992; p.
104). Such organizational identities are important because they provide employees with a
sense of ‘who we are’ and thus with meaning, purpose, and direction (Haslam et al., 2003), as
well as affiliation, respect and belonging (Greenaway et al., 2016; Haslam et al., 2000; van
Dick et al., 2006). In this way, organizational identity has important implications not only for
employees’ work-related attitudes and behavior (Riketta, 2005), but also for their health and
well-being (Steffens et al., 2017; Steffens et al., 2018).
Furthermore, social identity theorists argue that the self is not fixed but flexible and
sensitive to social context (Turner, 1985). More specifically, whether (and to what extent) our
sense of self is informed by a particular group membership and shapes our cognition, affect
and behavior depends on the salience of a given social identity in the situation at hand (Oakes
et al., 1994). In this regard, major organizational changes have the capacity not only to
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 5
increase employees’ awareness of their group membership but also, more fundamentally, to
change the nature of organizational identity (i.e., what it means to be a member of the
organization). Indeed, fundamental organizational changes are often seen by employees as
threats to their organizational identity that have a significant bearing on their adjustment to
the change (Terry et al., 2001; Ullrich et al., 2005).
Consistent with these ideas, employees often experience major organizational changes
as entailing a loss of their former organizational identity, and therefore as highly stressful
events. Indeed, Marks and Mirvis (2001) have drawn parallels between employees’ reactions
to takeovers and those that follow death and loss more generally. Supporting such claims,
research in a range of social contexts has found that, even when change is ostensibly
desirable and positive, associated identity change can have profound consequences for
individuals’ mental health and well-being — as witnessed in increased levels of depression,
burnout, and lower levels of life satisfaction (Haslam et al., 2021; Iyer et al., 2009; Jetten et
al., 2010; Praharso et al., 2017; Steffens et al., 2016). Previous research in the M&A context
also indicates that organizational change often results in a decreasing level of identification
with the pre-existing organization after the change (Gleibs et al., 2008) and in low levels of
post-merger identification with the new organization (Giessner et al., 2012; van Knippenberg
et al., 2002). These negative consequences are exacerbated to the extent that people identify
with groups whose identity is negatively affected by change (e.g., because the group is
disbanded; Sani et al., 2008). This suggests that the more emotional significance individuals
attach to their pre-existing organizational identity, the more their well-being and adjustment
are likely to suffer if they lose that identity.
At the same time, organizational changes — particularly M&As — also have
implications for the adoption of a new, or the revision of an existing, social identity in the
light of a newly emerging organization. Coming to identify with the newly emerging
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 6
organization can promote adjustment and well-being to the extent that it restores or even
improves employees’ capacity to satisfy their social needs, including the need for
affiliation, belongingness, and respect (Greenaway et al., 2016; van Dick et al., 2006).
Indeed, in previous merger studies identification with the newly emerging organization after
the change has been found to explain various consequences of organizational change —
including job satisfaction (Amiot et al., 2006; Jetten et al., 2002; Jimmieson et al., 2004) and
organizational citizenship behavior (van Dick et al., 2006; van Dick et al., 2004). What is
more, under some circumstances, people’s identification with a pre-merger organization can
be a catalyst for the development of identification with the newly emerging organization. For
example, van Dick et al. (2004, 2006) found that employees’ identification with their former
organization can be positively associated with post-merger identification with the newly
emerging organization, in ways that support adjustment and well-being. Similarly, an
experimental study by van Leeuwen et al. (2003) revealed a positive relationship between
pre-merger and post-merger identification. They also found the relationship between pre- and
post-merger identification to be positive even when there was low continuation of the pre-
merger and post-merger groups (even though it was weaker than in the condition of high
continuation).
To integrate these various findings and explain different trajectories following
organizational change, the present paper seeks to set out and test the Social Identity Model of
integrative framework for understanding the impact of organizational change draws on
general theorizing about identity change processes and builds upon the Social Identity Model
of Identity Change (SIMIC; Haslam et al., 2008, 2021; Jetten et al., 2010). According to
SIMIC, people derive health and well-being benefits from belonging to social groups in
general as well as in times of upheaval and change (when these are a major source of
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 7
psychological resilience; Drury, 2012; Williams et al., 2019). More specifically, the model
identifies two pathways to successful adjustment after life changes — an identity
maintenance and an identity gain pathway (Haslam et al., 2008; Jetten et al., 2010).
The first of these pathways takes the form of an identity maintenance pathway. Here
people’s health and well-being are supported by their being able to maintain valued group
memberships during life changes or transitions. However, if the change interrupts the
connection between past and present, individuals’ sense of identity continuity will tend to be
compromised in ways that can jeopardize their health and well-being. In part this is because
pre-existing identities are no longer an accessible source for support and meaning (Cruwys et
al., 2013, 2014; Sani et al., 2008).
SIMIC’s second pathways is an identity gain pathway. Here people’s health and well-
being are supported by their being able to acquire a new identity in the context of a life
change or transition. This is because this new identity not only furnishes them with a new
sense of belonging, meaning and purpose, but also provides a basis for them to receive and
benefit from new sources of support (Cruwys et al., 2014; Haslam et al., 2021; Jetten et al.,
2010). At the same time, pre-existing identities can serve as a platform for developing new
identities after a change (Haslam et al., 2021). Therefore, both these pathways, i.e., identity
gain and identity maintenance, suggest that successful adjustment to change can be facilitated
by the group memberships (and associated social identities) that an individual has access to
prior to the change.
Yet while the SIMIC model has been shown to provide important insights into the
identity processes and pathways that impact health in the context of general life change (e.g.,
those associated with illness, relocation, and retirement; see Haslam et al., 2021, 2019; Iyer et
al., 2009), its usefulness as a model of adjustment to organizational change remains
unexplored. In what follows, we review theory and evidence that speaks to the importance of
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 8
these two pathways for successful adjustment after organizational change before going on to
report the findings of a study that provides an initial test of SIMOC in the context of an
organizational acquisition.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 9
Conceptual Model of the Social Identity Model of Organizational Change (SIMOC)
Note. The plus and minus signs indicate the impact of pre-change identification on post-change identification and adjustment. Observed
variables are displayed in boxes with solid lines, while latent identity change processes are displayed in boxes with dotted lines.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The
final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 10
The Identity Maintenance Pathway: Sense of Continuity During Organizational Change
During organizational changes and M&As in particular, some organizational groups
are more likely than others to be forced to change their identity. Following the tradition of
social identity theorizing, previous research has analyzed M&As from an intergroup
perspective (Blake & Mouton, 1985; Gleibs et al., 2010; van Leeuwen et al., 2003) and
suggested that the extent to which one organization dominates the integration process after a
merger or acquisition influences employees’ experience of (dis)continuity (van Knippenberg
et al., 2002). Here a dominant merger partner (e.g., due to its higher pre-merger status) or an
acquiring organization will typically have more influence in the integration process and is
more likely to define the characteristics of the post-change identity in terms of its pre-change
identity (Giessner et al., 2006; Gleibs et al., 2008; Lupina-Wegener et al., 2014; Ullrich et al.,
2005). In line with these ideas (see also van Knippenberg et al., 2002; van Knippenberg &
van Leeuwen, 2001), laboratory and field studies provide evidence that employees’
organizational membership determines how likely they are to be able to transfer their pre-
change identification to the post-change identification (Bartels et al., 2006; Gleibs et al.,
2008; Lupina-Wegener et al., 2014; van Dick et al., 2004; van Knippenberg et al., 2002). In
this regard, a common finding in the literature is that pre-change identification relates
positively to post-change identification for employees of the dominant merger partner or
acquiring organization, while this is less true for employees of the subordinate merger partner
or acquired organization (Lupina-Wegener et al., 2014).
In this vein, van Knippenberg and colleagues (van Knippenberg & van Leeuwen,
2001; van Leeuwen et al., 2003) argue that employees can more easily transfer their pre-
merger identification onto the post-merger entity if they have a strong sense of identity
continuity. In line with previous research, we define identity continuity as an employee’s
sense that their pre-existing organization is represented in the organization after the
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 11
organizational change such that the post-change identity is perceived as a continuation of the
pre-change identity (van Knippenberg & van Leeuwen, 2001). Here employees’ sense of
continuity reflects their sense that the organizational change has had little (or no) impact on
the nature of their organizational identity (identity maintenance) or that the organizational
change implies significant changes to their organizational identity — to the extent that their
former organizational identity can no longer be maintained (identity change). Consistent with
this argumentation, SIMOC proposes that employees’ perceived identity continuity
determines the accessibility of the identity maintenance pathway in ways that facilitate the
transition of identification from pre- to post-change and that thereby support adjustment.
However, as alluded to above, SIMOC extends previous work that has focused on
maintenance of an existing identity as a way to facilitate post-change identification and
adjustment by also introducing an alternative pathway that centers on the experience of
identity gain.
The Identity Gain Pathway: Identity Leadership During Organizational Change
Even though going through major organizational changes often means that employees
cannot maintain an existing identity, negative responses are not inevitable. Instead, the
experience of identity change is influenced by myriad social factors including the ways in
which leaders help employees to negotiate a change to their identity. In this regard, leading
change and shaping employees’ perception of the change are an essential function of
leadership (Yukl, 2006). During organizational change, leaders thus serve as an important
source of guidance in helping employees to make sense of the transition that they and the
organization are undergoing (Giessner et al., 2016).
To understand what leaders can do to support employees in dealing with change to
their organizational identity, we draw on the social identity theory of leadership (Haslam,
Reicher, & Platow, 2020; Hogg, 2001; Hogg & van Knippenberg, 2003; Reicher, Haslam, &
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 12
Hopkins, 2005). This perspective conceptualizes leadership as a group membership-based
influence process and argues that leaders’ effectiveness arises from their capacity to develop
and manage a sense of shared social identity (i.e., a sense of ‘we’ and ‘us’). As Steffens et al.
(2014, p. 1021) put it, leaders who engage in identity leadership facilitate their followers’
relationship with the organization by “developing an understanding and exemplifying what it
means to be a member of the organization, acting as a champion for the organization and
devising activities that bring members of the organization together”. More specifically,
identity leadership has been argued to encompass four components whereby, to be effective,
leaders need (1) to be seen as ‘one of us’ (to be ingroup prototypical), (2) to be seen as ‘doing
it for us’ (to advance ingroup interests), (3) to craft a sense of ‘us’ (to develop and shape
ingroup identity), and (4) to make ‘us’ matter’ (to create material structures that support the
ingroup and translate the idea of “us” into lived experience; Haslam et al., 2020; Reicher et
al., 2005; Steffens et al., 2014). Furthermore, validating this model, evidence from over 20
countries indicates that leaders’ engagement in identity leadership has unique positive impact
on a range of important outcomes including employees’ identification, job satisfaction,
innovative behavior, and citizenship (van Dick et al., 2018).
Previous research on identity leadership in the context of organizational change has
shown that leaders who embody (i.e., are prototypical of) the defining characteristics of the
group are more trusted and thus are especially effective in leading change (Hogg et al., 2012;
Pierro et al., 2007; van Knippenberg et al., 2008). Focusing primarily on identity
prototypicality, researchers have argued that those changes that are promoted by prototypical
leaders are more likely to be perceived as identity-consistent than the same changes promoted
by less prototypical leaders (van Knippenberg & Hogg, 2003). In this vein, previous research
also shows that leaders can serve as agents of continuity by minimizing subordinates’ sense
that their identity has changed in fundamental ways while simultaneously helping employees
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 13
see any change as a continuation of shared identity (van Knippenberg et al., 2008; Venus et
al., 2019).
Yet while assuring employees that ‘we will remain who we are’ can be an effective
strategy for encouraging acceptance of change (Venus et al., 2019), there are other aspects of
identity leadership that are also likely to help leaders manage organizational change
effectively. In particular, leaders who engage in identity leadership can also work with
employees’ current understanding of ‘who we are’ to develop an understanding of ‘who we
want to be’. Here the process of envisioning a clear and bright tomorrow for the organization
and its associated identity can facilitate employees’ identity transition from the pre-existing
to the newly emerging organization after the change (Lupina-Wegener et al., 2014). Indeed,
consistent with previous work on identity entrepreneurship which shows that effective leaders
do not just embody who we are but also work to craft social categories (Reicher & Hopkins,
1996a, 1996b), leaders are more likely to help employees deal successfully with
organizational change if they create a sense of future identity that is both positive and
meaningful. Moreover, leaders who engage in identity advancement by promoting the
interests of group members (Steffens et al., 2014) may be more likely to foster subordinates’
sense that their group is likely to gain from the changes. By helping employees negotiate the
changes to their identity and consolidate a sense of a positive future collective identity,
leaders who engage in identity leadership should therefore help to ensure a successful
transformation of employees’ sense of ‘us’ over the course of any organizational change.
This is particularly important when the material changes that occur impact the
organizational identity to such an extent that the sense of ‘us’ that existed prior to the change
can no longer be maintained. Supporting this assertion, van Knippenberg et al. (2008) found
that the positive effect of leaders’ group representativeness on group members’ willingness to
support change was more pronounced under conditions of high discontinuity threat.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 14
Similarly, Giessner (2011) showed that communicating the necessity of change was crucial
for employees who lacked a sense of continuity and contributed to their development of
identification with an organization after it had undergone a major change. In this way,
identity leadership that promotes a sense of new organizational identity can facilitate
employees’ interpretation of the identity change as an identity gain, rather than an identity
threat or loss, and thereby increase the accessibility of the identity gain pathway.
The Present Study
The goal of the present study was to test SIMOC’s key propositions in a naturalistic
field setting. Building on and extending theorising about the process of social identity
change, SIMOC argues that changes in the sense of self that employees derive from their
organizational membership will shape their responses to organizational change. As set out in
determine whether identification with the pre-existing organizational group serves as a
valuable resource to support employees’ development of post-change identification and
adjustment to organizational change: (1) social identity maintenance (vs. change), and (2)
social identity gain (vs. loss). More specifically, employees should be more likely to adjust
successfully to organizational change either if they can maintain their identity (via the
identity maintenance pathway), or if they are able to change their identity (either by adopting
a new identity or by revising their old identity) in ways that are perceived as an identity gain
(via the identity gain pathway). Moreover, SIMOC proposes that identity leadership that
promotes the new emerging identity may be particularly important when the identity
maintenance pathway is inaccessible, as the identity gain pathway can compensate for this
and protect highly identified employees from the negative consequences that result from
identity loss. At the same time, a sense of identity continuity should serve to prevent the
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 15
experience of loss in the absence of identity work performed by the leaders in the
organization.
Advancing previous social identity theorising of organisational change processes,
SIMOC is able to account for different trajectories following organizational change. It
suggests that an experience of growth in response to challenges posed by a rupture of a
valued organizational identity is most likely to arise when a new positive and meaningful
identity can be formed (for related observations in the field of trauma, see Muldoon et al.,
2019). At the same time, it also proposes that strong identification with the pre-existing
organization can have less positive or even negative consequences for post-change
identification and adjustment among employees who cannot access either of the two
pathways (i.e., if employees have a sense that they can neither maintain their valued old
identities nor acquire positive new ones). This is because here change is likely to be
perceived as entailing identity loss.
On the basis of our model, we predict that the relationship between pre-change
identification and adjustment should be positive if continuity is high (so that the maintenance
pathway is accessible) and/or identity leadership is high (so that the gain pathway is
accessible). However, pre-change identification should be less positively or even negatively
related to post-change identification and adjustment under conditions of low continuity and
low identity leadership (so that both pathways are inaccessible and employees experience
identity loss). More formally, this analysis leads us to hypothesize a three-way interaction
between pre-change identification, identity continuity, and identity leadership. The
relationships between pre-change identification and post-change identification and
adjustment should be doubly moderated by identity continuity and identity leadership.
The present research advances our understanding of the psychological processes that
structure employees’ responses to organizational identity change. It does this in several ways.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 16
First, SIMOC provides an integrative framework that builds on, and extends, previous
theorizing around organizational change processes. Specifically, it advances previous
theorizing that points to a positive relationship between pre- and post-merger organizational
identification by outlining identity maintenance and identity gain as related but distinct
pathways to post-merger identification and adjustment. Second, the present work extends on
a growing body of work that is concerned with the ways in which identity transitions affect
individuals’ health and well-being (Haslam et al., 2021) by suggesting that organizational
change involves identity change processes that have important implications for health and
well-being. Third, the present research makes an important contribution to the leadership
literature and the social identity theory of leadership. For while research has stressed the
importance of leading change as a key function of leadership (Yukl, 2006), we know little
about how leaders influence subordinates’ sense of self in times of change. While there are a
few studies on identity prototypicality in the change context, most of the work on identity
leadership has focused on relatively static contexts. In particular, the present research
advances research on identity leadership that has focused on leaders’ ability to influence
others (Haslam et al., 2020; Steffens et al., 2014; van Knippenberg, 2011), by exploring the
role that identity leadership plays in supporting adjustment in the context of organizational
change.
Method
Acquisition Context and Study Design
The study was conducted in the context of a large acquisition by a European
pharmaceutical company. The acquiring organization (here called Alpha) had acquired sites
from a supplier organization (Beta). According to the financial reports of the two
organizations, Alpha was financially more successful than Beta in the year prior to the
acquisition, while Beta had had a more difficult year (as indicated by a decline in its market
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 17
value). However, the main motive for the acquisition by Alpha was to reach an
internationally recognizable size and to strengthen its market position as an international
market player and acquire complementary functions delivered by its former supplier. As a
result of the acquisition, Alpha gained recognition as a group, and indeed it changed to being
branded as an international (rather than a national) operating company. The acquired sites
were not part of the Beta group’s core business but were complementary to Alpha and likely
more valued in Alpha, according to one of Beta’s board of executive directors. The acquired
Beta sites remained intact (e.g., keeping their functional organizational units such as
compliance, IT, HR and finance), while synergies were achieved in terms of overheads.
Therefore, the headquarters of Alpha were most directly affected by the acquisition, while
other Alpha sites were not subjected to any changes as part of the acquisition. Hence, only
employees from the Alpha headquarters site and the acquired Beta sites that experienced
change participated in the present study. The vast majority of employees were white-collar
workers, with only few blue-collar workers performing manual work in the production.
We collected data over two waves via an online survey completed by employees of
the Alpha headquarter and the acquired Beta sites. We used a predictive design with a time
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 18
lag of one and a half years between the two data collections.1 The first measurement point
(T1) was four months after the official announcement of the acquisition and three months
before the implementation of organizational changes due to the acquisition started. During
this initial planning and formal combination stage (Seo & Hill, 2005), we measured
employees’ pre-change identification. One and a half years later the operational combination
stage of the integration had officially ended (Seo & Hill, 2005). At this post-integration time
point (T2), we collected data on employees’ post-change identification and adjustment, as
well as all other variables that are described in more detail below.
Participants
Our a-priori considerations and expectations concerning response rates and final
sample size were based on previous longitudinal studies on post-merger identification and
M&A studies testing similarly extensive models. On the basis of research by van Dick et al.
(2006), we expected that about 37% of the contacted participants would respond in the first
data collection wave (T1) and that about 33% of participants from the first data collection
————————————————————————
1 This study was part of a larger research project which included four measurement points. An
overview of all measures assessed in the four measurement points can be found in the
supplemental materials (OSF;
the present study was to test whether pre-change identification can predict employees’
adjustment, health and well-being after the change, we excluded the second and third
measurement points where data were collected during the integration phase, and only used
data from the first (pre-change) and fourth (post-change) measurement point. Adjustment
outcomes which are crucial to this study were only assessed post-change at the fourth
measurement point. Employees, who took part in the data collection before the integration
and stayed in the sample during the integration were approached to participate in the fourth
measurement point. To avoid confusion, in what follows, the fourth measurement point is
labelled here as T2.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 19
would respond to the follow-up survey (T2). The expectations for the follow-up response rate
were based on a longitudinal study with a one-year time lag (total N = 157 after three waves
of data collections) conducted by Gleibs et al. (2008) and a similar study with a two-year
time lag (total N = 220 after two waves of data collections) conducted by Amiot et al. (2006).
These expectations were met. Out of 1668 employees who were contacted by email,
761 responded at the first measurement point (46% response rate in reference to the target
sample). A total of 256 participants gave their consent to participate voluntarily and
continued to participate until the data collection was finished 18 months later (34% follow-up
response rate). We excluded participants who did not state their pre-acquisition
organizational affiliation (n = 1) or who did not have an immediate supervisor (n = 30). The
final sample consisted of 74 employees from the acquiring organization and 151 from the
acquired organization. Of the final sample (N = 225), 72.9% of the participants were male,
26.2% were female, and two participants chose to not state their gender. Participants were
between 18 and 68 years old (M = 43.08, SD = 9.90). On average, they had worked for 15.71
years (SD = 10.78) with their pre-acquisition organization and for 5.13 years (SD = 4.84)
with their immediate supervisor.
Ethics
The content of the questionnaire as well as the procedure to ensure anonymity and
confidentiality during and after the data collection were reviewed and approved (a) by a data
privacy manager at the first author’s university, (b) an independent external data privacy
manager as well as (c) by the organization’s employee representatives and their ethics review
board. The Head of Communication announced to employees via e-mail that the survey was
part of a scientific study conducted by the first author’s university. Initial emails informed
participants about the study and included a confidentiality agreement, as well as a code for
matching data from the measurement points, while ensuring anonymity. A few days later
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 20
participants received a second email including the link to the online survey from the first
author. All participants were thanked and debriefed after the second data collection.
Descriptive findings were disseminated in the organization’s annual report.
Measures
Since the acquired sites were located in different European countries, the
questionnaire was made accessible in the three languages that were spoken in these countries
(German, French and English). A professional translation agency translated all items from the
original English into French using the standard procedure of translation, back-translation, and
re-translation (see Brislin, 1970). A bilingual research assistant and the first author translated
and back-translated the original items from English to German if there was no German
version of the validated scales available. Any inconsistencies were resolved through
discussion with the third author.
We conducted a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) in R (Version 3.4.3) using the
lavaan package (Rosseel, 2012) to ensure the distinctiveness of the adjustment constructs
including post-change identification measured at T2. Overall, the results of the CFA
(reported in the supplemental material B, p. 2-6) yielded a good fit to the data for a six-factor
model representing post-change identification, job satisfaction, OCB, depression, life
satisfaction, and post-traumatic growth (S-B χ2 = 684.29, df = 484, p < .001; scaling
correction factor = 1.14, CFI = . 95, RMSEA = .05 [.04, .05], SRMR = .07). After confirming
the validity of combining the a priori defined items to their respective scale, we assessed the
reliability of the multi-item scales and report coefficient omega (Hayes & Coutts, 2020;
McNeish, 2018; G.-J. Peters, 2014) using the reliability function of the MBESS package in R
(Version 4.8.0; Kelley, 2020). All scales showed high reliability. Unless stated otherwise,
participants indicated their agreement with relevant statements on 7-point scales ranging from
1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly agree”).
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 21
Pre- and Post-Change Organizational Identification
We measured participants’ organizational identification with their old organization
(i.e., Alpha for the acquiring organization and Beta for the acquired organization) before the
integration process had started. Eighteen months after the official acquisition we assessed
employees’ organizational identification with the newly formed organization (hereafter
referred to Post-Alpha). At both time points we used three items from the Organizational
Identification Scale developed by Mael and Ashforth (1992), but referred either to
“[Alpha/Beta], the former organization before the acquisition” to assess pre-change
identification or to “[Post-Alpha], the ‘new’ company created as a result of the acquisition of
the Beta sites by Alpha” to assess post-change identification: “When I talk about [Alpha or
Beta/Post-Alpha], I usually say ‘we’ rather than ‘they’”, “[Alpha’s or Beta’s/Post-Alpha’s]
successes are my successes”, “When someone praises [Alpha or Beta/Post-Alpha], it feels
like a personal compliment” (ω = .89 for pre-change identification, ω = .83 for post-change
identification).
Sense of Continuity
Participants indicated on a four-item scale validated by Lupina-Wegener et al. (2014)
whether they had experienced a sense of continuity of their former identity after the
organizational change. Illustrative items are “After the acquisition [Post-Alpha] represents
my former organization” and “After the acquisition my former organization is still clearly
visible” (ω = .85).
Identity Leadership
Employees’ perceptions of their immediate supervisors’ identity leadership in relation
to their post-change organizational identity were measured using the Identity Leadership
Inventory (ILI; Steffens et al., 2014). Sample items include “In the light of the organizational
changes due to the acquisition, my immediate supervisor … exemplifies what it means to be
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 22
a member of [Post-Alpha]” and “…develops an understanding of what it means to be a
member of [Post-Alpha]”. A composite identity leadership score was computed by averaging
responses to the 15 items. The reliability of the identity leadership inventory (ω = .96) was
similar to the internal consistency of the scale found in previous studies (e.g., Steffens et al.,
2014).
Adjustment Indicators
In order to measure adjustment to change, we included two criterion variables
commonly used in previous M&A studies (e.g., van Dick et al., 2006) to measure work-
related attitudes and behaviors: job satisfaction and organizational citizenship behavior
towards the organization after the change. Two additional criterion variables were included to
measure employees’ adjustment in terms of their health and well-being after the change.
Drawing on studies on health and well-being during identity transitions (e.g., Cruwys et al.,
2021; Praharso et al., 2017), we measured employees’ level of depression and life
satisfaction. To capture the extent to which individuals were able to experience growth
following traumatic experiences, we also assessed employees’ post-change growth (Muldoon
et al., 2017).
Job Satisfaction. We measured job satisfaction with three items adapted from the Job
Diagnostic Survey (Hackman & Oldham, 1975). Illustrative items are “All in all I am
satisfied with my job” and “In general, I don’t like my job” (reversed item; ω = .84).
Organizational Citizenship Behavior (OCB). We assessed employees’
organizational citizenship behavior in the new post-acquisition organization using Lee and
Allen's (2002) eight-item OCB-O Scale. Sample items are “I keep up with developments in
the organization” and “I offer ideas to improve the functioning of the organization” (ω = .88).
Depression. We used the seven-item depression subscale of the DASS-21, a well-
validated short form of the 42-item Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (Lovibond & Lovibond,
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 23
1995), which can be used in non-clinical samples (Henry & Crawford, 2005). Sample items
for the depression subscale are “Over the course of the past four weeks, please indicate
whether you experienced the following: … I found it difficult to work up the initiative to do
things” and “… I felt that life was meaningless” (ω = .93).
Satisfaction with Life. We measured employees’ subjective well-being with the five-
item Satisfaction with Life Scale (Diener et al., 1985). This measure has established
reliability and validity and assesses life satisfaction as a cognitive-judgmental process.
Sample items are “I am satisfied with life” and “In most ways my life is close to ideal” (ω
= .91).
Post-Traumatic Growth. The Post-Traumatic Growth Inventory (PTGI; Tedeschi &
Calhoun, 1996) assesses the experience of a positive change following trauma, major crises,
or extreme stressors. We used the Posttraumatic Growth Inventory Short Form (PTGI-SF;
Cann et al., 2010) which has been used in a wide variety of populations. Due to the context,
we excluded two items a-priori, which measure Spiritual change, from the original 10-item
PTGI-SF and adapted the remaining eight items to the work context by changing the word
“life” to “work life” and asking participants to refer to the acquisition instead of “my crisis”
(see full adapted version of the PTGI-SF in the online supplemental material A, p.1).
Illustrative items are “As a result of the acquisition, …I have a greater sense of closeness
with others at work” and “…I discovered that I’m stronger than I thought I was”. Participants
responded to these items on 6-point scales ranging from 1 (“I did not experience this change
as a result of the acquisition”) to 6 (“I experienced this change to a very great degree as a
result of the acquisition”; ω = .91).
Control Variables
We controlled for participants’ sex and age because research has shown that well-
being varies with sociodemographic variables (e.g., Diener & Shu, 1997; Keyes et al., 2002).
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 24
We also controlled for participants’ tenure in their pre-acquisition organization since
identification needs time to develop. Moreover, previous research has shown that the
relationship between pre-change identification and post-change identification is stronger
among members of the dominant organization (who experience greater continuity; e.g.,
Lupina-Wegener et al., 2014). Therefore, to rule out the possibility that our hypothesized
moderating effects simply reflect the influence of pre-acquisition organizational membership
(belonging to Alpha coded as 0 and Beta coded as 1), we included the interaction between
pre-change identification and pre-existing organizational membership as a control variable in
existing organizational membership moderates the effect of pre-change identification on
adjustment.
All supplemental materials, survey measures, R scripts, as well as additional analyses
and results are available on the Open Science Framework (OSF;
Results
Subject Attrition and Sensitivity Analysis
Because the study had a predictive design with a time lag of one and a half years
between the two data collection points and also had strict participant exclusion criteria, we
had a considerable dropout rate. To test whether the dropout led to non-random sampling, we
used a binary logistic regression analysis to assess the probability of staying in the final
sample or leaving after responding to the first survey as a function of T1 measures of sex,
age, tenure, pre-acquisition organizational membership, and pre-change identification. The
results of the binary logistic regression analysis indicated that the probability of dropout was
slightly decreased by tenure in the pre-acquisition organization (Exp(B) = -.02, p = .02), but
was not affected by participants’ sex (Exp(B) = .20, p = .33) or age (Exp(B) = .01, p = .33).
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 25
Most importantly, results showed that neither pre-acquisition organizational membership
(Exp(B) = .17, p = .41) nor pre-change identification (Exp(B) = .02, p = .76) predicted
dropout. The results of this analysis suggest that the validity of our findings is unlikely to be
affected by systematic dropout.
For the test of SIMOC, we held the sample size constant across the separate analyses
by list-wise excluding missing observations in key variables of our model. This resulted in a
sample size of 177 and consequently 164 degrees of freedom for the analyses testing the
proposed three-way interaction. To address the statistical power underlying these analyses,
we conducted a sensitivity analysis. We used this procedure because post-hoc power analysis
can be misleading if performed on data that have already been collected (Zhang et al., 2019).
Results of the sensitivity analysis showed that the minimum detectable effect size partial eta
squared was .05, setting statistical power to 80% and assuming 164 degrees of freedom in the
regression analyses for each outcome separately, which are shown in the online supplemental
material C (p. 7-14). This meant that our analysis was able to detect effects equal to 5% of
the variance unaccounted for by the other variables. These correspond to small-to-medium
effects according to Cohen’s classification of conventional effect sizes (Cohen, 1973).
Regarding the capacity for multi-group CFA to validate the composition of a general
adjustment factor (as presented below), our sample size can be considered as reasonable and
sufficient given our rather high level of communalities (here, three out of four above .60)
according to MacCallum et al. (1999). Under such conditions, even studies with sample sizes
of 60 participants tend to obtain high congruence between sample factors and population
factors (MacCallum et al., 1999).
For the multi-group SEM testing the key propositions of SIMOC, we used maximum
likelihood estimation with robust (Huber-White) standard errors (MLR) and the Satorra-
Bentler scaled test statistic (Satorra & Bentler, 1988, 1994). The latter has been found to be
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 26
effective for the correction of models with non-normally distributed data in small to moderate
samples (Chou et al., 1991; Hu & Bentler, 1999). Regarding the power for the multi-group
SEM analyses, it is worth noting that the fit index RMSEA is relatively independent of the
sample size (Schermelleh-Engel et al., 2003).
Preliminary Analysis of Differences between Organizations
adjustment outcomes and predictor variables in our model for the full sample (N = 225). As
expected, sense of continuity and identity leadership were associated with most adjustment
outcomes (except post-traumatic growth). Also in line with our expectations, post-change
identification was significantly related to job satisfaction, OCB, depression, and satisfaction
with life, as well as post-traumatic growth.
To explore the impact of the organizational group an employee belonged to before the
change on the predictor and moderators of our model, we first compared employees from
Alpha and Beta on measures of pre-change identification, sense of continuity, and perceived
identity leadership. Pre-change identification was considerably lower among Beta employees
(M = 3.58, SD = 1.75), than among Alpha employees (M = 5.34, SD = 1.22, t(197.15)
OrgB OrgA
= 8.77, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 1.10), possibly reflecting the fact that the acquired Beta sites
were not part of the Beta group’s core business, and these employees had lower status within
their former Beta group. Replicating previous findings (e.g., van Knippenberg & van
Leeuwen, 2001), Beta employees reported a significantly lower sense of continuity than
Alpha employees (M = 4.81, SD = 1.66; M = 3.73, SD = 1.29, t(112.27) = 4.79, p
OrgA OrgB
< .001, Cohen’s d = .74). Even though not explicitly stated by SIMOC, we explored whether
Alpha and Beta employees differed in ratings of their immediate supervisor’s identity
leadership after the integration. Results indicated that employees in the acquired and
acquiring organization perceived their supervisors to engage to a similar degree in identity
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 27
leadership by promoting the new emerging organizational identity (M = 5.09, SD = 1.23;
OrgA
M = 5.13, SD = 1.22, t(138.76) = -.24, p = .81, Cohen’s d = -.03). Hence, we can assume
OrgB
that supervisors in both organizational groups were likely perceived to provide a similar
amount of support to their employees to help them gain a sense of new identity.
Additionally, we explored differences in the trajectories of organizational
identification from pre- to post change in employees of Alpha and Beta. Results of a
repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a significant interaction effect for organizational
identification as a function of pre-acquisition organizational membership (Alpha vs. Beta)
and time (pre-change T1 vs. post-change T2), F(1, 223) = 61.78, p < .001, η2 = .14.
(partial)
This significant interaction indicated that despite experiencing lower continuity,
identification increased more strongly from pre- to post-change among Beta employees than
among Alpha employees, such that post-change identification was higher among Beta than
among Alpha employees after the integration (M = 4.74, SD = 1.35; M = 5.21, SD =
OrgA OrgB
1.40, t(142.37) = -2.42, p = .02, Cohen’s d = -.34). Similar trajectories of identification were
reported by Edwards et al. (2017). If sense of continuity was the only cause of post-change
identification and uniformly lower among Beta employees, the observed increase in Beta
employees’ identification would be surprising. However, these findings are consistent with
our model in indicating that employees’ perception of identity continuity is not the only
contributor to post-change identification and that the development of post-change
identification can also be influenced by other factors such as supervisors’ identity leadership.
In summary, preliminary analysis identified differences between the organizational
groups, Alpha and Beta, that are mostly in line with previous research. Consequently, this
difference in the identification transfer from pre- to post-change by organizational group
must be modelled in the analyses testing SIMOC in the current sample. For accurate results,
we report all analyses involving post-change identification separately for Alpha and Beta. It
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 28
is nevertheless important to point out that this research was not designed to examine group
differences, but to test the key proposition of SIMOC that there are two interdependent
pathways in operation for members of both organizations. Other than the differences in the
relationship between pre- and post-change identification, we do not expect (and do not find)
the hypothesized effect to be different for Alpha and Beta.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 29
Means, Standard Deviations, and Bivariate Correlations Between Variables (N = 225)
Alpha Beta
Variables 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
M SD M SD
1. Identity Continuity 4.81 1.66 3.73 1.29
2. Identity Leadership 5.09 1.23 5.13 1.22 .19**
3. Pre-change Identification 5.34 1.22 3.58 1.75 .19** .12
4. Post-change Identification 4.74 1.35 5.21 1.40 .16* .37*** .03
5. Job Satisfaction 5.50 1.32 5.72 1.12 .23*** .38*** -.02 .53***
6. OCB 4.88 1.16 5.19 1.12 .19** .40*** .03 .58*** .51***
7. Depression 2.13 1.22 2.45 1.52 -.27*** -.14* .01 -.41*** -.64*** -.30***
8. Satisfaction with Life 5.36 1.33 4.84 1.39 .17* .17* .15* .29*** .48*** .33*** -.54***
9. Post-traumatic Growth 1.96 1.01 2.35 1.19 -.05 .11 .04 .24*** .09 .32*** -.04 .04
10. Organizational group (Alpha = 0, Beta = 1) -.34*** .02 -.46*** .16* .09 .13 .11 -.18* .16*
Note. *p<.05, **p<.01, *** p<.001. OCB = Organizational Citizenship Behavior.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission.
The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 30
Testing the SIMOC
The main analyses followed four steps to test SIMOC which were all carried out
within a multi-group structural equation modelling (SEM) analytical framework (using the
lavaan package for R, Version 0.6-7; Rosseel, 2012). This allowed us to efficiently test
whether the proposed relationships can be assumed to be identical across Alpha and Beta. In
the first step, we estimated a latent “adjustment” variable using the scales of the adjustment-
related measures as indicators. In the second step we added pre-change identification,
continuity, identity leadership, and all interactions including the hypothesized three-way
interaction as predictors. In line with guidelines for determining model fit (Hooper et al.,
2008; Hu & Bentler, 1999), we used a combination of fit indices, including the Satorra-
Bentler scaled chi-square (S-B χ2), Comparative Fit Index (CFI > .90), Root Mean Square
Error of Approximation (RMSEA < .08), and Standardized Root Mean Square Residual
(SRMR < .08) to evaluate overall model fit as acceptable and the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) to compare the models (where
lower AIC and BIC indicate better model fit). In the third step, we plotted the three-way
interaction to facilitate interpretation and conducted simple-slope difference tests to
determine whether the slope in the low continuity–low identity leadership condition (i.e.,
where no pathway is accessible) differed significantly from the other slopes. The fourth and
final step explored whether post-change identification mediated the relationship between pre-
Specification of a Latent Adjustment Factor
In the interest of a clear exposition of our results, we estimated a latent adjustment
variable using the scale means of the adjustment-related measures as indicators. While being
well aware that these measures reflect theoretically distinct constructs which can also be
studied in their own right, we focus in our model on adjustment where similar relationships
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 31
are expected across the variables (see Tables SM3-8 in the supplemental material C for
separate results by outcome variable). A one-factorial model estimating a latent adjustment
construct based on the observed variables of job satisfaction, organizational citizenship
behavior, depression, satisfaction with life with equal loadings across groups was found to
have a good fit after we excluded post-traumatic growth from the composition (S-B χ2 = 9.57,
df = 7, p =.21; scaling correction factor = 1.18, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .07 [.00, .17], SRMR
= .05). Indeed, post-traumatic growth is conceptually distinct from the other adjustment
outcomes (job satisfaction, OCB, depression, and satisfaction with life) in that it measures
direct positive change after adversity and hence it seems likely that it would be experienced
in a qualitatively different way. Accordingly, we treated post-traumatic growth as a separate
outcome variable in subsequent analyses.
Analyses of Three-way Interactions: Multi Group SEM
In the second step, we tested the key hypothesis of SIMOC that continuity and
identity leadership jointly moderate the effect of pre-change identification on post-change
identification as well as on general adjustment to organizational change and post-traumatic
growth. To test the proposed three-way interaction and examine whether the proposed
relationships differ by organizational group membership, we performed multi-group
structural equation modelling (SEM) using the lavaan package in R (Version 0.6-7; Rosseel,
2012). Although investigating differences between employees of Alpha and Beta was not the
focus of the present study, we chose this method because it allowed us to model the potential
differential in identification transfer between Alpha and Beta that has been identified
theoretically and empirically in previous work (e.g., van Knippenberg & van Leeuwen, 2001)
as well as to investigate whether further model parameters differ between the two
organizational groups. All variables were standardized before building the interaction terms.
Prior to the final step exploring the proposed mediation (Step 4 below), post-change
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 32
identification was treated as a dependent variable. We regressed the three outcome variables
adjustment, post-traumatic growth, and post-change identification on the predictors (pre-
change identification, continuity, and identity leadership) and the two-way (pre-change
identification x continuity, pre-change identification x identity leadership, and continuity x
identity leadership) and three-way interactions (pre-change identification x continuity x
identity leadership). To improve model fit, we allowed for three residual correlations, namely
between organizational citizenship behavior and post-traumatic growth, organizational
citizenship behavior and post-change identification, and between depression and satisfaction
with life, because scales contained items with similar words or phrases. This model yielded
an acceptable fit (S-B χ2 = 85.11, df = 55, p = .006; scaling correction factor = .89, CFI = .94,
RMSEA = .07 [.04, .10], SRMR = .05, AIC = 2627.36, BIC = 2852.86).
We then constrained the effects of the predictor variables and their interactions to be
equal across the two organizational groups except for the effect of pre-change identification
on post-identification, which is known to be contingent on organizational dominance (van
Knippenberg & van Leeuwen, 2001). The resulting model still had an acceptable fit (S-B χ2 =
114.21, df = 75, p = .002; scaling correction factor = .87, CFI = .92, RMSEA = .07 [.04, .10],
SRMR = .06, AIC = 2610.57, BIC = 2772.55). A comparison between the constrained and
unconstrained models using a chi-squared difference test indicated that making further
distinctions in parameter estimates between Alpha and Beta did not result in better model fit
(ΔS-B χ2 (20) = 28.94, p = .09). In fact, the AIC and BIC were both lower for the constrained
model and thus the constrained model was favored over the unconstrained model. These
findings indicate that the coefficients do not vary by organizational group (except for the
theoretically expected relationship between pre-change identification and post-change
identification). The results of the multi-group SEM analysis for the constrained model can be
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 33
the dominated organization found in previous studies (van Knippenberg & van Leeuwen,
2001), the effect of pre-change identification on post-identification was significant and
positive for employees of the acquiring group Alpha and less positive and not significant for
employees of the acquired group Beta. Above and beyond this effect, the multi-group SEM
analysis provided consistent support for the hypothesized three-way interaction of pre-change
identification x continuity x identity leadership on post-change identification (β = -.16, p
=.04), as well as adjustment (β = -. 14, p =.03), and post-traumatic growth (β = -.17, p =.002).
Separate regression analyses for the measures combined in the latent adjustment variable
(i.e., job satisfaction, OCB, satisfaction with life, and depression) yielded generally the same
results, and are presented in the online supplemental material C (p. 7-14).
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 34
Parameter Estimates of the Constrained Multi-group Structural Equation Model
Response to Organizational Change
Post-change Identification Adjustment Post-traumatic Growth
b SE z p b SE z p b SE z p
Alpha .53 .17 3.11 .002
Pre-change Identification .06 .06 1.02 .31 .17 .08 2.10 .04
.04 .08 0.43 .67
Beta
Continuity .17 .09 1.97 .05 .23 .07 3.29 .001 .05 .07 0.74 .46
Identity Leadership .31 .07 4.21 < .001 .29 .06 4.97 < .001 .12 .07 1.76 .08
Pre-change Identification x
.12 .09 1.43 .15 .09 .06 1.44 .15 .07 .07 1.10 .27
Continuity
Pre-change Identification x
.05 .08 0.68 .50 .13 .06 2.20 .03 -.02 .08 -0.28 .78
Identity Leadership
Continuity x Identity Leadership -.04 .08 -0.48 .63 -.10 .06 -1.61 .11 .02 .06 0.34 .74
Pre-change Identification x
-.16 .08 -2.06 .04 -.14 .06 -2.13 .03 -.17 .05 -3.07 .002
Continuity x Identity Leadership
Note. N = 177 (n = 57, n = 120). Unconstrained parameter estimates for the effect of pre-change identification on post-change
Alpha Beta
identification are shown in bold.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The
final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 35
Follow-up Analyses of Interactions
In the third step, we conducted follow-up analyses on the three-way interaction effect
and focused specifically on the condition of low continuity–low identity leadership, where we
expected the most unfavorable responses. To facilitate interpretation of the three-way
combinations of low (one standard deviation below the mean) and high levels (one standard
deviation above the mean) of the moderating variables. What stands out here is the slope of
the low continuity–low identity leadership condition represented by the solid bold line, which
indicates the effect of pre-change identification on outcomes among participants for whom
neither of the two pathways were accessible. For post-change identification, we created
separate plots for Alpha and Beta in light of the fact that the relationship between pre-change
identification and post-change identification differed as a function of organizational group
membership (as reported earlier).
post-traumatic growth, and post-change identification for both organizations. More
specifically, for employees of Alpha, the relationship between pre-change identification and
post-change identification was positive and significantly different from zero in all but the
Replicating previous findings (van Knippenberg & van Leeuwen, 2001), for employees of
Beta the effects of pre-change identification on post-identification were smaller and actually
negative in the low-low condition (b = -.30, p = .01). The results for adjustment and post-
traumatic growth did not differ significantly between Alpha and Beta. In line with specific
predictions by SIMOC, under low continuity (indicating identity change) the slope was
significant and positive when identity leadership was high (b = .23, p = .009), but was
significant and negative when identity leadership was low (b = -.30, p < .001). For post-
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 36
traumatic growth, the slopes were in the same direction as found for adjustment but were not
significantly different from zero.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 37
Three-way Interaction Plotted at Conditional Values (+/- 1 SD) of Pre-change Identification,
Continuity, and Identity Leadership
−2 −1 0 1 2
Note. C = Continuity, IL = Identity Leadership.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
1−
2−
Pre−Change Identification
Group: Alpha
noitacifitnedI
egnahC−tsoP
Low C / Low IL
Low C / High IL
High C / Low IL
High C / High IL
−2 −1 0 1 2
1−
2−
Pre−Change Identification
Group: Beta
noitacifitnedI
egnahC−tsoP
−2 −1 0 1 2
1−
2−
Pre−Change Identification
tnemtsujdA
−2 −1 0 1 2
1−
2−
Pre−Change Identification
htworG
citamuarT−tsoP
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 38
We also conducted simple-slope difference tests (Dawson & Richter, 2006) to
determine whether the slope of the low continuity–low identity leadership condition (no
accessible pathway) is significantly more negative than the slopes resulting from the
moderating variables identity leadership or continuity (or both) being conditioned to a high
completeness, the remaining comparisons are reported in the supplemental material D, p. 15).
As can be seen, the majority of slope differences were significant (shown in bold), providing
additional support for our key hypothesis. Specifically, the slopes of the relationship between
pre-change identification and outcome variables were indeed more negative when no
pathway was accessible (low identity leadership and low continuity) compared to the slopes
where one or both pathways were accessible. The slopes for participants for whom either the
from each other for all outcomes, suggesting that neither of the two pathways is more
beneficial than the other. In sum, then, the results of the multi-group SEM analyses and the
simple slope tests supported SIMOC’s key hypothesis that both pathways need to be taken
into account to predict employees’ response to change, and that pre-change identification can
have a detrimental effect on adjustment if none of the identity pathways is accessible.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 39
Estimates for Slopes Between Pre-change Identification and Outcomes at Conditional Values
of Identity Leadership and Continuity
CI 95%
b SE z p
[LL, UL]
Post-change identification
Low C and low IL Alpha .20 .17 1.16 .25 [-0.14, 0.53]
Low C and low IL Beta -.30 .12 -2.46 .01 [-0.54, -0.06]
Low C and high IL Alpha .63 .18 3.47 .001 [0.27, 0.98]
Low C and high IL Beta .13 .13 0.97 .33 [-0.13, 0.38]
High C and low IL Alpha .77 .21 3.71 <.001 [0.36, 1.17]
High C and low IL Beta .27 .17 1.57 .12 [-0.07, 0.61]
High C and high IL Alpha .54 .17 3.25 .001 [0.22, 0.87]
High C and high IL Beta .05 .15 0.30 .76 [-0.25, 0.34]
Adjustment
Low C and low IL -.30 .09 -3.48 <.001 [-0.46, -0.13]
Low C and high IL .23 .09 2.60 .009 [0.06, 0.41]
High C and low IL .15 .12 1.34 .18 [-0.07, 0.38]
High C and high IL .14 .10 1.45 .15 [-0.05, 0.33]
Post-traumatic Growth
Low C and low IL -.05 .12 -0.40 .69 [-0.29, 0.19]
Low C and high IL .24 .13 1.77 .08 [-0.03, 0.50]
High C and low IL .43 .18 2.43 .02 [0.08, 0.77]
High C and high IL .05 .15 0.34 .73 [-0.24, 0.33]
Note. N = 177. Significant estimates are shown in bold. IL = Identity leadership, C =
Continuity. CI = confidence interval; LL = lower limit; UL = upper limit.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI:
10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 40
Results of t-Tests of Slope Differences: Comparing the Relation Between Pre-change Identification and Outcome Variables (a) when
Continuity and Identity Leadership is Low and (b) when Continuity and/or Identity leadership is High
Post-change Identification Adjustment Post-traumatic Growth
Slope pairs
95% CI 95% CI 95% CI
∆ p ∆ p ∆ p
[LL, UL] [LL, UL] [LL, UL]
Holding identity leadership (IL) constant low,
does continuity (C) matter?
low C and low IL minus high C and low IL -.57 .004 [-0.96, -0.18] -.45 .001 [-0.73, -0.17] -.48 .02 [-0.88, -0.07]
Holding continuity (C) constant low, does
identity leadership (IL) matter?
2 low C and low IL minus low C and high IL -.43 .009 [-0.75, -0.11] -.53 <.001 [-0.76, -0.29] -.28 .10 [-0.62, 0.05]
Mixed conditions
3 low C and low IL minus high C high IL -.35 .05 [-0.70, 0.01] -.44 .001 [-0.69, -0.19] -.10 .60 [-0.46, 0.27]
4 high C and low IL minus low C and high IL
.14 .50
[-0.27, 0.56]
-.08 .59
[-0.36, 0.20] .19 .39 [-0.24, 0.62]
Note. N = 177. ∆ = Standardized coefficient of Slope A minus coefficient of Slope B. Significant difference between Slope A and Slope B are
shown in bold. Differences between slopes are positive (negative) when Slope A is larger (smaller) than Slope B. IL = Identity leadership, C =
Continuity. CI = confidence interval; LL = lower limit; UL = upper limit.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The
final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 41
Analyses of Mediation
In the fourth and last step, we built on the constrained model from Step 2 to test the
proposed mediating effect of post-change identification on both adjustment (as depicted in
previous analyses, we modelled the two-way interaction between pre-change identification
and organizational group membership by freeing the parameters for this relationship across
= 77, p < .001; scaling correction factor = .87, CFI = .90, RMSEA = .08 [.06, .11], SRMR
= .06). Path coefficients of the mediation model are reported in the supplemental material E
(p. 16). Although the chi-square difference test indicated a better fit of the unconstrained
mediation model ΔS-B χ2 (25) = 51.66, p = .001, the information criteria, which also take into
account model parsimony, favored the constrained model (constrained model: AIC =
2618.53, BIC = 2774.16, vs. unconstrained model: AIC = 2628.51, BIC = 2863.54).
Acknowledging that the fit of the mediation model is not optimal, we nevertheless
proceeded by estimating the indirect effects of pre-change identification on adjustment and
post-traumatic growth via post-change identification at selected conditional values of
continuity (+/- 1 SD) and identity leadership (+/- 1 SD), using bootstrap confidence intervals
(1000 bootstraps). Indirect effects under the various conditions for employees of Alpha and
adjustment and post-traumatic growth were positive and significant for employees of Alpha
as long as they could perceive continuity of their pre-existing identity (so that the identity
maintenance pathway was accessible) and/or perceive high identity leadership to develop a
new identity (so that the identity gain pathway was accessible). However, under conditions of
low continuity and low identity leadership (where no pathway was accessible), this positive
indirect effect became smaller and non-significant. For Beta employees, the indirect effects
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 42
were not significant at any combinations of low and high moderator values. However, in line
with our expectations, the indirect effects for Beta employees were positive as long as at least
one pathway was accessible, but became smaller and even negative in the low–low condition.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 43
Multi-group SEM of the Effects of Pre-change Identification, Continuity, and Identity Leadership on Adjustment Mediated by Post-change
Identification
Note. *** p < .001, ** p < .01, * p < .05. For presentation purposes, only significant standardized regression coefficients are shown (except
the non-significant direct effect of the three-way interaction on adjustment and the effect of pre-change identification on post-change
identification for Beta employees). Coefficients for the direct three-way interaction effects (in bold) on adjustment and post-traumatic growth
are shown in brackets and their total effects outside the brackets. ID = Identification, OCB = Organizational Citizenship Behavior.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission.
The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 44
Indirect Effects of Pre-change Identification on Adjustment at Conditional Values of Moderators (Constrained Mediation Model)
Low Continuity (-1 SD) High Continuity (+1 SD)
Conditions
Low Identity High Identity Low Identity High Identity
Leadership (-1 SD) Leadership (+1 SD) Leadership (-1 SD) Leadership (+1 SD)
boot 95% CI boot 95% CI boot 95% CI boot 95% CI
b b b b
c c c c
SE [LL, UL] SE [LL, UL] SE [LL, UL] SE [LL, UL]
Alpha .08 .08 [-0.08, 0.22] .21 .10 [0.03, 0.42] .26 .11 [0.09, 0.53] .18 .07 [0.04, 0.33]
Adjustment
Beta -.10 .06 [-0.22, 0.003] .03 .05 [-0.07, 0.15] .08 .09 [-0.06, 0.28] .003 .06 [-0.11, 0.10]
Post-traumatic Alpha .04 .05 [-0.04, 0.15] .11 .07 [0.001, 0.27] .13 .08 [0.01, 0.32] .09 .05 [0.003, 0.21]
Growth
Beta -.05 .04 [-0.13, 0.003] .02 .03 [-0.04, 0.08] .04 .05 [-0.03, 0.17] .002 .03 [-0.06, 0.06]
Note. Significant indirect effects are printed bold. SD = Standard deviation. b = Beta coefficient of indirect effect. Boot SE = bootstrapped
standard error. CI = bias-corrected confidence interval based on 1000 bootstrap samples; LL = lower limit; UL = upper limit.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission.
The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 45
Discussion
Understanding employees’ adjustment to organizational changes is becoming
increasingly important in today’s rapidly changing business environment. Adjusting to
organizational changes — especially major ones such as takeovers — can be psychologically
challenging. The present research sought to address the key question of how organizations
can build employees’ bond with the new organization that materializes in the wake of
organizational change as well as facilitate their psychological adjustment and functioning.
Building on social identity theorizing, we proposed that significant organizational changes
entail identity transitions and thus affect employees’ sense of belonging (Haslam et al.,
2021). More particularly, we introduced a Social Identity Model of Organizational Change
(SIMOC) that specified two interdependent pathways to successful adjustment (identity gain
and identity maintenance) and provided a prospective examination of predictions derived
from the model.
Key findings showed that when employees identified strongly with their
organizational group before the change this had important benefits for their adjustment when
they either experienced identity continuity (thereby having access to an identity maintenance
pathway) or worked with a leader who helped them adopt a new identity or revise their
former identity in ways that they perceived as entailing identity gain (thereby providing
access to an identity gain pathway). As proposed by the social identity theory of leadership
(Haslam et al., 2011; Hogg, 2001; van Knippenberg & Hogg, 2003), the degree to which
leaders promoted an understanding of the emerging organization’s identity as identity gain
facilitated their ability to adjust in the aftermath of the change. Importantly, when pre-
existing identities could not be maintained, adjustment to organizational change was
determined by the extent to which employees’ supervisors helped to create and promote a
new positive and meaningful organizational identity.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 46
It is also noteworthy that the impact of the organizational change on employees’ lives
varied significantly as a function of differences in their pre-existing identification and
associated concerns. Employees who identified highly with their organization before the
change had much to lose and were most concerned about whether their pre-existing identity
would continue to exist. If a change to their pre-existing identity seemed inevitable, they
showed the greatest sensitivity to their supervisors’ identity leadership. These high-identifiers
were also most able and willing to adjust to the change when their supervisor engaged in
identity work around creating a new or reinventing the pre-existing identity. However, highly
identified employees responded most negatively to the change when they were not able to
maintain a sense that their valued pre-existing identity would endure and when their
supervisor failed to provide them with guidance around the new emerging identity.
One might argue that the very existence of employees for whom both pathways are
inaccessible presents something of a puzzle because these employees are most likely to leave
the organization (Mael & Ashforth, 1995; Sani, 2005). However, it is conceivable that
employees who have previously been highly identified with their organization are more loyal
to the organization even in the face of adverse changes (e.g., Avanzi et al., 2014; van
Knippenberg et al., 2007), and so might stay even though leaving the organization might be
on their minds. More generally, we think that there are a range of reasons why people may
stay in an organization after major organizational changes even if they cannot maintain their
old social identity or acquire a new one (not least, the need to remain employed).
Importantly, though, regardless of whether or not people may eventually leave the
organization, our findings suggest that their inability to maintain or acquire a meaningful
organizational identity is likely to have significant adverse implications for their
organizational behavior and well-being. In line with this argument, our results showed a
consistent pattern across multiple adjustment outcomes, affecting not only employees’ job
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 47
satisfaction and organizational citizenship behavior but also their life satisfaction and levels
of depression, as well as their sense of growth following the adversity of the change. These
findings highlight the importance of identity leadership that helps employees who remain
with the organization after disruptive changes in gaining a new positive and meaningful
identity. This helps to offset the negative consequences of the identity loss that results when
employees cannot maintain their valued pre-existing organizational identity in the context of
organizational change.
Furthermore, additional mediation analysis supported SIMOC’s proposition that post-
change identification is a key identity process in this transition. Here our results indicated
that, at least among employees of the dominant organization, as long as one moderator was
high (a sense either of continuity facilitating identity maintenance or of supervisors’ identity
leadership facilitating identity gain), employees’ pre-change identification was a valuable
resource that contributed to their adjustment to the change by increasing their identification
with the newly emerging organization.
We would also like to note that we replicated previous findings on the identification
transfer differential between the dominant and subordinate organizational group in this
acquisition setting (e.g., Lupina-Wegener et al., 2014). In other words, the relationship
between pre-change identification and post-change identification may generally be lower for
employees from the subordinate group. This speaks to the need to bear in mind the
organizational group that an individual identifies with and its structural characteristics (e.g.,
status), especially when testing or applying SIMOC in an intergroup context. Above and
beyond this variation, this initial test of SIMOC suggests that the two interdependent
pathways operate for both employees of the dominant and the subordinate organizational
group. This suggests that SIMOC can be treated as a generic model of organizational change.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 48
Implications for Theory and Practice
By introducing SIMOC, we provide an integrative framework for explaining how
M&As and other major organizational changes generally impact organizational members’
work-related behaviors and attitudes, as well as their health and well-being in response to the
organizational change. Previous models that have been developed in the M&A context have
focused primarily on continuity of the pre-existing identity and demonstrated a positive
relationship between pre-merger identification and post-merger identification for employees
who can maintain their identity (e.g., van Knippenberg & van Leeuwen, 2001; van Leeuwen
et al., 2003). This previous work has not highlighted the possibility that employees’ pre-
change identification can have a negative impact on their response to change. However,
social identity theorizing (in particular, the work on identity continuity by Sani and
colleagues, 2008) suggests that individuals who derive part of their self-concept from their
pre-existing social groups will feel most affected by the change and respond most negatively
to the extent that the change compromises their sense of identity continuity. SIMOC can
integrate these possibilities and findings by pointing to the importance of a second, identity
gain pathway, and the role of leadership in these unfolding dynamics. The present findings
suggest that both identity maintenance and gain pathways need to be considered if we want to
explain when negative consequences result from organizational changes and to understand
why employees’ pre-existing identification can still relate positively to their adjustment and
well-being despite a lack of identity continuity.
By translating the Social Identity Model of Identity Change (Haslam et al., 2008,
2021; Jetten et al., 2010) into a model of organizational change, the present research
highlights the importance of identity changes in the organizational context and extends
previous leadership and change management literature. More specifically, our findings imply
that organizations need to manage the accessibility of the identity maintenance and gain
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 49
pathways to facilitate the identity transition and prevent employees from losing their sense of
‘who we are’. As observed here, this is something leaders can do by creating, representing,
advancing and embedding a new ‘sense of us’ for the organization after the change (Haslam
et al., 2011; Reicher et al., 2005; Steffens et al., 2014).
In supporting these ideas, the present research contributes to a growing body of
research pointing to the influence of identity leadership on employees’ health and well-being
(Steffens et al., 2018) while also extending this by providing initial evidence for the
effectiveness of identity leadership in promoting employees’ adjustment to organizational
change. Moreover, here it appears that leaders who help employees to regain a sense of
belonging can even foster a sense of growth from adversity after a stressful, potentially
traumatic change (for related arguments in the clinical domain, see Muldoon et al., 2019).
Indeed, even if an acquisition is positive on a material level (as it was in this acquisition
identity is about and what it means to embrace it. In line with this point, our findings indicate
that identity leadership was important for the identity transition process in both of the
organizations that we studied (i.e., both Alpha and Beta). Here, then, identity leadership
predicted employees’ adjustment above and beyond pre-existing organizational group
membership, suggesting that it always has at least some bearing on employee outcomes. In
this way, the present work has important implications for our understanding of the role of
leadership in managing change processes. In particular, in line with Giessner and colleagues'
(2016) observation that middle- and lower-levels managers will often be more likely to be
perceived as ‘one of us’ than members of the distant top management, the present research
indicates that immediate supervisors are well placed to develop employees’ understanding of
what it means to be a member of the emerging organization as they go through a process of
change (Yukl, 2006).
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 50
These findings also have a range of practical implications for organizations seeking to
manage organizational change and associated identity processes. In line with SIMOC, it
appears that this is not necessarily a context where ‘one size that fits all’, but rather that
organizations can make use of different strategies that focus, where relevant and applicable,
on either the maintenance or the acquisition of a valued social identity. As specified by
SIMOC, the effectiveness of these strategies will depend on employees’ identification with
their pre-existing organization as well as their perception of the nature of the change. In this
regard, a starting point for practitioners might be to first evaluate the extent to which the
organizational change affects (and is perceived as affecting) fundamental organizational
attributes such as its mission, strategies, structures, and core values. If small changes to these
aspects of identity content are observed, then strategies that highlight ‘who we were and will
continue to be’ seem most likely to be effective for highly identified members (as also
suggested by Venus et al., 2019). However, if disruptions to organizational identity are
expected, then leaders need to answer questions about ‘who we want to be’ in the future for
those highly identified members if they want to promote their engagement with, and
adjustment to, the change. From a practical standpoint, organizations might here look to
develop leaders’ identity leadership capacity by providing them with tools to constructively
engage with team members in times of change (e.g., Haslam et al., 2017; Peters et al., 2013).
Indeed, efforts to foster leaders’ ability to help employees to regain a sense of belonging as
they negotiate the loss of a previous, valued identity would seem to be critical for any
organization that is interested in facilitating employees’ adjustment.
Limitations and Future Research
Despite its theoretical and empirical contribution, the present research also has
important limitations which provide interesting starting points for future research.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 51
First, over the course of the 18-month data collection period we saw a considerable
drop out of participants resulting in a rather small sample size — in part a reflection of the
fact that this type of research is logistically challenging to conduct. However, the sample of
177 complete responses in this test of SIMOC lies within the typical range of sample sizes for
M&A studies (Gomes et al., 2020). Moreover, we addressed the issue of statistical power
using a sensitivity analysis, which indicated that we are able to detect small-to-medium
effects with a probability of 80%, but not effects smaller than .05. These findings suggested
that in light of our study’s sample size we would have sufficient power to detect average
effect sizes of cultural differences on M&A integration outcomes (η² = .16) reported in a
meta-analysis by Stahl and Voight (2004) and even smaller effects relating to organizational
group membership on post-change identification (η² = .05) as reported by Gleibs et al.
(2008). Nevertheless, we acknowledge that the size of our sample limits our ability to detect
small effects and is also responsible for rather wide confidence intervals. However, as noted
by Kenny and Judd (2019), effects are likely to be heterogenous across settings and
participants, calling into question the value of “the definitive large N study in an effort to
establish whether a given effect exists or not” (p. 587). We suggest that the value of our
theoretical model, which was supported across a range of dependent variables, should now be
explored further across a new range of settings and participants.
In a similar vein, the unequal sample sizes (such that the Alpha sample was only half
the size of the acquired Beta sample) complicated conclusions about potential effects of
status differences. While we considered the impact of pre-change organizational group on the
identity transfer as discussed above, given the sample sizes, we were not in a position to test a
four-way interaction involving this variable. Although it would be interesting to investigate
group differences more systematically, this is a task for future research, noting that our model
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 52
should apply to everyone experiencing change, whether in a dominant group (such as Alpha
here) or a subordinate one (such as Beta).
Second, we cannot draw causal inferences due to the correlational nature of our
design. Future research should therefore test SIMOC using experimental and/or intervention
procedures with the goal of examining issues of causality and ruling out alternative
explanations. Another limitation of our design was that we did not measure and thus could
not control for the levels of the adjustment outcomes before the change. To provide greater
insight into the process of change (e.g., assessing how changes in predictor variables affect
subsequent changes in outcomes) and to replicate the mediating effect of post-change
identification, there would therefore be value in future work that collects longitudinal data on
all constructs across three or more measurement points (Edwards et al., 2017).
Third, although the present research tested SIMOC using separated measurement
points of independent and dependent variables, common method variance (CMV) among the
self-report measures could have artificially increased the relations between variables
(Podsakoff et al., 2003). However, the main purpose of this initial test of the SIMOC was to
establish the hypothesized interaction effect. Common method bias cannot produce an
artificial interaction effect — “on the contrary, finding significant interaction effects despite
the influence of CMV in the data set should be taken as strong evidence that an interaction
effect exists” (Siemsen et al., 2010, p. 470; see also Evans, 1985; McClelland & Judd, 1993).
That said, there is clearly scope for future studies to collect multimodal data, such as
objective data on employees’ performance, health, and turnover rates (noting that, for legal
and other reasons, this was not possible in the present study). In further work, there would
also be value in extending the relationships investigated here — for example, by examining
additional indicators of adjustment including physiological and behavioral indicators (e.g.,
cortisol for an index of stress; see Haslam & Reicher, 2006). In relation to the measurement
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 53
of the variables in the present study, we would note too that our model focuses on specifying
how leadership of a single identity fosters responses to M&As and thus, our measure of
identity leadership captures the promotion of one common organizational identity. However,
people may have varying intersectional identities and so it will be a task for future work to
examine how leaders can manage multiple identities or nested identities within a
superordinate identity in the context of organizational change.
Fourth, although the observed patterns support SIMOC’s key proposition of two
interdependent but separate pathways to successful adjustment, we did not measure identity
maintenance and identity gain (or loss) directly. To provide more specific insights into these
core transition processes of SIMOC, future work should include measures of identity
maintenance, identity gain and loss (as in Haslam et al., 2008). In addition, qualitative data
should explore employees' subjective interpretation and sense-making of the change
processes and experience of identity formation dynamics under conditions of varying levels
of continuity and identity leadership, including potential changes over time. While employees
who managed change via the identity gain pathway would be expected to experience similar
levels of adjustment as employees who took the identity maintenance pathway, they might
have experienced the identity transition in qualitatively different ways. Clearly, then, further
research is needed to explore the identity transition processes more closely.
Finally, because our study was tested in the context of a single acquisition the
generalizability of our findings remains to be established in other contexts. Mergers and
acquisitions are complex events that vary significantly in regard to a range of important
structural characteristics (e.g., the status or dominance of the partners, the collective history
of the organization). Accordingly, it would be valuable for future research to examine the
degree to which the patterns observed in the present research are also found in other merger
contexts as well as in the context of a broader range of other organizational changes (e.g.,
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 54
relocations, restructures). While SIMOC describes the general processes that employees can
experience during an identity transition, we imagine that the accessibility of the different
pathways may be very different across different types of integration patterns following a
merger (Giessner et al., 2006; Gleibs et al., 2013; Makri et al., 2012).
The extent to which the pre-existing organizational group membership affects the
accessibility of the different pathways likely depends on the integration pattern. If mergers
follow an assimilation pattern, where one organization clearly dominates the other and thus
the dominating organization experiences limited impact on their identity, it is likely to be the
case that employees of the dominant organization will experience identity maintenance. In
contrast, in these circumstances the employees of the dominated merger partner, who have to
adjust to the new organization, will be more likely to find themselves on an identity gain
pathway — providing their leaders promote the new identity. However, in an integration
pattern (where employees of both merger partners give up their pre-existing identity to form a
new one), both may follow the identity gain pathway if their leaders promote the new
identity, while in a separation pattern, both merger partners may be more likely to follow an
identity maintenance pathway. As a result, investigating whether the strength of the different
pathways varies as a function of merger integration patterns with varying levels of dominance
during the integration process would be an interesting way to establish the generalizability of
the predictions made by SIMOC and to identify potential boundary conditions.
Conclusion
No death, no doom, no anguish can arouse the surpassing despair which flows from a
loss of identity. (Lovecraft, 1943)
In the present work, we introduced a new integrative framework in the form of the
Social Identity Model of Organizational Change (SIMOC) to explain how major
organizational changes affect employees’ relationship with a new emerging organization and
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 55
their adjustment to change. Results from a predictive study that examined employees’
unfolding experiences of an organizational acquisition provided support for the key
predictions of this model. Specifically, they show that employees’ ability to adjust to major
organizational change is enhanced if they have access to an identity maintenance pathway
and/or an identity gain pathway. In this our findings indicate that if employees believe their
identity is unlikely to endure after organization change, then it becomes critical for leaders to
make sense of, and champion, an understanding of what the new emerging identity stands for.
However, if neither the identity maintenance or identity gain pathway is accessible,
then organizational change is likely to undermine not only employees’ constructive
engagement with the change but also their health and well-being. Here, then, SIMOC — and
the data that support it — suggest that the key task for leaders who want to support their
employees through organizational change is to mitigate its potential to engender a devastating
sense of identity loss.
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative
version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/pspi0000386
THE SOCIAL IDENTITY MODEL OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 56