Use of Media in Indonesian Language Learning for High School Students
Suci Lestari
Sucilestari27052001@gmail.com
One of the success factors in learning is the teacher's ability to plan and implement
learning. Effective learning activities cannot appear by themselves, but the teacher must create
learning that allows students to achieve the learning objectives that have been set. Therefore, an
optimal process of delivering information is needed in learning. One of the efforts to create these
conditions is the optimal use of learning media.
Media is anything that can transmit messages, stimulate students' thoughts, feelings
and desires so as to encourage the learning process to occur in them.bEducational media is a
set of auxiliary or complementary tools used by teachers or educators in order to communicate
with students or students (Suhatman Jaya, Syahrul R, 2013). In learning Indonesian the media
can optimize the learning process. The use of media can also make learning fun. As research
by (Syofiani et al., 2019) which states that crossword puzzles are seen as being able to improve
students' language skills and students feel happy and excited to take part in learning.
In learning Indonesian, the use of media also plays a very important role in improving
language skills, namely listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Therefore, learning language
skills in schools does not only emphasize the theoretical aspect, but how to make students able to
use language as it functions. Several studies follow the importance of using media in improving
language skills. Research in 2013 by (Handayani et al., 2013) stated that the use of song media in
learning poetry writing skills for class IX students of SMP N 5 Lubuk Basung plays an important
research in 2016 by (Fitri et al., 2016) the skills of writing argumentative essays for class X SMA
Negeri 5 Padang before using the TTW type cooperative learning model with the aid of image
media were lower than the skills for writing argumentative essays for class X SMA Negeri 5 Padang
after using the TTW type cooperative learning model with the aid of image media. Subsequent
research in 2019 by (Syofiani et al., 2019) and (Putri & R., 2019) which stated that there was a
significant influence in the use of the model cooperative learning type think talk write assisted by
audiovisual media to the skills or writing persuasive text for eight grade students of SMP Negeri 8
Padang.
Given the need to use media in Indonesian English learning, the author conducted a survey
on the use of learning media in Indonesian language lessons. This survey is distributed
throughgoogle forms with respondents 30 students of SMA Negeri 2 Kota Sawahlunto consisting
of students of class X and XII. This survey contains 10 statements regarding the use of instructional
media in Indonesian language lessons.
The first statement is that the use of media in learning Indonesian is very important. The result is
46.7% strongly agree and 53.3% agree. From the survey results, the authors conclude that the use
of media in learning Indonesian is very important. This is in line with the opinion (Novelti et al.,
2018) which states that language has a central role in the intellectual, social, and emotional
development of students. Language is a supporter of success in learning. This opinion is confirmed
by Mone in (Novelti et al., 2018) which states that language learning is expected to help students
get to know themselves, their culture, and other people. In addition, language is used to express
ideas and feelings, participate in society, discover and use their own analytical and imaginative
abilities. This opinion shows how important the position of language is, so that an effective media
is needed in the delivery of language learning.
The second statement is that the teacher has used learning media that is in accordance with
the Indonesian language subject matter being taught. The result is 13.3% strongly agree, 83.3%
agree, and 3.4% disagree. From the survey results, the authors can conclude that teachers have used
appropriate media in learning Indonesian. According to Saud (2009: 97) appropriate, efficient, and
varied media can be a good learning media. Media content that is designed according to the learning
design can make quality media. Quality media will foster interest for students to learn to use media.
The third statement is that learning media have been used in learning listening, reading,
reading, and writing skills. The result is 10% strongly agree, 83.3% agree, and 6.7% disagree. From
the results of the survey, the authors conclude that the media has been used in language skills. This
is in accordance with the objectives of learning Indonesian in the 2013 curriculum in general, which
aims to make students able to master six skills, namely listening, reading, viewing, speaking, writing
and serving skills (Suhatman Jaya, Syahrul R, 2013). For example, in the 2013 curriculum,
Indonesian language learning is text-based learning. From all these texts it can be seen that the end
of learning aboutttext is that students are able to produce/write texts (Hizati et al., 2018). In learning
to write according to (Novelti et al., 2018) writing skills cannot be created without going through a
process, writing skills grow and develop due to an iterative process.
The fourth statement is the use of learning media to make the material easier to understand.
The result is 43.3% strongly agree, and 56.7% agree. From the survey results, the authors can
conclude that the use of learning media can make the material easier to understand. The problem
that is often encountered in learning according to (Hartidini & Ratna, 2018) is the lack of teacher
potential to make Indonesian language learning interesting. Students are reluctant to convey their
ideas either orally or in writing. Therefore, the use of learning media can foster student interest in
learning new things in the learning materials delivered by the teacher so that they can be easily
understood (Nurrita, 2018).
The fifth statement is that the use of learning media makes the process of learning
Indonesian more enjoyable. The result is 50% strongly agree, and 50% agree. From the results of
the survey, the authors conclude that the use of media can make learning more fun. Sudjana and
Rivai in (Nurseto, 2012) media can foster students' learning motivation because teaching will attract
their attention so that students can understand and enable mastery and achievement of teaching
goals. For example in research by Atmazaki in (Gustianingsih et al, 2013) said that puzzles were
able to create a pleasant atmosphere.
The sixth statement is that the teacher uses learning media in the form of pictures. The result
is 13.3% strongly agree, 80% agree, and 6.7% disagree. From the results of the survey, the authors
conclude that teachers have used image media in Indonesian lessons. Learning using pictorial media
according to Tarigan in (Suhatman Jaya, Syahrul R, 2013) is recommended by experts and pictures
that seem silent actually say a lot for those who are sensitive and full of imagination. Therefore, the
selection of images must be appropriate, interesting, and stimulating for students.
The seventh statement is that the teacher uses audiovisual media in learning Indonesian. The
result is 10% strongly agree, 46.7% agree, and 43.4% disagree. From the survey results, the authors
conclude that audiovisual media have been used in learning Indonesian. The benefits of audiovisual
media according to (Mulyani R, Syahrul R, 2018) are used to stimulate students' thinking power in
finding a main idea so that they can write it down into a text. In addition, audiovisual media can
complement the basic experiences of students when they read, discuss, practice, etc. so that it is
very effective in influencing and manipulating ideas before students write them down.
The eighth statement is that the teacher uses game media in learning Indonesian. The result
is 30% strongly agree, 50% agree, and 20% disagree. Based on the results of the survey, the authors
can conclude that teachers have used game media in learning Indonesian. The benefits of using
game media according to (Syofiani et al., 2019) are that by playing children will try to have desires
and achieve their desires. Through play, all aspects of a child's development can be improved. By
playing freely, children can express and explore to strengthen what they already know and discover
new things.
The ninth statement is that teachers use technology in learning Indonesian. The result is
43.4% strongly agree, 50% agree, and 6.7% disagree. From the survey results, it is stated that
teachers have used technology in learning. This is in line with the opinion of Ivanovic M, Javorský
S, Horváth R, and Goulão MF, Fombona J in (Ramadhan et al., 2019) education must reflect actual
changes and consider ways that can support the demand to provide quality conditions for human
existence. in the context of the process of social transformation. Education has not escaped
transformation because in a globalized world when things change, there is a need to continue
education, recycle and develop it to provide answers to future challenges.
The tenth statement, media literacy has been realized in Indonesian language learning. The
result is 66.7% strongly agree, and 33.3% agree. Based on the survey results, the authors can
conclude that the teacher has carried out media literacy in learning. This is related to the opinion of
Hobs in (Ramadhan et al., 2019) which states that media literacy is one of the basic skills that must
be possessed by individuals in the 21st century and has become a central and inseparable part of
life. Media literacy can be defined as the use of mass media tools as needed, accessing the content
in these tools, understanding, analyzing and evaluating messages correctly and consciously.
From the results of the data above, it can be concluded that media has been used in learning
Indonesian. Teachers have used media in learning listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills.
The media used in learning Indonesian are picture, audiovisual, and game media. Media technology
has been used in learning Indonesian and literacy has been realized media in learning. From these
results students stated that the media made it easier to understand the material and made learning
more fun. However, despite all that, we as teachers must be able to choose the right media for
learning. Innovation in the use of technology-based media is also needed given the increasingly
sophisticated era.