Cross-Dimensional Framework:
A Way to Integrate Social Context on Personality Assessment
Angeline M. Mercado
Makati City, Metro Manila, Philippines
mercado.angel.montilla@gmail.com
Preprint DOI: 10.31219/osf.io/f6cnq
1 The Cross-Dimensional Framework was also presented on the 56th Annual Convention
Conferences of the Psychological Association of the Philippines, in Davao City, Philippines
(September 2019) and at the 3rd Psychological Research Convergence of University of
Makati, Makati City, Philippines (November 2019)
1 of 44
Cross-Dimensional Framework:
A Way to Integrate Social Context on Personality Assessment
Despite various advances in methods, personality scale development still tends to
focus on traits, leaving social context out of the equation. To address this, Cross-
Dimensional Framework (Cross D) was devised to systematically integrate social
context on every item of a personality scale. The framework was used to develop
the Cross-Dimensional Conscientiousness Scale (XC). After standardization, XC
was administered to 304 Filipino college students along with the
Conscientiousness scale items from the International Personality Item Pool
Representation of the NEO PI-R (IPIP NEO), and Big Five Inventory (BFI).
Statistical analyses were performed to see whether (1) the theoretical assumptions
of Cross D are true and if the framework does not compromise the (2) reliability
and (3) validity of the test created. The majority of the results support all the
theoretical assumptions of Cross D including its effect on reliability and validity
of the test, thereby providing evidence of the framework’s utility. Besides the
novelty of integrating social context on trait measurement, the framework also
paves way for the possible quantification of trait’s consistent expression across
social context.
Keywords: Big Five; personality; test development; social context; social
pressure; persona
Running head: Cross-Dimensional Framework
2 of 44
Personality assessment had gone far from its association with humors in circa 370 BCE,
to phrenology in 1780s (OpenStax, 2016), then the birth of psychoanalysis in 1895 (Feist
& Feist, 2008). Despite this, personality scales as popularly known today – self-report
tests – only rose to popularity towards the early 1900s.
This shift from client-tailored interviews of psychoanalysis to the pen-and-paper
inventories was marked by the creation of Personal Data Sheet (Cohen & Swerdlik, 2009)
which exemplified (1) standardization of trait measurement, and the (2) time-efficient
group administration – utility advantages inherent of its format.
To gain these pros, most of the succeeding personality inventories adapted this
survey format as well. Nevertheless, the format also comes with the cons of poor
adaptability to the diverse and complex nature of personality – a trade-off for giving up
the client-tailored probing for a fixed set of generalized statements. This shortcoming
tends to dismiss crucial factors which affect personality – such as social context (Bandura,
1997; Rotter, 1982; London & Oldham, 1977; Johnson & Chang, 2006; Gardner, Gabriel,
& Lee, 1999). In response to this, Cross-Dimensional Framework (Cross D), was created
to incorporate social context on the items of personality scales (Mercado, 2019a).
Although the framework was successfully adapted to develop the Cross-
Dimensional Conscientiousness Scale (or XC read as “Cross C”) (Mercado, 2019b), its
assumptions are yet to be put to test. To address this need, the paper aimed to evaluate
the framework’s assumptions: (1) Social factors, namely Social Stipulation and Social
Interaction, influences the expression of a trait, and Cross D does not compromise the (2)
reliability and the (3) validity of a test constructed based on it. This investigation was
expected to aid in establishing the validity of the assumptions which thereby define the
utility of the framework.
3 of 44
Personality Structure and Measurement
Across paradigms, the idea of personality as a construct has been long focused on its
characteristic as a pattern of behavior and thought that occurs consistently across
situations; asserting that personality is an internal characteristic rather than a mere
reaction to the environment.
This emphasis on the internality of personality is evident in how George Allport,
proposed a revision for one of his finest definition of personality – “the dynamic
organization within the individual of those psychophysical systems that determine his
unique adjustments to his environment” (Allport, Personality: A psychological
interpretation, 1937, p. 48). He later changed the phrase “that determine his unique
adjustments to his environment” into “that determine his characteristic behavior and
thought” (Allport, Pattern and growth in personality, 1961, p. 28) to make the point that
personality is not only reactive but is also proactive and expressive pattern of thought and
behavior (Feist & Feist, 2008, p. 378).
Believing that personality is mostly internal, the search for these universal
characteristic patterns of behaviors and thoughts – more commonly called “traits” – had
been the trend and theme of the succeeding factor analytical paradigm. With leading
proposals such as the Sixteen Personality Factor (Cattell, 1949), triad model of
Psychoticism, Extraversion and Neuroticism (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1975), and Five-
Factor Model (McCrae & Costa, 2003), the community of personality psychology had
been on a debate of which and how many factors or traits are necessary and sufficient to
cover the whole spectral domain of personality (Feist & Feist, 2008).
Five-Factor Model
So far, the most commonly used and widely accepted factorial structure of personality is
4 of 44
the Five-Factor Model (FFM) by Paul Costa Jr. and Robert McCrae (Feist & Feist, 2008)
owing its scientific reputation from the empirical studies that support its universality and
stability of its measurement across culture (Gurven, von Rueden, Massenkoff, Vie, &
Kaplan, 2013; Katigbak, Church, Guanzon-Lapena, Carlota, & del Pilar, 2002; McCrae,
et.al., 2005; Schmitt, et al., 2007; McCrae, 2002). FFM summarizes personality into five
traits namely Openness to experience, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness,
and Neuroticism which are popularly known as the “Big Five”. For this paper,
Conscientiousness, one of the Big Five traits was used as the common trait measured by
the three personality scales which served as the research instruments.
Influence of Social Context with Personality
While personality tests continuously grow in number, most only factor in traits. This is
despite the prevailing notions that personality is affected by social context as put forward
by the Triadic Reciprocal Causation of Albert Bandura, and by the Cognitive Affective
Personality Theory of Walter Mischel, and Yuichi Shoda (Feist & Feist, 2008).
This notion was also supported by researches under various social setting
including industries with shared incentive (London & Oldham, 1977), corporate
community with individual workloads (Johnson & Chang, 2006), and typical daily
interaction of students from collectivist and individualist cultures (Gardner, Gabriel, &
Lee, 1999) which found changes in behavior depending on its social context and
perceived consequences.
At the time of writing, only few related studies regarding the use of social situation
in personality assessment were found and none of them directly address the purpose of
Cross D – to categorized social situations and use that category as settings where
expression of a trait may vary. The works of Ziegler, Horstmann, and Ziegler (2019) and
Rauthmann, et al. (2014) identified factors that measures the characteristics of a situation
5 of 44
itself, rather than the personality traits across situations. In fact, later part of these studies
also found discriminating correlations between the situation factors and the Big Five, a
property that Cross D aims to avoid as its aims for universal application across personality
traits. Another approach on quantifying personality traits is through situational judgement
(Mussel, Gatzka, & Hewig, 2018) but this approach does not use a taxonomy of situation
and did not adapt Likert format.
Cross-Dimensional Framework
To fill in this gap, Cross D proposed a way to integrate social context on the assessment
of personality by sampling behavioral manifestations of traits across social settings. First,
the framework identified the four Social Dimensions wherein the behaviors are assumed
to vary due to social context. Next, it adds this layer of Social Dimension to the existing
structure of trait targeted to be quantified. In doing so, it dissects the trait into context-
sensitive units called Cross-Dimensions.
Besides the actual increase in the number of subscales, it also makes item writing
more specific. Thus, the stems with Cross D application ask more specific and measurable
behaviors (e.g. “I fix my bed right after I wake up.” from XC), in contrast with the
traditionally all-encompassing stems (e.g. “I like order.” from IPIP NEO).
The Structure of Cross D
At present, the Cross D is composed of four hierarchical Social Dimensions that
was anchored from Kapwa and Pakikipagkapwa of Enriquez (1978a; 1997), but instead
of treating the two categories of Kapwa – Ibang-tao (outsider) and Hindi-ibang-tao (one-
of-us) – as a dichotomy, the Cross D sees it as a continuum through the spectrum of
Pakikipagkapwa or social interaction.
6 of 44
each of its categories into two, and, at the same time, narrowing down the eight (8) levels
of Pakikipagkapwa, into four Social Dimensions (Mercado, 2019a). This was done by
investigating the factor that differentiates the two types of Kapwa (which was called
Social Stipulation) and naming another factor that can further divide the levels of
Pakikipagkapwa into two (which is Social Interaction). The presence or absence of these
two distinguishing factors defined the four Social Dimensions.
Social Stipulation (SS). The primary role of Social Stipulation is to separate reactive
behavior from proactive behavior. In a nutshell, behaviors that spring solely due to Social
Stipulation is reactive, while behaviors that were done without the influence of Social
Stipulation are proactive in nature.
Thus, Social Stipulation can be defined as an external demand of a social setting
or consequence inherent of a certain behavior that pressures a person to act accordingly.
Examples of this are monetary reward, career advancement, and social status. Internal
reinforcements such as self-improvement, serving the common welfare, or self-
expression do not count as Social Stipulation as they are proactive behaviors rather than
reactive (Allport, 1961).
Within the framework, Social Stipulation exists in two Social Dimensions,
namely: Individual and Professional, and absent on the other two: Personal and
Relational. In Individual Dimension, the Social Stipulation is marked by the consequence
of one’s action to self, while in Professional Dimension, it is apparent with an action’s
effect towards self and others. The difference in Social Stipulation between Individual
and Professional Dimensions lies in the presence or absence of another factor, Social
Interaction.
7 of 44
Comparison of Social Dimension to Levels of Kapwa and Pakikipagkapwa
Social Social Factors a Kapwa b Pakikipagkapwa c Language of Cultural
Dimension a Interpersonal Attributes e
Social Social
Relationship d
Stipulation Interaction
Pakikitungo
Level of amenities
(civility with)
Pakikisalamuha Vertical
Professional Present Present Ibang-tao ------------------------
(interaction with) Collectivism
Pakikilahok
------------------------
(participating with)
Pakikibagay
Level of conforming
(in-conformity with)
Vertical
Individual Present Absent Ibang-tao
Individualism
Pakikisama
Level of adjusting
(being along with)
Hindi- Pakikipagpalagayang-loob Horizontal
Relational Absent Present Level of mutual trust
ibang-tao (understanding) Collectivism
Pakikisangkot
------------------------
(getting involved)
Hindi- Horizontal
Personal Absent Absent
ibang-tao Individualism
Pakikiisa
Level of full trust
(being one with)
Based on: a Mercado (2019a), b Enriquez (1978a), c Santiago & Enriquez (1976), d Santiago (1976), and e Triandis & Gelfand (1998)
8 of 44
Social Interaction (SI). The second factor that defines the Social Dimensions is Social
Interaction. It refers to the necessary cooperation, collaboration, or communication with
others as required by the nature of the behavior, or due to the inherent impact of the
behavior on others. Social Interaction also exists once another person was set as the object
or receiver of the behavior, even if there is no cooperation, collaboration, or verbal
communication required – such as in the case of Relational Dimension.
Social Interaction is present in two Social Dimensions, namely: Professional and
Relational, and absent on the other two: Personal and Individual. In Professional
Dimension, Social Interaction exists as a reaction to external demand such as deadline,
standard of quality, or inevitability of teamwork; as opposed to Relational Dimension,
where Social Interaction is proactive or internally motivated. The difference between the
two lies in the presence or absence of the first factor, Social Stipulation. Social
Dimensions was also matched with related concepts from existing related literature
(Triandis & Gelfand, 1998; Santiago, 1976) for additional context.
Assumptions of Cross D
Despite literatures that find differences in behavior under varied situational context
(London & Oldham, 1977; Johnson & Chang, 2006; Gardner, Gabriel, & Lee, 1999),
none of these explicitly supported the postulates of the current framework – that social
context affects the way personality traits manifest. Being new and untested, the Cross D
lacks backup research to assess its claims and benefits. As a response, this paper aims to
evaluate the utility of Cross D by testing its assumptions specifically:
(1) Social context influences the expression of a trait thus:
(a) Role difference exist.
(b) Social Stipulation influences behavior.
(c) Social Interaction influences behavior.
(2) Cross-Dimensional framework does not compromise the reliability of the test.
9 of 44
(3) Cross-Dimensional framework does not compromise the validity of the test.
Methodology
To answer these inquiries, Cross D was used to develop Cross-Dimensional
Conscientiousness Scale (Mercado, 2019b), a personality inventory that measures
Conscientiousness as defined in Five-Factor Model. The newly developed inventory was
administered to college students from a Philippine city university along with IPIP NEO,
and Big Five Inventory. Data gathered from this was interpreted and analyzed in line with
the theoretical basis of Cross D.
Data Gathering
A total of 304 respondents, were gathered from February 2018 to February 2019
through convenient sampling. The majority of them are Filipino college students at a
city university in the Philippines with typical ages ranging from 18 to 22 .
They were asked to take the XC (Mercado, 2019b) and the Conscientiousness
scales of IPIP NEO (International Personality Item Pool, 2019), and BFI (John, Naumann,
& Soto, 2008) within the same day in either online or pen-and-paper format. All scores
and responses from the tests were matched and tallied unless a criterion in their respective
test manual (e.g. questionable test-taking time) suggests that the result is likely to be
invalid.
Instruments
This study used a total of three personality tests namely Cross -Dimensional
2 Demographic information such as age and gender were made optional to assure anonymity
during small group test administration.
10 of 44
Conscientiousness Scale (or XC), International Personality Item Pool (or IPIP NEO),
and Big Five Inventory (or BFI). Each of these will be introduced alongside their
psychometric properties in the succeeding sections.
The first one, XC, served as the experimental scale where the framework was
used. On the other hand, the Conscientiousness scales of IPIP NEO and BFI served
as the control scales or the baseline tests that do not use Cross D. Comparisons on
their psychometric properties (based on responses from similar respondents) were
done so that the relative impact of using the framework can be evaluated.
Cross-Dimensional Conscientiousness Scale (XC)
XC is a scale for Conscientiousness that used Cross D to factor in social
context on the expression of the said trait. It has internal reliability of 0.96 (n=415)
as piloted on Filipino college students (Mercado, 2019b). The test works under the
assumption that social context is not a trait to be measured in itself, but is instead, a
factor to be considered for the expression of the traits (Mercado, 2019a).
The assumption was materialized by intentionally aligning the Social
Dimensions of Cross D – Personal, Individual, Professional, and Relational – as
settings on where the four trait components of Conscientiousness – Aptitude,
Orderliness, Commitment, and Deliberation – are expressed as behavior. Thus, each
item has a designated Social Dimension and is also categorized under a Trait
Component. As a result, the system created a four-by-four matrix of 16 Cross-
From this test, a set of 25 scores per examinee (composed of 4 Trait
Components, 4 Social Dimensions, 16 Cross-Dimensions, and one overall score for
11 of 44
Conscientiousness) was gathered for the study. The association of the said scores was
The Interaction of Social Dimensions, Trait Components and Cross-Dimensions
Trait Component
Aptitude b Orderliness b Commitment b Deliberation b
Social Dimension
Personal Personal Personal Personal Personal
(Conscientiousness)a Aptitude c Orderliness c Commitment c Deliberation c
Individual Individual Individual Individual Individual
(Conscientiousness) a Aptitude c Orderliness c Commitment c Deliberation c
Professional Professional Professional Professional Professional
(Conscientiousness) a Aptitude c Orderliness c Commitment c Deliberation c
Relational Relational Relational Relational Relational
(Conscientiousness) a Aptitude c Orderliness c Commitment c Deliberation c
Total score: Conscientiousness d
a Social Dimension, b Trait Component/sub-trait, c Cross-Dimension, d General score/trait
In this paper, the term Social Scales was used to refer to the four Social
Dimensions and the 16 Cross-Dimensions since they are the subscales that directly
consider the social factors. In the same manner, the term Trait Scales was used to
collectively refer to four Trait Components (or the sub-traits) and Conscientiousness
(which is the trait or the general score) being the subscales that focus on the
by the Trait Scales, it must still be kept in mind that they are still modifi ed by the
framework through their social context-specific items.
12 of 44
Scores from each of the 25 subscales presented were recorded as raw scores.
Responses per item itself were also gathered (with negatively keyed item reverse
scored) and used as the database for examining the reliability measures and validity
correlations.
International Personality Item Pool Representation of the NEO PI-R (IPIP NEO)
IPIP NEO is a 50-item Big-5 inventory from the International Personality Item
Pool. Each trait in the Five-Factor Model has 10 items that use 5-point Likert scale.
Based on a study with 811 Greek adults, representative of their population, the test
has an internal reliability of 0.875 and acceptable concurrent validity values for the
Conscientiousness scale (Ypofanti, et al., 2015).
Big Five Inventory (BFI)
Similar to IPIP NEO, the BFI also measures all five traits from the Five-Factor
Model (John & Srivastava, 1999). It has 44 items that come with a 5-point Likert
13 of 44
scale; nine of which measures Conscientiousness. The test was reported to have good
internal reliability at 0.89 upon running on 343 Malaysian nurses (Hee, 2014).
While IPIP NEO and BFI measure all five traits in the Five-Factor Model,
only the items dedicated to Conscientiousness were used for the interest of the study.
This particular trait was chosen to match the scope of XC, and thus serve as a
controlled variable. The tests themselves, the IPIP NEO and BFI, served as the
control setups where Cross D was not applied.
Organization and Analysis of the Data
Presentation of analysis can be divided into three parts: (1) gathering evidence of the
interaction between social context and the expression of a trait, (2) examining the
relative effect of adding Social Dimension on test reliabilit y, and (3) examining the
relative effect of adding Social Dimension on test validity. All of these parts
document, test, and quantify the validity of the frameworks’ assumptions and
framework’s relative utility in comparison with the current practice and standards.
For within-test comparison, Trait Scales, which are more trait-focused, were
used as the controlled while Social Scales served as the experimental. As for the
between-tests comparison, IPIP NEO and BFI served as the baseline, being the scales
developed with traditional non-Cross D process. Cutoff values were also collected
from literature to serve as standards.
The common trait measured by the tests, Conscientiousness, was held constant
throughout the process and was not evaluated on its own. Rat her, the paper was
focused on how Cross D affects the quality of a personality scale.
Part 1: Social context influences the expression of a trait.
The first part of the analysis is a search for evidence if social context influences the
14 of 44
expression of a trait. This assumption can be divided into three premises: (1) Role
difference exists, (2) Social Stipulation influences behavior, and (3) Social
Interaction influences behavior.
Testing these premises was conducted on two levels. The first is on the trait
level, through the broader four Social Dimensions, while the second is on sub-trait
level, through the more specific 16 Cross-Dimensions.
First Premise: Role difference exists.
Role difference was defined in this paper as the divergence of a person’s behavior
across social circumstances due to the interaction of personality and social factors.
To examine if role difference exists, the scores on scales measuring a common
construct (e.g. Aptitude) but across Social Dimensions (e.g. Personal Aptitude,
Individual Aptitude, Professional Aptitude, and Relational Aptitude.) were compared
using test of difference. Significant differences theoretically prove that social context
affects the expression of personality traits.
Role Difference on Social Dimensions. The presence of role difference was tested
using Friedman’s Test across the four Social Dimensions with Wilcoxon Signed -rank
Test paired with Bonferroni correction as post hoc. Significant differences across
Social Dimensions prove the influence of social context on the expression of a trait,
and consequently, the existence of role difference across social settings on trait level.
Role Difference on Cross-Dimensions. For the sub-trait level, Friedman test was
conducted on four Cross-Dimensions that share the same Trait Component. After
which, Wilcoxon Signed-rank Test with Bonferroni correction served as post hoc.
Thus, the method required four Friedman tests, one for each Trait Component, and a
15 of 44
set of Wilcoxon Signed-rank Tests as post hoc for every significant Friedman test
result. Differences from these tests consequently shows evidence of role difference
on sub-trait level.
Since social context is defined by the presence or absence of Social Stipulation
and influence should also be evaluated; separately as the second and third premises.
Second Premise: Social Stipulation influences behavior.
To test whether SS influences behavior, test of difference was conducted between
Social Dimensions with opposing occurrence of SS but has the same SI occurrence.
Thus, Wilcoxon Signed-rank Test was conducted between scores in Personal
Conscientiousness and Individual Conscientiousness (both of which lacks SI), and
between Relational Conscientiousness and Professional Conscientiousness (both of
which has SI). The first subscale for each pair is characterized by the absence of SS,
while the second is characterized by its presence.
To quantify the stability of its influence, correlations between Social
Dimensions with similar occurrence of SS were gathered. For this, Spearman rho
correlation was performed between Personal Conscientiousness and Relational
Conscientiousness (since both lack SS), and between Individual Conscientiousness
and Professional Conscientiousness (since both have SS).
Parallel tests were conducted for the sub-trait level by using analogous Cross-
Dimensions of each Trait Components instead of the broader Social Dimensions.
Third Premise: Social Interaction influences behavior.
Likewise, to test if SI influences behavior, Wilcoxon Signed-rank Test was conducted
between scores in Personal Conscientiousness and Relational Conscientiousness
16 of 44
(both of which lacks SS), and between Individual Conscientiousness and Professional
Conscientiousness (both of which has SS). For each pair mentioned, the former is
characterized by the absence of SI, while the latter is characterized by its presence.
To test the stability of Social Interaction’s influence, correlation of Social
Dimensions that have similar occurrence of SI were gathered. For this purpose,
Spearman rho correlation was performed between Personal Conscientiousness and
Individual Conscientiousness (since both lack SI), and between Professional
Conscientiousness and Relational Conscientiousness (since both h ave SI).
For the sub-trait level, similar tests were conducted with corresponding Cross-
Dimensions of each Trait Components instead of the broader Social Dimensions.
Results supporting the first part consequently prove that social factors exist (first
premise) and social context (as defined by SI and SS) affects behavior (second and third
premise). This also establishes the validity of the social factors as constructs in line with
the criteria of Borsboom, Mellenbergh, & van Heerden (2004) and thus, supports the
conceptual foundation of Cross D as applied on a trait scale.
Part 2: Cross-Dimensional framework does not compromise the reliability of the
test.
As a framework for psychometric tests, Cross D should also prove that it can
help on improving reliability, or at the very least, does not compromise it. As such,
its impact on internal reliability was tested by conducting (1) within-test, (2) between-
tests, and (3) against-the-standard comparisons. Average proportional distance (APD)
was used as the measure for the purpose since this measure is not affected by the number
of items (Sturman, Cribbie, & Flett, 2009). In APD, lower values reflect better
reliability.
17 of 44
To see whether the framework improved the reliability of the test, within-test,
and between-tests comparisons were conducted. For the former, the APD values of
each Social Scale were compared with that of Trait scales. For the later, APD values of
XC scales were compared to Conscientiousness scales from IPIP NEO and BFI.
Judging whether the framework improves the internal reliability of a test was
based on the percentage of the times when the Social Scales (for within-test
comparison), and the XC scales (for between-tests comparison) received favorable
results (lower APD). A percentage greater than 50% was considered as a sign of
better reliability, while 60% and above is set as the threshold for significant
improvement.
To know whether the application of Cross D framework compromised the
reliability of the test created or not, against-the-standard comparison was performed.
Cutoffs for average proportional distance were set at .30, .25, and .20 for average, very
good, and excellent consistency, respectively (Sturman, Cribbie, & Flett, 2009). Any
value higher than .30 reflects low reliability and was interpreted as a compromise on
reliability.
Part 3: Cross-Dimensional framework improves the validity of the test.
Since the framework proposed an additional aspect to measure – social factors, its
effect on validity is also of concern. To tell whether the Cross D improved the test’s
validity, (1) within-test and (2) between-tests comparison was conducted. To see
whether it did not compromise validity, (3) against-the-standard item validity was
also done.
Within-test Comparison of Concurrent Validity
For within-test comparison, the concurrent validity (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955, p.
18 of 44
282) of Social Scales was compared to that of Trait Scales. Correlations were
anchored to IPIP NEO and BFI Conscientiousness scale scores as the external
criterion. While a stronger positive correlation necessarily equates to better
concurrent validity, the differences between values were still evaluated for statistical
significance using the work of Lenhard and Lenhard (2014).
For between and against-the-standard comparison, the item validity values were
gathered and treated as an extension of construct validity (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). In
this measure, higher correlation means better fit of the item to the construct it is
supposed to measure, thereby providing a value that is comparable to factor loading
of construct validity (Clark & Watson, 1995, p. 314; Campbell & Fiske, 1959).
Item validity (Parry & Crossley, 1950), was quantified using the item-total
correlation for the subscale. To account for the rise in correlation due to the inclusion
of item-score, the total subscale scores were operationalized as the respective scale
raw score, less the score from the item of concern (Howard & Forehand, 1962, p.
731)
Between-tests Comparison of Average Item Validity
In between-tests comparison, the mean item validity of each XC scale was gathered
and compared to parallel values of IPIP NEO and BFI Conscientiousness scales.
Since there are only two baselines, the XC scales need to have better item validity at
least once in these comparisons to say that the framework aided on validity.
Against-the-standard Comparison of Item Validity
To see whether the framework compromised the test’s validity, i tem validity values
were evaluated based on the standards used by various literatures (Wolfinbarger &
Gilly, 2003; Hinkin, 1995; Nurosis 1994; Cristobal, Flavián, & Guina, 2007). Cutoffs
19 of 44
were set at .30, .40, and .50 for average, good, and excellent item validity
respectively. Values lower than .29 were considered as low.
Results
This section summarizes the findings from the analysis. The first part examines the
assumptions of Cross D, followed by the observation of its effect on (2) reliability
and (3) validity. Each of these parts were further divided into more specific topics as
represented by an assumption (for Part 1) or a particular point of comparison (for
Part 2 and Part 3).
Part 1: Social context influences the expression of trait.
This part focuses on the evidences of social context and its influence on the
expression of a trait as shown by the scores. This was further divided into three
subsections, each summarizing the evaluation of a premise on both trait and sub-trait
level.
First Premise: Role difference exist.
To see if role difference exists and affects behavior, Social Dimensions (for
trait level) or Cross-Dimensions (for sub-trait level) was tested for difference with
Friedman test and Wilcoxon Signed-rank tests with Bonferroni correction as post
hoc.
As shown on Appendix A.1, there are significant differences (p < .001)
between Social Dimensions and Cross-Dimensions with moderate effect ranging
from .243 to .490. Upon performing post hoc tests (see Appendix A.2), it was found
that at trait level, all six paired comparison have significant differences (p < .001),
while for the sub-trait level, 21 out of 24 paired comparisons were also significant (p
< .001) even with the Bonferroni correction’s LDS p-value of .008. In general, these
20 of 44
findings support the premise that role difference exist, both on trait and sub-trait
level.
Second Premise: Social Stipulation influences behavior.
For the second premise, Wilcoxon Signed-rank test and Spearman rho were
conducted between pairs of Social Dimensions (for trait level) or Cross -Dimensions
(for sub-trait level) matched in such way that differences can theoretically be
attributed to the influence of Social Stipulation while correlations statistically
represent the stability of this influence (see complete results on
Appendix B).
On trait level, large significant differences were found (z = -12.75, p < .001,
r = -0.52 and z = -12.58, p < .001, r = -0.51) along with equally large
(equivalent) (equivalent)
and significant correlations (r = .841, p < .001, z’ = 1.22 and r = .725, p < .001, z’
s s
= 0.92). These results support the second premise at trait level.
For the sub-trait level, all eight comparisons yield statistically significant
differences (p < .001) with moderate to strong practical effect (r -0.25 to -
(equivalent) =
0.55). This was paired by correlations (r = .382 to .703) that are all statistically
significant at the alpha of .001 and has moderate to large effect size ranging from
0.40 to 87. All these findings support the assumptions of Social Stipulation at sub-
trait level.
Altogether, scores were found to behave in line with how Cross D predicted
Social Stipulation to exist and influence behavior. Evidences are more stable and
more pronounced on the trait level than on sub-trait.
21 of 44
Third Premise: Social Interaction influences behavior.
For the third premise, Wilcoxon Signed-rank Test and Spearman rho was conducted
between pairs of Social Dimensions (for trait level) or Cross -Dimensions (for sub-
trait level) matched in such way that differences can be ascribed as the influence of
Social Interaction while correlation represent the stability of this influence (see
complete results on
22 of 44
Appendix C).
For the trait level, statistically significant differences with moderate effect
size were found (z = -11.22, p < .001, r = -0.46 and z = -10.84, p < .001,
(equivalent)
r = -0.44). The correlations were also significant with large effect size (r =
(equivalent) s
.819, p < .001, z’ = 1.15 and r = .764, p < .001, z’ = 1.01). These results all support
the third premise at trait level.
For the sub-trait level, six out of eight comparisons yield statistically
significant differences (p < .001) with varied degree of practical effect (r -
(equivalent) =
0.01 to -0.55). However, correlations (r = .351 to .635) are all statistically significant
(p < .001) and has moderate to strong effect size ranging from 0.37 to 0.75. The great
majority these findings validates the assumptions of Social Interactions at sub-trait
level.
In summary, the majority of results are in line with how Cross D predicted
Social Interaction to manifest in scores, thereby supporting the third premise – Social
Interaction influences behavior. Evidences are more pronounced on trait level than on
sub-trait.
Part 2: Cross-Dimensional framework does not compromise the reliability of the
test.
The impact of the framework on internal reliability was tested by conducting (1)
within-test, (2) between-tests and (3) against-the-standard comparisons using APD
values.
Within-test Comparison
For the first part, APD values of Social Scales scale were compared to Trait Scale’s.
Results were gathered as frequency and was converted to percentage.
23 of 44
Cross-Dimensions outperformed
the whole test and Trait
Components while Social
Dimensions tied with the whole
test and comes close to Trait
Components. This shows that per group of scales of XC
reliability tends to be better when the scale is trait-focused than when it is social-context-
focused. However, specificity in content, thereby regrouping the items into smaller units
(i.e. Cross-Dimensions), tends to increase the reliability more dramatically.
Between-tests Comparison
Similar to the first part, APD
values were compared, gathered
as frequency then converted to
percentage, but this time, XC
scales were compared to IPIP
NEO and BFI.
3, IPIP NEO have far much better reliability (62.50% to 100%) than XC scales.
Nevertheless, XC scales shows comparable (50.00%) to considerably better (68.75%)
reliability than BFI. This implies that to some extent, Cross D improves the reliability of
the test as compare to traditional trait-focused approach on test development.
24 of 44
Against-the-standard Comparison
To see if Cross D application compromised reliability, APD values were also
evaluated in comparison to the standards (see p. 18 ).
As what can be seen in
values greater than the average
range. Straightforwardly, this says
that Cross D does not compromise
the test’s reliability; more so, it
per group of scales of XC
improves the test’s reliability as supported by findings from within-test and between-
test comparisons.
Part 3: Cross-Dimensional framework improves the validity of the test.
To tell whether the Cross D improved the test’s validity, (1) within-test and (2)
between-tests comparisons were conducted and to see if it did not compromised
validity, (3) against-the-standard comparison of item validity was also performed.
Within-test Comparison (of Concurrent Validity)
After the comparison of concurrent validity values, results were collated as frequency and
converted into percentage. Statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) were also
separated from non-significant.
25 of 44
with IPIP NEO (left) and BFI (right) Conscientiousness scale as criterion
validity values as compared to Social Scales considering both significant and non -
significant results. Thus, this reflects that Cross D could have decreased the validity
of the test. However, it is interesting to note that scales with sim ilar number of items
– Social Dimensions and Trait Components – have almost equal validity.
Between-tests Comparison (of Item Validity)
For the second part, average item validity values of XC were compared to IPIP NEO’s
and BFI’s. Similar to previous comparisons, the results were summarized as
percentage.
and IPIP NEO (left) and BFI (right) Conscientiousness scale
XC scales, but their leads are only significant with Cross-Dimensions. Nevertheless,
26 of 44
this still supports the previous finding that says Cross D decreases the validity of the
test in comparison to traditionally developed tests.
Against-the-standard Comparison (of Item Validity)
To see if the Cross D
compromised the validity of
the test with the reference to
the standards (see p.19) .
Results were presented in
Based on this, up to
86.2% of (or 69 out of 80) XC items have acceptable item validity. This proportion
makes the pool of items of XC acceptable in general.
For comparison, the XC scales have better ratio of items with excellent
validity than IPIP NEO and BFI. However, all items of both IPIP NEO and BFI have
acceptable item validity in contrast to XC with 13.8% to 17.5% items with poor
validity. This implies that Cross D might have reduced the validity of the items.
Discussion
Ever since survey-type tests outdated lengthy interviews in the 1900s (Cohen &
Swerdlik, 2009), the advances in personality test development leaned towards
statistical methods and exploration of traits to be included on standardized
personality tests. As a result, the tradeoffs on using fixed sets of statements –
specifically, the dismissal of social context, were left unchecked. This went on amidst
the rise of personality theories which factors in the situation (Bandura, 1997 ; Rotter,
1982), researches showing disparities in behavior as its social consequences change
27 of 44
(London & Oldham, 1977; Johnson & Chang, 2006; Gardner, Gabriel, & Lee, 1999),
and studies dissecting behavioral changes during human interaction (Santiago &
Enriquez, 1976; Santiago, 1976).
As a resolution, Cross-Dimension Framework (Cross D) was devised to serve as
a guide on incorporating social factors – namely, Social Stipulation and Social Interaction
– on a personality inventory. After successful adaptation on a test named, Cross-
Dimensional Conscientiousness Scale (XC), this paper examined the empirical basis of
its (1) theoretical assumptions and its effect on (2) reliability and (3) validity of the test.
Cross D and the Assumptions of Its Constructs
As hypothesized in the first premise (p. 15), differences in scores were noted
between scales that measure similar content (i.e., trait or sub-trait) but concern different
Social Dimensions. Within the framework, these differences were credited to the unique
combination of social factors in each Social Dimension and serve as proof of role
difference. Such difference in expression of personality across social context was also
suggested by literatures factoring in social circumstance (Bandura, 1997; Rotter, 1982),
consequences of behavior (London & Oldham, 1977; Johnson & Chang, 2006; Gardner,
Gabriel, & Lee, 1999), and degree of interactions (Santiago & Enriquez, 1976; Santiago,
1976). Moreover, these differences also show that the Social Dimensions are not only
theoretical but also manifest on actual scores.
Interestingly, the scales with similar occurrence of a social factor (i.e. Social
Stipulation or Social Interaction) were also found to be correlated despite the differences
in scores (second and third premise, p.16-16). Using the proposed structure of Cross D to
interpret these results, the similarity can be deduced as the shared social factors while the
differences rose from the distinct combinations of these social factors. This consequently
28 of 44
implies that the trait measured is not a mere lump of a whole but is a continuum with
more specific, but not completely distinct parts.
Effect of Cross D on Reliability
It was also observed that the APD values improves as the unit becomes more
specific (i.e. from whole test to Cross-Dimension) which is in line with the theoretical
increase in homogeneity as the scope narrows down. Considering that XC items were
grouped based on their content (which is a theory-based approach) rather than item
statistic during the test development phase (Mercado, 2019b), this increase in reliability
but are also statistically relevant. Additional research can be conducted to see if this
specificity on content also increases the test-retest and inter-rater reliability.
Varied results were gathered from between-test APD comparison, but upon taking
a closer look, the results can be best explained by the ratio of item retained to the initial
item pool. The 50-item IPIP NEO was from 858 initial items, 44 items of BFI were from
300, while the 80 items of XC are from 500. Considering their APD values which are
.081, .143, and .157 respectively, it can be observed that lower item retention rate leads
to better APD value. This can be due to a wider selection for the best items to be included
in the final form. Nonetheless, against-the-standard comparison showed that XC did not
compromise the reliability of the test since all of its scales have acceptable APD values.
Effect of Cross D on Validity
It was also found that the test produced lower concurrent and item validity values
than those developed in traditional way. Despite this, the values still generally meet the
standard cutoffs. While this seems to be a drawback, in hindsight, it is theoretically
inevitable. Since social factors can be considered as constructs themselves, infusing them
29 of 44
to a personality scale will “reduce” the scale’s validity. That is because, strictly speaking,
the Cross D-aligned items do not measure what it is “only” supposed to measure (i.e. the
trait); the items also consider the social aspects of the behavior. Within Domain-Sampling
Theory, Cross D can be seen as an “expansion” on a construct that traditionally developed
tests cover. This expansion creates a mismatch in scope which shows as lower validity
values.
This explanation was also supported by the comparisons of concurrent validity
that Trait Scales has characteristics closer to traditional tests since it focuses on the trait
more than the social context (p. 11).
Perhaps, a more appropriate research design can shed a light on this in the future;
one which can compare a single trait as repeatedly measured by a traditionally developed
test but across social settings and as measured by a Cross D-based test. Such study will
also further evaluate the evidence for construct validity (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955) of
Cross D social factors and social settings.
Limitations and Recommendations
Overall, this study showed indications of the framework’s capacity to integrate
social factors on personality assessment. It also provided statistical evidence for the
framework’s assumptions and efficiency by attesting to the existence of social factors and
to the efficiency of its proposed social setting taxonomy.
The systematic incongruence found on scores across Social Dimensions also
challenges the mindset that personality only changes over time and pushes for escalation
of social factors as an inevitable component on personality assessment (rather than an
extraneous variable) – a matter that can be addressed through Cross D application.
30 of 44
Replication of the study with other traits and using a larger sample representative of the
population can best reevaluate these conclusions.
31 of 44