Prosocial motivation as a mediator between dispositional mindfulness and prosocial behavior
Hali Kil
David O’Neill
Joan E. Grusec
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, 100 St. George St. Toronto ON M5S3G3
Corresponding Author: Hali Kil, hali.kil@umontreal.ca
Acknowledgements: This study was funded by a grant to the third author (JEG) from the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council. We thank the students who participated in this study
and the research assistants that helped with data collection.
Accepted for publication in Personality and Individual Differences.
© 2021. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0
Abstract
Researchers have theorized that mindfulness leads to prosocial behavior through awareness of
one’s personal goals and motivations. The present research examined the mediating effect of
internalized prosocial motivation on the link between dispositional mindfulness and prosocial
behavior. Undergraduate students (N=232) completed questionnaires assessing prosocial
motivation and mindfulness. Prosocial behavior was assessed with the social mindfulness
decision-making task. The results indicated that internalized prosocial motivation mediated the
link between the mindfulness facet of acting with awareness and social mindfulness. The results
suggest the importance of individual characteristics such as internalized prosocial motivation as
mediators of the link between dispositional mindfulness and prosocial behavior. Given that only
one facet of mindfulness—acting with awareness—was indirectly associated with prosocial
behavior, the results also indicate that general measures of dispositional mindfulness may not be
sufficiently nuanced when investigating these associations.
Keywords: prosocial motivation; dispositional mindfulness; internalization; prosocial behavior
Highlights
• Mindful people may be more motivated to behave in a way that benefits others
• Internalized prosocial motivation explains why mindful people may be more prosocial
• Acting with awareness is an important mindfulness facet for prosocial behavior
Prosocial motivation as a mediator between dispositional mindfulness and prosocial behavior
1. Introduction
Prosocial behavior encompasses actions that benefit another person, such as helping,
sharing, showing consideration and concern, and making amends for past wrongdoings (Grusec
& Sherman, 2011). A unique form of prosocial behavior that has received relatively little
attention is social mindfulness, defined as the recognition and respect of another’s agency by
allowing that person to make meaningful choices, often at the cost of satisfying one’s own
personal preferences (Mischkowski et al., 2018; Van Doesum et al., 2013). In social mindfulness
tasks, participants are asked to choose one item from a set of three items—one unique and two
identical (e.g. one black hat, two white hats)—then instructed to imagine that someone else
would be selecting from the two remaining items after they made their selection. Selecting an
identical item is thought to demonstrate social mindfulness, since this prosocial behavior allows
for another person to have choice and agency. Van Doesum et al. (2013) originally hypothesized
that dispositional mindfulness and social mindfulness would be linked, based on existing
theoretical perspectives and empirical research suggesting that mindful individuals are
empathetic and compassionate (e.g. Adair et al., 2018; Cameron & Fredrickson, 2015),
characteristics that have been shown to correlate with greater prosocial behavior (see Condon,
2017). However, whereas the expected links to empathy and perspective-taking were found in
their study, dispositional mindfulness and social mindfulness were not significantly correlated.
In the present study, we address two possible explanations for the lack of association
found between dispositional mindfulness and social mindfulness. First, we propose that greater
internalized prosocial motivation may mediate the link between dispositional mindfulness and
prosocial behavior, i.e., social mindfulness. Van Doesum et al. (2013) proposed that the effects
of individual prosocial characteristics, such as an intrinsic motivation to be prosocial, may
potentially be an intermediary mechanism underlying the association between mindfulness and
prosocial behavior. Second, we propose that a more nuanced, multifaceted measure of
dispositional mindfulness may demonstrate specific facet-level links to prosocial behavior.
While Van Doesum et al. (2013) measured mindfulness using a single-facet measure (Mindful
Attention and Awareness Scale), some argue that there exist a number of dispositional
mindfulness facets (e.g. Baer et al., 2006). Like personality facets, each dispositional
mindfulness facet may exert unique effects on motivation or behavior. To test this assertion, the
present study examined the indirect association between dispositional mindfulness and social
mindfulness using a path model that included five facets of mindfulness and prosocial motivation
as a mediator of this indirect association.
1.1 Mindfulness
Mindfulness can be defined as a state of present-oriented, nonjudgmental attention and
awareness (e.g. Baer et al., 2006). Of many models describing mindfulness, the five-facet model
proposes five mindfulness characteristics that include 1) observing: paying attention to
sensations, perceptions, and internal states such as thoughts and feelings; 2) describing: the
ability to label and describe internal states with words; 3) acting with awareness: being focused
and undistracted when enacting desired behaviors; 4) nonjudging: not criticizing or judging
oneself for thoughts or feelings, and; 5) nonreactivity: noticing and pausing in response to
thoughts or feelings (Baer et al., 2006). Dispositional mindfulness research using these five
facets has found positive associations between the facets of mindfulness and emotional
intelligence, persistence in problem solving, self-regulation of behavior, and executive
functioning (Baer et al., 2006; Baer et al., 2008; Feldman et al., 2014, Short et al., 2016). High
levels of mindfulness have also been found to correlate with less neuroticism and more
extraversion, openness to experience, agreeableness, and conscientiousness (Giluk, 2009).
Dispositional mindfulness has also been linked to various interpersonal factors, including lower
social anxiety, objective observation of emotions in social situations, and relationship
satisfaction in couples (Cameron & Fredrickson, 2015; Hayes-Skelton & Graham, 2013; Lenger
et al., 2017).
There has been considerable and growing interest in the association between mindfulness
and prosocial behavior. A recent meta-analysis reported that elevated mindfulness is linked to
both self-reported and observed ratings of prosocial behavior, although the effect size for the
former was significantly stronger (see Donald et al., 2019). Further, increasing mindfulness
through mindfulness training appears to lead to more prosocial behavior. Condon et al. (2013)
found that mindfulness meditation training had a significant direct link to whether or not
someone would be prosocial by giving up their seat to someone who was in need. However, this
link is not consistent: Ridderinkhof et al. (2017) found no effect of mindfulness training on
empathic responding or prosocial behavior. Regarding dispositional mindfulness and prosocial
behavior, as noted above, Van Doesum et al. (2013) reported no direct link between self-reported
mindfulness and prosocial behavior in the social mindfulness task. Several reasons for this
discrepancy are possible: for example, self-report measures and behavioral tasks do not always
target the same phenomenon, nor do they consistently correlate (Suen & Ary, 2014).
In the present study, we propose that one possible reason for the lack of association
between mindfulness and social mindfulness is that the separate facets of mindfulness do not all
relate to prosocial behavior to the same extent. Although Van Doesum et al. (2013) used a
single-facet measure of mindfulness and found no link with social mindfulness, mindfulness
facets do not consistently intercorrelate, suggesting that distinct characteristics of mindfulness
may be uniquely associated with prosocial behavior. These unique associations cannot be tested
using a combined, single facet measure of mindfulness. To address this issue, in the present
study, we measured mindfulness using the five-facet model to assess the unique links of each
facet to social mindfulness.
1.2 Prosocial Motivation as a Mediator
A second reason for the lack of association between mindfulness and social mindfulness
reported by Van Doesum et al. (2013) may be that the link is indirect. In the present study,
prosocial motivation was proposed as a mediator of this indirect link. According to self-
determination theory (SDT; Ryan & Deci, 2000), there are three sources of prosocial motivation:
1) external motivation, defined as wanting praise or rewards and avoiding punishment; 2)
introjected motivation, combining internal and external pressures that act through esteem-based
pressures, such as avoidance of guilt or seeking social approval, and; 3) identified motivation,
acting in line with one’s own values or goals and the most internalized form of motivation
among these three sources (Ryan & Connell, 1989).
Internalized prosocial motivation may be heightened in those with high dispositional
mindfulness. It has been theorized that mindful individuals have an enhanced capacity to assess
the world and react to situations in accord with their motivations (Schultz & Ryan, 2015).
Research supporting this assertion has found that mindfulness is positively related to prioritizing
internalized goals such as feelings of community and having interpersonal relationships, rather
than external goals such as financial success or public self-image (e.g., Brown & Kasser, 2005).
Thus, both theory and research suggest that mindful individuals can better understand their
internalized motives, and potentially behave in line with those motives.
There is also a wealth of research evidence to support a link between internalized forms
of prosocial motivation and prosocial behavior. For example, Wentzel et al. (2007) found in
adolescents that internalized motivation was linked to prosocial goal motivation, which
ultimately linked to peer ratings and teacher ratings of prosocial behavior. Similarly, Grant
(2008) found that volunteers who reported greater internalized prosocial motivation were more
likely to persist in their prosocial behavior, and Hodge and Lonsdale (2011) found that
sportsmen with greater internalized motivation were more likely to be prosocial with teammates.
On the other hand, use of rewards, which is related to external motivation, has been found to be
related to lower rates of prosocial behavior (Fabes et al., 1989). In the case of social mindfulness,
we proposed that those who act prosocially are likely to be acting with identified motivation, the
most internalized form of prosocial motivation of the three motivations, because no external
rewards or consequences are associated with choices made in the social mindfulness task.
1.3 The Present Study
The aim of the present study was to address why mindfulness and social mindfulness
were not linked in the Van Doesum et al. (2013) study by including a five-facet measure of
mindfulness and investigating how prosocial motivation may indirectly link the two constructs.
We hypothesized that higher levels of mindfulness may be linked to internalized prosocial
motivation (i.e. identified motivation), indirectly linking mindfulness and social mindfulness. We
made no assumptions regarding which mindfulness facet might be most related to prosocial
motivation, with the exception of acting with awareness. We hypothesized acting with awareness
would be positively linked to social mindfulness since it is the most outwardly-oriented facet of
mindfulness (i.e., targeting behavior rather than internal states; Baer et al., 2006). That is,
mindful individuals who are aware of and intentional in their actions were hypothesized to be
more likely to respond to the social mindfulness task in a prosocial way, i.e., to recognize
another’s agency.
2. Methods
2.1 Participants
First-year students (N=232; 66.4% female) participated at an urban Canadian university.
Participants were 17 to 25 years of age (M = 18.99; SD = 1.50). They were East Asian
age
(31.0%), Western or Eastern European (23.3%), South Asian (15.5%) and West and Central
Asian (8.2%) in background, or were from other ethnic or multiple ethnic origins (22.0%).
2.2 Procedure
The procedure was approved by the university’s ethics board. Participants were recruited
from introductory psychology courses and received a small course credit for their participation.
Consent was obtained from all participants, and they completed all measures at the lab on a
computer. Upon completion, they were debriefed.
2.3 Measures
2.3.1 Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ). Mindfulness was assessed using
the FFMQ, which consists of 39 items corresponding to 5 subscales (Baer et al., 2006) observing
(e.g., “I pay attention to how my emotions affect my thoughts and behavior.”), describing (e.g.,
“Even when I’m feeling terribly upset, I can find a way to put it into words.”), acting with
awareness (e.g., “I find myself doing things without paying attention.”; reverse-scored),
nonjudging of inner experience (e.g., “I tell myself I shouldn’t be thinking the way I’m
thinking.”; reverse-scored), and nonreactivity to inner experience (e.g., “I perceive my feelings
and emotions without having to react to them.”). Participants rated their agreement with each
item (1=never or very rarely true; 5=very often or always true).
2.3.2 Prosocial Motivation. Motivation to be prosocial was measured using the Prosocial
Regulation Questionnaire (PSR-Q; Ryan & Connell, 1989). The PSR-Q consists of five
situations potentially requiring prosocial action (e.g., Why would you help someone who is in
distress?). For each situation, participants indicate their agreement with 5 different reasons for a
prosocial response (1 = not at all true; 4 = very true). The total of 25 items combine to form 3
subscales: external motivation (“Because I could get in trouble if I didn't.”; 5 items), introjected
motivation (e.g., “Because I'd feel bad about myself if I didn't.”; 10 items) and identified
motivation (e.g., “Because I think it's important to give help when it's needed”; 10 items).
2.3.3 Social Mindfulness. The social mindfulness paradigm (Van Doesum et al., 2013) is
a computer-based social decision making task that assesses prosocial behavior. Participants are
shown three objects, among which one is unique and the other two identical (e.g., one pink
bottle, two yellow bottles), then instructed to imagine that someone would be selecting from the
Five different sets of three objects were presented, and responses were binary: 0 = unique object
chosen (e.g., pink bottle); 1 = identical item chosen (e.g., yellow bottle). An average across the
five sets resulted in a score between 0.0 and 1.0, with higher values indicating greater frequency
of prosocial choices. Psychometric properties, in particular convergent validity, of the social
mindfulness task have been previously established in similar samples (Dou et al., 2018;
Mischkowski et al., 2018; Van Doesum et al., 2013).
2.4 Analysis
Path analysis was conducted using MPlus7, allowing for simultaneous and robust testing
of the association of each mindfulness facet to each type of prosocial motivation, and the latter to
social mindfulness, in a single model. We did not include paths between mindfulness facets and
social mindfulness, since the two constructs were unrelated in previous studies (i.e., Van
Doesum et al., 2013). Age and gender were controlled in the analysis to minimize demographics-
driven statistical variation (Boehnke et al., 1989; Eagly & Crowley, 1986). Ethnicity was not
controlled due to lack of significant correlations with any variables of interest. Bootstrapping
was implemented with 10,000 samples. A bootstrapped confidence interval that does not include
zero indicates statistically significant effects (Preacher & Hayes, 2008). Significance of paths
was concluded when both p-values and bootstrapped confidence intervals were significant, to
address concerns about inflated alpha from testing multiple paths. Model fit was assessed with
the following criteria: chi-square (χ ) p-value below .05, root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA) below .07, Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI) above .95, and standardised root
mean square residual (SRMR) below .08 (Barrett, 2007; Hu & Bentler, 1999; Steiger, 2007).
3. Results
and acting with awareness were negatively correlated with external motivation, and positively
correlated with identified motivation. Nonjudging was negatively correlated with external and
introjected motivation. Introjected motivation was positively correlated with external and
identified motivation. Identified motivation was positively correlated with social mindfulness.
Descriptive statistics, Cronbach’s α, and zero-order correlations
M SD α 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Mindfulness
14.60 2.62 .63
1.
Observe
15.67 3.80 .85 .05
2.
Describe
* **
16.26 3.16 .75 .14 .22
3.
Act with awareness
** **
14.29 3.48 .75 -.01 .19 .26
4.
Non-judging
**
14.74 3.48 .77 .11 .12 .07 .17
5.
Non-reactivity
Prosocial Motivation
** ** *
10.18 2.95 .71 -.18 -.09 -.20 -.13 -.05
6.
External
* **
28.77 5.77 .82 .02 .04 -.01 -.13 -.08 .55
7.
Introjected
* ** **
35.43 4.24 .83 .17 .12 .28 .05 .02 -.04 .42
8.
Identified
**
0.57 0.22 - .03 -.09 .05 -.02 .03 -.01 .05 .22
9.
Social mindfulness
* ** ** **
- - - -.11 .14 -.19 .02 .21 .003 -.11 -.24 .04
10.
Gender
18.99 1.50 - -.08 .10 .10 -.07 -.07 .02 .11 -.003 .05 .03
11.
Age
Note. **p≤.01; *p≤.05. Gender: 1=male, 2=female.
The tested path model showed good fit: χ (5) = 5.085, p = .406; RMSEA = .009 [CI =
observing and acting with awareness were negatively related to external motivation. Acting with
awareness was positively related to identified motivation. Identified motivation was positively
related to social mindfulness. Only the two latter paths were significant in both confidence
intervals and p-values after manually correcting for inflated alpha (p = .05/23 paths) due to
correlations between external and introjected motivation, and between introjected and identified
motivation. Considering the significant paths among acting with awareness, identified
motivation, and social mindfulness, we tested whether identified motivation may mediate
between acting with awareness and social mindfulness. This test of indirect effects with
bootstrapping at 10,000 was significant, β = .060, SE = .023, p = .010, 95% CI = .022, .098,
suggesting that acting with awareness was linked to social mindfulness through identified
motivation for prosocial behavior.
Unstandardized regression coefficients are reported, with standard error in parentheses. Black lines indicate significant paths based on
p-values and bootstrapped confidence intervals; grey lines indicate non-significant paths that were entered into and tested in the
4. Discussion
In the present study we investigated the indirect association between dispositional
mindfulness and social mindfulness, mediated by internalized prosocial motivation. We
addressed this association using a five-facet model of mindfulness to distinguish the independent
effects of each characteristic of mindfulness. Specifically, we had hypothesized that mindful
individuals would show more internalized prosocial motivation. The results confirmed our
hypothesis, demonstrating positive links between acting with awareness and identified prosocial
motivation, and negative links between observing and acting with awareness and external
prosocial motivation. We had also hypothesized that more internalized prosocial motivation
would indirectly link mindfulness and prosocial behavior in the form of social mindfulness. The
results also confirmed this hypothesis, demonstrating indirect associations between acting with
awareness and social mindfulness through identified prosocial motivation.
Although existing research suggests that mindfulness and prosocial behavior are directly
related (Donald et al., 2018), in the case of social mindfulness, Van Doesum and colleagues
(2013) reported no significant correlation. Further, while empirical findings support the
association between general mindfulness and prosocial motivation (e.g., Chatzisarantis &
Hagger, 2007; Howell & Buro, 2011) and prosocial motivation and prosocial behavior (e.g.
Grant & Berry, 2011), there has yet to be a facet-based assessment highlighting the unique
contributions of each component of mindfulness to prosocial behavior via prosocial introspection
and motivation. The present study provides preliminary evidence that the mindfulness facet of
acting with awareness may be a key factor connected to greater internalized motivation in the
prosocial domain, and indirectly to prosocial behavior in the form of social mindfulness. This
mindfulness-motivation-behavior link may be explained by mindful individuals’ heightened
awareness of their actions, given that mindful individuals have an enhanced capacity to translate
internal values and motives into behaviors that align with these beliefs (i.e. Brown et al., 2007;
Shapiro & Schwartz, 2000; Vago & David, 2012). Potentially, mindful awareness of one’s own
actions may drive the values-to-behavior pathway for prosocial behavior, with further
examination of this link necessary to deduce causality.
The present results confirm Van Doesum et al.’s (2013) speculations that mindfulness is
not directly linked to prosocial behavior in the form of social mindfulness, and that the link may
be indirect through prosocial motivation. The mediating role of prosocial motivation in the link
between dispositional mindfulness and prosocial propensity echoes related literature. For
example, in a study of adolescents, Hardy and Carlo (2005) found that religious adolescents’
prosocial behavior was mediated through the internally held value to be kind to others. Further,
Carlo et al. (2005) found that individuals high in personality traits of openness and extraversion
were more likely to act prosocially, with the link mediated by prosocial motivation. Similarly,
we found that a disposition for mindfulness, particularly acting with awareness, is linked to a
greater tendency to be prosocially motivated and act correspondingly. Indeed, mindful
individuals feel greater empathy and compassion in social situations (Beitel et al., 2005; Condon
et al., 2013), making them act in line with their internally held beliefs (i.e. motivations), and
leading to their enhanced desire to help others.
The present study underlines the importance of the motivation for prosocial behavior as a
mediator between certain facets of mindfulness and concern for others. The study, of course, is
cross-sectional, and causal inferences cannot be made. It is also possible that other mediators
indirectly link mindfulness facets and prosocial behavior. For example, existing research
suggests that emotional empathy, perspective taking, and compassion are linked to both
dispositional mindfulness and prosocial behavior (e.g., Baer et al., 2006; Berry et al., 2018). It
also remains to be seen whether prosocial motivation may moderate, rather than mediate, the
association between mindfulness and prosocial behavior. Further, considering the relatively
small coefficients seen in the model, it is possible that other variables not measured in this study,
such as personality factors, may more strongly mediate between mindfulness and prosocial
behavior. Simultaneously considering all of these factors, as well as prosocial motivation, in a
parsimonious model linking mindfulness and prosocial behavior would provide an extended
understanding of the process by which the two variables are connected.
Additionally, further research must be conducted to address whether specific components
of mindfulness are linked to specific forms of prosocial behavior. While the present study found
an indirect association from acting with awareness to social mindfulness through internalized
prosocial motivation, a different facet may be demonstrated to drive a different type of prosocial
behavior. For example, the facet of non-reactivity may be linked to prosocial donating when
watching distressing fundraising videos (i.e. illness in hospitals, starvation in low and middle
income countries) due to its unique links to emotion regulation (Coffey et al., 2010), potentially
regulating the autonomic reaction to distressing thoughts and allowing for impactful action.
These future studies would shed light on our understanding of the way in which present-oriented,
nonjudgmental attention and awareness have an impact on concern for others. Further, given that
mindfulness has been found to be more strongly associated with self-reported compared to
observed ratings of prosocial behavior (Donald et al., 2019), future studies of these links may
help to elucidate whether different mindfulness facets link to greater self-reported versus
observed prosocial behavior.
The present study focused on an important but rarely studied aspect of prosocial
behavior—sacrificing one’s own choices in order to allow another individual to make
meaningful choices for themselves. One facet of mindfulness was associated with this
manifestation of concern for others—acting with awareness or being attentive when engaging in
a desired action. What also appears to be important in actions relevant to social mindfulness is
the existence of an internalized motive of caring or consideration for others. We suggest that
acting with awareness facilitates social mindfulness because it encourages inhibition of
automatic responses such as negative internal reactions to situations and promotes internalized
motivation to be prosocial.