Environmental Linkage in Indonesian Language Learning
Ella Wulandari/19016018
Ellawulandari330@gmail.com
The environment is an aspect that is related to many things, one of which is related to
learning. The environment can affect the quality of learning for students, especially when
learning Indonesian. In learning Indonesian, it can be called environmentally friendly learning.
Environmental-based Indonesian language learning is known to be able to reduce student
boredom during learning activities. When students experience boredom or boredom in learning,
educators or teachers can invite them to take advantage of the surrounding environment as a
source and fun learning media. This learning foundation can also improve social relations
between students, including in terms of values and norms. Therefore, it is able to help students
rethink the relationship between humans and the environment so that students can recognize and
think about environmental issues.
In learning related to the environment is very important for students. Uyar and Ensar (in
Ramadhan et al, 2019) suggest that using environmental themes in text learning can arouse
students' interest in learning languages and by implication can increase students' knowledge
about the environment. In learning about the environment, students are able to participate in
protecting and protecting the environment. For this reason, it can make students view the
environment as a valuable asset that should be protected for human survival, not as something
available for personal gain. Therefore, it is very important to develop knowledge about the
environment, awareness about the environment, and changes in behavior towards the
environment (Ramadhan et al, 2019). It was also clarified by Buldur and Omeroglu (in
Ramadhan et al, 2019) that environmental education is important to increase students' attitudes
and awareness of the environment.
According to Sukma (2007) In carrying out the development of students' knowledge and
experience, teachers play an important role in developing students' knowledge and experiences in
everyday life and are able to guide students towards critical thinking on matters relating to the
student's experience. Through learning that concerns the environment, students are able to train
students to think critically and contextually, with a critical and contextual way of thinking that
can affect Indonesian language learning, so that understanding of the environment and language
learning are interrelated. Thus, teachers use the environment to train, familiarize, and encourage
students to be responsive to environmental conditions related to learning. Not only that,
according to Sukma (2019), teachers should also motivate students to do this. Then the teacher
must also be wise in utilizing the environment as a learning medium which can later make
students more innovative and creative in learning. According to Ramadhan et al (2018), an
innovative learning model is learning that is able to improve student learning outcomes, so that
they are also able to improve their skills and abilities.
Creativity is closely related to the influence of the environment for a student, according
to Munandar (in Piliang et al, 2014) creativity is the result of individual interact ion with the
environment, so it can be seen if a creative student can be determined by encouragement or
motivation from within and his environment. Then it will greatly affect the learning outcomes.
This is in line with the opinion of Zulhafizh et al (2013) that students' attitudes and learning
motivation contribute to their learning outcomes, namely the Indonesian language. Therefore,
creativity is needed to improve learning.
Efforts to improve learning related to the environment can be through the literacy movement.
According to Sukma (2017), literacy skills have a huge impact on student success in learning and
everyday life. In addition, literacy can play an important role in student literacy education. Not
only that, in literacy education, teachers also need to instill character education in students.
According to Sukma (2020) the cultivation of important characters is instilled since students are
still in elementary school. Character planting can be done in the learning process at school so
that students are wiser towards the environment. Here, the role of a teacher is needed to achieve
government goals. According to Sukma (2012) and Ramadhan et al (2019), the teacher acts as a
facilitator and manager of learning in the learning process. With the supervision and guidance of
teachers, students are expected to develop a sense of love for the environment.
Based on the questionnaire that the author distributed about "Environmental Linkages in
Indonesian Language Learning" to Padang State University students in semesters 3 and 5,
students at Jambi University in semester 5, students at Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta University in
semester 5, students at the Islamic State University Sunan Kalijaga in semester 5, students at
Brawijaya University in semester 5. 5, 5th semester students of Diponegoro University, 5th
semester of Helvetia Health Institute students, 5th semester of Wali Songo Islamic State
University students, 1st semester of Sultan Thaha State Islamic University students, 1st semester
of Indonesian Islamic University students. Of the total number of 32 respondents who
participated in filling out the questionnaire. The female respondents were more dominant with 31
female respondents and 1 male respondent with a percentage of 96.9% female, 3.1% male.
The results of the questionnaire distribution that have been carried out show that there are
59.4% of respondents agree and 40.6% agree that involving the environment in learning
Indonesian is able to develop students' thinking and acting skills. Then 46.9% of respondents
agree and 53.1% strongly agree that the material in involving the environment is able to make
students not easily bored and more interested in participating in the teaching and learning
process. Furthermore, 3.1% of respondents disagree, 53.6% agree and 40.6% strongly agree that
one form of environmental linkage in learning can be found in descriptive text material that aims
to describe an event, event, picture, human, and others. -other. As many as 3.1% of respondents
did not agree, 53.6% of respondents agreed, and 40.6% of respondents strongly agreed that
students involved or interacting directly with the environment were able to foster a sense of love,
responsibility, and care for the environment. In addition, in linking environmental material, it is
very influential on the Indonesian language learning process, there are 3.1% of respondents
disagree, 65.6% agree and 31.3%. Then 62.5% of respondents agree, and 37.5% of respondents
strongly agree that the material by observing the environment can train students to make an
example of a literary work with the environmental theme. In the material statement about a clean
and good environment being one of the components supporting student success in learning, it
was found that 3.1% of respondents did not agree, 53.1% of respondents agreed and 43.8% of
respondents strongly agreed. Furthermore, there are 71.9% of respondents agree and 28.1% of
respondents strongly agree that linking the environment in learning Indonesian is able to open
broad knowledge and insight for students. As many as 6.2% of respondents disagree, 68.8% of
respondents agree and 25% of respondents strongly agree that the legend material about
Rorojongrang Temple from Yogyakarta is related to the environment in learning Indonesian.
Finally, it can be found that 3.1% of respondents disagree, 53.1% of respondents agree and
43.8% of respondents strongly agree that the material about teachers as educators, it is necessary
to provide material related to the environment to students in order to train awareness about the
importance of maintaining environment.
Based on the results of research that has been done by the author, it can be concluded that
the relationship between the environment in learning Indonesian has an important role to grow
and develop students' awareness of the need to protect the environment. Materials about the
environment can be included in Indonesian language learning such as students can be instructed
to make the text being studied with an environmental theme. The author hopes that by linking the
environment in learning Indonesian, it can make students more responsible and take care of the
surrounding environment so that it will be better in the future.