Running head: CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
Emerging complexity in children's conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor
Xin Yang
Yarrow Dunham
Yale University
Please send correspondence to Xin Yang, Department of Psychology, Yale University, 2
Hillhouse Ave., New Haven, CT 06511 (e-mail: xin.yang@yale.edu).
Accepted at Developmental Science
Conflict of Interest Statement:
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements:
We thank the families, schools, and museums that participated in the study. We thank Ilayda
Orhan, Sophie Arnold, Ragna Naas, Francesco Scarpetta, Haley Hegefeld, Luisa Graden, Laura
Rodriguez, and Auguste White for help with data collection, Ilayda Orhan for help with study
materials and reading earlier versions of the manuscript, and Urmi Pandya for coding open-
ended answers, and members of the Social Cognitive Developmental Lab at Yale for helpful
discussions.
Data Availability Statement:
All study materials, data files, and analysis code that replicates all results in the manuscript and
supplemental materials are also openly shared and are available on an anonymous link at:
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
Research Highlights
• We examine the emergence and development of more complex and differentiated
understandings of wealth, poverty, and social inequality.
• American middle-class children gradually grow less positive towards the wealthy relative
to the poor during early and middle childhood.
• Older children increasingly recognize that the wealthy have disproportionate social power
to affect a broad range of outcomes.
• These early conceptualizations may set the stage for adult reasoning, including adult
decisions about how society should address issues related to inequality and poverty.
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
Abstract
Past work suggests that children have an overly rosy view of rich people that stays consistent
across childhood. However, adults do not show explicit pro-rich biases and even hold negative
stereotypes against the rich (e.g., thinking that rich people are cold and greedy). When does this
developmental shift occur, and when do children develop more complex and differentiated
understandings of the wealthy and the poor? The current work documents the developmental
trajectory of 4- to 12-year-old primarily American middle-class children’s conceptualizations of
the wealthy and the poor (total N = 164). We find: 1) age-related decreases in pro-rich
preferences and stereotypes relative to the poor; 2) domain-sensitive stereotypes across
prosociality, talent, and effort; 3) resource-specific behavioral expectations such that with age
children increasingly expect the wealthy to contribute more material resources but not more time
than the poor; 4) an increasing recognition of the unfairness of the wealth gap between the
wealthy and the poor; and 5) a developing understanding of the link between wealth and power.
In sum, this work illuminates the emergence of more complex understandings of wealth, poverty,
and inequality.
Keywords: social inequalities; pro-rich bias; stereotypes; unfairness; behavioral expectations;
wealth-power links
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
Emerging complexity in children's conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor
Economic inequality is one of the defining issues of our time, especially as the wealth
gap has increased in recent years (Congressional Budget Office, 2016; Roser, 2013). Critically,
the wealthy not only hold more material resources but also enjoy increased ability to affect or
control their own life outcomes, experience greater leniency for misbehaviors, and can leverage
wealth to acquire more advantages and opportunities (Deaton, 2013a, 2013b; Singal, 2017).
These disparities are also often replicated across generations, further enlarging the wealth gap
(Ortiz & Briggs, 2003). Children’s social development unfolds while experiencing and observing
these inequalities. In the current work, we explore children’s evaluations of and lay beliefs about
the rich and the poor, especially how this reasoning develops between ages 4 and 12, important
years for children’s emerging understanding of social structures.
Previous work on the early understanding of the wealthy, the poor, and of wealth
inequalities generally shows a relative “pro-rich bias”, i.e. more favorable attitudes, evaluations,
and expectations associated with rich people compared to poor people (using “rich/poor” verbal
labels or symbols of wealth such as toys, cars, and houses). Given the widespread use of relative
measures, this “pro-rich” bias could equivalently be described as a relative “anti-poor” bias.
Beginning from the preschool age, children are found to prefer the rich over the poor and
evaluate the rich more positively (Horwitz et al., 2014; Li et al., 2014; Shutts et al., 2016).
Children also choose to befriend the rich (Ahl & Dunham, 2017; Li et al., 2014; Shutts et al.,
2016), and these preferences are robust across variation in the affluence of participants’ families
(Shutts et al., 2016). Turning to specific traits, children think the rich are nicer (Li et al., 2014;
Roussos & Dunham, 2016), more competent (Roussos & Dunham, 2016; Shutts et al., 2016;
Sigelman, 2012), and more popular (Shutts et al., 2016; Sigelman, 2012) than the poor. In
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
addition, children believe that the rich are more likely to share their resources than the poor (Ahl
et al., 2018) and that the poor might be unable to realize their goals due to resource barriers and
discrimination (Weinger, 2000). In a separate line of work on explanations and justifications of
inequalities between the rich and the poor, children also favor merit-based explanations that
justify such inequalities (Leahy, 1983; Mistry et al., 2016; Sigelman, 2012).
However, adults reason about the rich and the poor in a quite different and more complex
way. For example, they display ambivalence, attributing both positive and negative traits to both
the rich and the poor, and both favoring and envying the rich (e.g., Kay & Jost, 2003; Wu, Bai, &
Fiske, 2018). Supporting these differentiated beliefs, research also shows that rich categories are
viewed as competent but cold, and poor categories are viewed as warm but incompetent (Durante
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018), corresponding to the Stereotype Content Model (SCM; (Fiske et
al., 2002; for developmental work, see Roussos & Dunham, 2016). Another form of more
complex understanding about wealth in adults involves associations between wealth and social
power (e.g., realizing that the rich are more able to influence personal and societal outcomes and
to become leaders than are the poor; Zakaria, 1999).
Some scattered evidence has recently begun to illuminate children’s progression beyond
a simple pro-rich bias. For example, by middle childhood, children judge inequality in wealth as
unfair (e.g., around age 7 and 8, Chafel & Neitzel, 2005; Hussak & Cimpian, 2015) and they
think we should help the poor (Mistry et al., 2016). Aligning with these views, children
sometimes act in ways so as to rectify resource disparities, patterns not explained by the pro-rich
bias (e.g., around ages 4 and 5, see Li et al., 2014; Paulus, 2014; children also begin to rectify
some race-based resource inequalities around ages 10 and 11, see Elenbaas & Killen, 2016;
Elenbaas et al., 2016). Finally, older children and adolescents sometimes evaluate the rich in a
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
negatively stereotyped manner. Most notably, one study finds negative stereotyping of the rich in
children above age 10 (Mistry et al., 2015), but the details of this shift remain unclear.
What remains unknown, then, is when and how children gradually develop a more
sophisticated conceptualization of both the rich and the poor that includes more complex or
ambivalent forms of reasoning. Another critical case concerns the understanding of power
dynamics. As mentioned above, wealth in the real world does not only involve material wealth, it
also interplays with social power (Deaton, 2013a, 2013b; Singal, 2017). When do children
understand that wealthy people are more able to affect or control their own life outcomes as well
as influence broader societal trends? Developmental work on this topic is crucial because it helps
us distinguish early intuitive theories from later societal input, which often relate to one another
in complicated ways (Shtulman & Lombrozo, 2016). It may also contribute to interventions to
reduce the stigma of poverty, which are potentially more effective at the stage when those biases
and stereotypes are just forming (e.g. Heberle & Carter, 2015).
The present study
Across two cross-sectional studies we investigated developmental changes in children’s
conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor during early and middle childhood. We tested
children aged 4 to 12, important ages in children’s development of understanding of fairness
(McAuliffe et al., 2017) and social power (Gülgöz, 2015; Gülgöz & Gelman, 2017), as well as
the ability to take different perspectives when reasoning about other minds (Epley et al., 2004).
These understandings and abilities might be potentially relevant cognitive milestones in
children’s reasoning about wealthy and poor groups. While our investigation was not motivated
by any single theoretical perspective, these considerations suggested to us that we were well-
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
positioned to document substantial changes in children’s conceptualizations of wealth and
poverty, providing vital data to contribute to future theory-building.
We introduced children to two novel social groups, one rich and one poor. We then
assessed children’s understandings of these two groups in relation to the other. We chose
relational and relative measures in part because wealth and class categories are inherently
relational. Further, relational measures also tend to be more sensitive with young children in
revealing differences between groups than non-relational measures as the former directly
contrast the groups (see also Ahl & Dunham, 2017; Horwitz et al., 2014; Li et al., 2014; Shutts et
al., 2016 for the use of relational measures on similar topics).
In order to draw a more complete picture of children’s developing conceptualization of
the wealthy, the poor, and social inequality, we included measures of two components that have
featured prominently in past work, but rarely in the same study: evaluations and expectations
(liking, stereotypes, and expectation of contributions), and explanations and justifications
(explanations of wealth and poverty and fairness judgments of inequality). A particular goal was
to examine when conceptualizations begin to go beyond mere positivity, become more
differentiated, and increase in complexity. We did this by first carefully refining the evaluations
and expectations measures such that children could not simply answer based on their attraction to
possessions. We also deliberately included questions that are explicitly not related to material
resources (unlike in past work e.g. Ahl & Dunham, 2017), such as the contribution of physical
effort and time, to further explore domain sensitivity in children’s reasoning. In particular, this
allows us to better evaluate whether pro-rich biases are driven by general positivity towards the
rich or if that positivity is more tightly centered on their relative resource wealth. Second, we
explored whether children differentiated different domains (stereotypes of warmth vs.
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
competence, expectations of resource vs. non-resource contributions). Given past work finding
that younger children do not yet clearly distinguish these two stereotype domains (Roussos &
Dunham, 2016), we expected that differentiation between them would increase as a function of
age. Furthermore, we also included a third component that we see as a crucial gap in the
literature, children’s richer understanding of links between wealth and social power. Following
recent work on developmental changes in children’s understanding of social power and how it
connects with age and gender (Gülgöz, 2015; Gülgöz & Gelman, 2017; Liben et al., 2001), our
work can further illuminate how children gradually understand the connections between wealth
and social power. In particular, here we investigated when children begin to realize that the
wealthy can exert outsized influence on their social environment in ways that go beyond the
simple expenditure of resources. This could shed new light on children’s understanding of the
social consequences of being wealthy or poor as well as their naïve sociology with respect to
wealth and power dynamics in the world.
We anticipated several possible patterns of results. According to past work, children
might display a pro-rich bias across all measures and ages or be pro-rich on some but show no
clear patterns on others, which would not provide strong evidence for a complex or differentiated
conceptualization. If, alternatively, children gradually develop a more mature and complex
conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor, we would expect differentiated patterns emerging
with age. Particularly, we would expect these patterns: 1) decrease of pro-rich bias across
evaluations and expectations; 2) different patterns across different domains; and 3) an increased
understanding of the wealth-power link. Study 1 was focused on the first two issues while Study
2 also further explored the third.
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
Study 1
Study 1 was our first thorough examination of how children gradually develop a more mature
understanding of the wealthy, the poor, and social inequalities. We included measures tapping
both evaluations and expectations and explanations and justifications components, and tested
children of different age groups (early to middle childhood). Study 1 pre-registration can be
displays), data, and analysis code for the studies can be found at
Method
Participants
Participants were 32 four- to five-year-olds (M = 4.94, SD = .59, range 4.04 – 5.94, 19
females) and 30 seven- to eight-year-olds (M = 8.03, SD = .65, range 7.02 – 8.94, 9 females).
This sample size was decided following past work in this field (e.g., Horwitz et al., 2014); power
analyses indicated that n = 60 was required to detect a small to medium effect with > 80% power
(linear multiple regression in a random model, two tails, up to 3 predictors,  = .05,  = .2;
using G*Power). We note that the final sample (n = 62) slightly exceeded our pre-registered
sample size (n = 60) because we aimed for testing a larger sample to account for possible data
exclusions. Among the 66% participants (n = 41) whose parents provided racial information,
there were 32 White participants, 3 Asian participants, 3 biracial or multiracial participants, 2
Hispanic/Latinx participants, and 1 Black participant. An additional 2 children were tested but
excluded from data analyses due to failure to pass memory check questions. During the data
collection stage of Study 1, we had the unexpected opportunity to include a sample of 20 older
children (9- to 12-year-olds, M = 11.11, SD = .99, range 9.05 – 12.68, 13 females). Among the
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
11 participants whose parents provided racial information, there were 8 White and 3 Hispanic or
Latinx participants. While this group was not part of our pre-registration, we elected to extend
the same pre-registered methods and analysis plan to this additional sample (adding this sample
does not materially change any results concerning the two younger age groups).
For studies reported in the paper, participants were tested in the lab, at local museums, or
at local schools in New England by the first author or trained research assistants. Family income
for individual participants was not available, but given the demographic profiles of our data
collection sites, we believe that most participants came from middle-class families. In addition,
based on data collected for another study with a similar age range and same data collection
database and sites, the majority of the children came from middle-class families and viewed their
own family as neither rich nor poor, but somewhere in the middle (like most American adults;
Fiske et al., 2002). Studies reported in this paper were approved by Yale University Institutional
Review Boards, project title “Development of Social Category Knowledge”, protocol
#1305012100. Written parental consent was obtained in advance of all testing; children also
provided verbal assent prior to beginning the procedures.
Materials and Design
We used Microsoft PowerPoint, presented on a laptop computer, to introduce participants
to two novel groups, one rich and one poor, and then collected data via Qualtrics on the same
laptop to eliminate the need for data entry. There were three main dependent measures (in the
following order): liking, stereotypes, and perception of inequality, followed by a section of
exploratory open-ended questions (detailed in Procedure). The former two measures tapped at
the evaluations and expectations component while the latter two were about the explanations and
justifications component. On our stereotypes measure, to more clearly examine when children’s
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor becomes more nuanced, we used questions that are
explicitly not related to material resources (so children could not simply answer those questions
based on attraction to possessions) and also explored domain differences as described below.
We used social groups rather than rich and poor individuals because we aimed to probe
true category-based reasoning about the rich and the poor that was not merely driven by specific
features of any one individual (following Horwitz et al., 2014). We used novel social groups
instead of real-world social groups so as to probe a generalized understanding of the rich and the
poor, rather than participants’ prior knowledge of specific social groups (following the literature
on minimal groups; e.g. Dunham, 2018). In addition, we introduced children to rich and poor
groups in the beginning and then at test only referred to the group members by group names.
This allowed us to present test questions without displaying possessions or objects that differed
in wealth, thereby probing pure category-based rather than possession-based reasoning.
Procedure
Group Introduction
Participants heard a story accompanied by illustrations about two novel groups of people,
Kubus and Vivoes (cartoon figures of people wearing red or blue shirts) living in two different
villages on a faraway island. One group lived in nice houses, played on nice playgrounds, and
had many nice toys; while the other group did not. The names for the rich versus poor group and
the order in which the groups were introduced were counterbalanced across participants.
Importantly, we described and depicted possessions varying in quality and quantity but never
used the words “rich” or “poor” to introduce the groups (following past work e.g. Horwitz et al.,
2014). After the brief introduction, as a first comprehension check, we asked participants to
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
match the possessions with the groups. Two participants failed to pass this memory check and
were excluded from data analyses.
Liking (1 item)
We showed participants pictures of the two groups, side by side, and asked “who do you
like more, Kubus or Vivoes”, followed by a scale “do you like them a little more or a lot more”
(using smiley faces as visual aid), creating a 4-point liking scale (pre-tested to be comprehensible
to children as young as age 4; similar liking questions were adapted from Horwitz et al., 2014; Li
et al., 2014; Shutts et al., 2016; similar scales were adapted from Dunham et al., 2011). We also
asked them to explain their answers as a follow-up exploratory question.
Participants were asked to guess whether Kubus or Vivoes did a certain behavior in
different scenarios (pre-tested to ensure comprehension). There were six scenarios presented in a
and each crossed with 2 valences, i.e., positive and negative). We chose these three domains
according to literature on the Stereotype Content Model, i.e. warmth and competence (Fiske et
al., 2002). We measured prosociality as one proxy for warmth following past developmental
work (Li et al., 2014; Roussos & Dunham, 2016), and further split competence into talent
(competence from natural talents) and effort (competence acquired through effort), a distinction
frequently drawn in the literature on reasoning about ability and success (e.g., Brown, Troy,
Jobson, & Link, 2018; Tsay, 2016; Tsay & Banaji, 2011) as well as in children’s own free
explanations of wealth and poverty (Leahy, 1983). Given the age-related decrease in essentialism
of status-related groups such as class (i.e., a declining tendency to see such groups as based on
innate differences; Davoodi et al., 2020) and the likelihood that talent is thought of as more
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
innate than effort, we might also expect to see different patterns of results for these domains
across age. Finally, we asked participants to explain their answer to the last question as an
exploratory follow-up.
Perception of inequality (1 item)
We showed participants pictures of contrasting possessions side by side, and asked “Do
you think it is fair or not fair that some people have more and better things than other people”,
followed by a scale “is it a little (not) fair or very (not) fair” (using the thumb-up and thumb-
down visual aid; pre-tested to ensure comprehension; adapted from e.g. Leahy, 1993). We also
asked them to explain their answers as a follow-up exploratory question.
Open-ended explanations section (3 items)
In the last section, we asked participants to indicate which group was rich (84% of
children answered this question correctly)1, followed by three open-ended explanation questions,
“why are some people rich”, “why are some people poor”, and “how can poor people get rich”
(in this order; pre-tested to ensure comprehension; adapted from e.g. Leahy, 1991). If
participants did not answer immediately, we prompted their answers with “can you make a
guess” and “there are no right or wrong answers, I am just interested in what you think”.
Experimenters entered their answers into the relevant textboxes in Qualtrics during testing.
Results
As noted above, conclusions regarding the two younger age groups did not change when
we included the additional sample of 9-12-yr-olds. Therefore, for ease of presentation we report
results for all three age groups below, and provide results with only the two younger age groups
1 We note that this question was not an appropriate memory check as it requires the interpretation of the word “rich,”
which we did not use elsewhere in the procedure. Hence, we did not treat it as a criterium to exclude participants. In
preliminary analyses, we confirmed that children’s answers on this question did not influence main results.
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
(as specified in our pre-registration) in supplemental materials. On Liking and Perceptions of
Inequality measures, here we report the mean-centered model predictions and 95% CIs; in these
centered models, statistically significant positive deviations from 0 indicate pro-rich preferences
or the perception of inequality as fair, while significant negative deviations from 0 indicate pro-
poor preferences or the perception of inequality as unfair. On Stereotypes, here we report the
model predictions and 95% CIs; in these models, statistically significant positive deviations from
0 indicate pro-rich stereotypes while statistically significant negative deviations from 0 indicate
pro-poor stereotypes. Figures for these measures are plotted using raw scale units, and Ms and
we also report cross-measure correlations and detailed model outputs in supplemental materials
(Figures S1 and S2, and Tables S5-S13). Preliminary analyses revealed no participant gender or
version (which group was the rich group in the story) effects so these factors were not discussed
further.
Liking
We fit a linear regression model predicting liking as a function of age group (4-5y, 7-8y,
(comparing to chance levels: 4-5-yr-olds: B = 1.16, 95% CI = [.85, 1.46]; 7-8-yr-olds: B = .83,
95% CI = [.52, 1.15]), while 9-12-yr-olds did not (B = .25, 95% CI = [-.14, .64]). The effect of
age group was significant (p = .002), driven by 9-12-yr-olds showing weaker pro-rich biases
comparing to both 4-5-yr-olds (B = -.91, 95% CI = [-1.40, -.41]) and 7-8-yr-olds (B = -.58, 95%
CI = [-1.08, -.08]). The difference between the two younger age groups did not reach the
conventional level of significance (B = .32, 95% CI = [-.12, .76], though qualitatively 7-8-yr-olds
showed somewhat weaker pro-rich bias than 4-5-yr-olds). In explorative analyses of open-ended
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
responses, we found that children said that they preferred the rich mostly because of their nicer
possessions (about 40% to 60% in each age group), though some of the 4-5-yr-olds (28%)
mentioned the irrelevant feature of group color (e.g., “they have blue shirts” or “because my
favorite color is red”). A few children provided other less interpretable reasons (e.g., “I really
want them to be my friends” and “they are nice”). Since preference for the poor was rare (only
18% of children) we had fewer explanations for that view to consider, and they were not always
consistently interpretable (e.g., “because they have not very nice toys”), though some responses
referenced compassion (e.g., “I feel sad for them”), group color, and hard work (e.g., “because
they work hard”).
Stereotypes
We fit a binomial linear mixed effects model predicting answer (1 = pro-rich choice, i.e.,
guessing that the rich did the positive behavior or the poor did the negative behavior, 0 = pro-
poor choice, i.e., guessing that the poor did the positive behavior or the rich did the negative
behavior) as a function of domain (prosociality, talent, and effort), valence (positive or negative;
contrast-coded), age group, and their interactions, with a random intercept for participants. The
3-way interaction was marginally significant (likelihood ratio test, 2(4, N = 82) = 8.60, p = .07),
suggesting somewhat different patterns of results for the three age groups. In order to more
clearly reveal the results for each age group, we decomposed the model for each age group,
following our pre-registration, though given the marginal nature of this interaction what follows
should be interpreted cautiously.
(comparing to chance levels: both B = 1.21, 95% CI = [.51, 1.92]) but not on effort (B = .22, CI
= [-.41, .86]; pairwise comparisons with effort were both significant, B = .99, 95% CI = [.17,
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
1.80]). In 7-8-yr-olds, pro-rich stereotypes on prosociality were reduced (p = .04); specifically,
they did not hold pro-rich or pro-poor stereotypes on either prosociality (B = .18, 95% CI = [-.64,
1.00]) or effort (B = -.03, 95% CI = [-.83, .78]), but only on talent (B = 1.66, 95% CI = [.70,
2.61]). In 9-12-yr-olds, pro-rich stereotypes across all three domains were again weaker (ps
< .05). Stereotypes regarding prosociality (B = -1.28, 95% CI = [-2.31, -.26]) and effort (B = -
1.82, 95% CI = [-2.95, -.70]) actually showed a pro-poor pattern and there were also no longer
significant pro-rich stereotypes regarding talent (B = .28, 95% CI = [-.65, 1.21]). In 7-8-yr-olds,
we also found a domain by valence interaction suggesting that the effect of valence differed
across domains; however, since this effect was unexpected and not observed in other age groups
we do not offer an interpretation here, though results are provided in supplemental materials.
In explorative analyses of open-ended responses, we found that the majority of 4-5-yr-
olds merely restated the question, gave unclassifiable explanations, or said that they did not
know (around 85% of responses fell into these categories, e.g., “because I like blue”, “because
the work is boring”, “every time it was Vivoes”, and “I don’t know”), while around 60% of the
children in the two older age groups referred to traits to explain their pro-rich/poor or anti-
rich/poor stereotypes (e.g., “they have lots of houses that are good but they don’t really work
hard”, “they have nicer things (so) they would want to do better things”, and “they are
meaner/nicer”).
Perception of inequality
We fit a linear regression model predicting perception of inequality as a function of age
levels: B = .16, 95% CI = [-.25, .56]) while the two older age groups thought it was unfair (7-8y:
B = -.83, 95% CI = [-1.25, -.42]; 9-12y: B = -.95, 95% CI = [-1.46, -.44]). There was a significant
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
effect of age group (p = .002): compared to 4-5-yr-olds, both 7-8-yr-olds (B = -.99, 95% CI = [-
1.57, -.41]) and 9-12-yr-olds (B = -1.11, 95% CI = [-1.76, -.46]) perceiving inequality as less fair
(the difference between 9-12y and 7-8y was not significant, B = -.12, 95% CI = [-.77, .54]). In
explorative analyses of open-ended responses, we found that children mostly referred to the
disparity of resources or treatment to explain why they thought the inequality was unfair (about
50% to 70% in each age group, e.g., “it is not fair when one has better and one has worse”,
“some people just get things but some people have to pay for them”, and “they (the rich) are
treated better”). Some of the older children (around 38% among older children) displayed more
advanced forms of normative reasoning (e.g., “everybody should have the same” and “everybody
should be treated equally”). As for those who thought the inequality was fair, most were 4-5-yr-
olds and they mainly gave unclassifiable/unknown reasons (e.g., “because they wanted to”,
“because that’s nice to”, and “because they got lots of questions right”; about 78%). Only two
children (both in the 9-12y age group) gave justifications for their answers, i.e., by referring to
hard work to justify the inequality (e.g., “if someone works harder than others then they deserve
nicer things”).
Open-ended explanations section (“why are some people rich”, “why are some people poor”,
and “how can poor people get rich”)
The first author and a research assistant blind to study hypotheses independently coded
answers to all open-ended questions (interrater agreement ranged from 71% to 95%, M = 85%,
disagreement resolved via discussion). For the three open-ended explanations concerning why
some people were rich or poor and how people could get rich, detailed coding criteria and results
are provided in supplemental materials and a brief summary focusing on age-related changes, is
provided here. When explaining why some people were rich or poor, 4-5-yr-olds mainly restated
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
the story or questions (e.g., mentioning possessions, 36%) or providing unclassifiable answers
(52%), while the two older age groups increasingly referred to hard work, use of money (saving
and wasting money), jobs, and inheritance. Chi-square tests showed that the age-related changes
in explanation patterns were significant on both questions, 2 (10) = 113.44, p < .001, and 2 (10)
= 102.59, p < .001. On the question “how can poor people get rich”, 64% 4-5-yr-olds did not
provide classifiable answers, while in the two older age groups, there were increasing references
to money (e.g., spending less money; especially in 7-8-yr-olds, 34%), jobs (e.g., getting well-
paying jobs, 31% in 7-8-yr-olds and 24% in 9-12-yr-olds), and hard work (especially in 9-12-yr-
olds, 52%). The age-related change in the pattern of answers was significant, 2 (10) = 183.25, p
< .001.
Discussion
Taken together, we found that 4-5-yr-olds held strong pro-rich preferences and
stereotypes and did not judge inequality as unfair, despite the use of measures that were not
confounded with the possession of resources. In contrast, and more novel to the present inquiry,
older children were less pro-rich, with both liking and stereotypes scores slightly dropped in 7-8-
yr-olds (though the effect of age group on liking did not reach conventional level of significance)
and entirely absent in 9-12-yr-olds (they favored the rich and the poor similarly, or even showed
pro-poor biases on some stereotype domains). Also, consistent with past work (e.g., Chafel &
Neitzel, 2005; Hussak & Cimpian, 2015), starting around age 7 and 8 children generally judged
inequality as unfair. Thus, confirming our predictions, we found evidence for an age-related
decrease in pro-rich bias as well as more differentiated evaluations of both the rich and the poor.
While in line with scattered findings (e.g., Ahl & Dunham, 2017; Hussak & Cimpian, 2015), to
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
our knowledge this is the first clear documentation of the developmental shift in pro-rich biases
in early and middle childhood.
We note one unexpected result on effort-related stereotypes. Unlike the other two
domains, 4-8-yr-olds did not hold pro-rich stereotypes on the effort domain, responding at
chance on questions like “who worked harder,” while 9-12-yr-olds believed that poor people
were more hardworking. Such results seem to be at odds with past research and our open-ended
measures that point to children’s reference to hard work in explanations (e.g., some people are
rich because they work hard; e.g., Leahy, 1981, 1983) and with meritocratic beliefs (e.g., rich
people work hard and poor people are lazy; e.g., McNamee & Miller, 2009). One possibility is
that young children hold no effort-related stereotypes spontaneously, but generate effort-related
answers when they have to explain why some people are rich or poor. To shed more light on this
finding and to provide an opportunity to conceptually replicate our findings, in Study 2 we
moved to a different stereotype measure that draws more directly from the past literature (e.g.,
Mistry et al., 2015).
Study 2
Study 1 showed that children’s conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor goes
beyond mere positivity towards the rich around middle childhood. Study 2 further explored
children’s nuanced conceptualizations of the wealthy and the poor using new measures, a more
racially diverse sample, and a continuous age range to better reveal the timing of the
developmental shifts we observed in Study 1, especially when including a more balanced sample
of somewhat older children.
We had three more specific goals in Study 2. First, we sought to conceptually replicate
the stereotype results from Study 1 with a different measure. Second, we aimed to further probe
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
the complexity of this conceptualization by further differentiating expectations of resource-
related vs. resource-unrelated contributions. This contrast is important because children might
think that the rich contribute more material resources than the poor simply because they have
more, without necessarily making inferences about generosity in general. Differences across
domains would also imply that responses are not driven merely by pro-rich bias. Third, we
developed a new measure to look at children’s emerging sociological understandings—whether
and when they think that the advantages that accrue to the wealthy go beyond those reflected in
concrete material terms, i.e. the wealthy also hold more social power to disproportionately
influence many forms of societal decision making. This new measure allows us to examine
children’s understandings of wealth and poverty more deeply. The study was preregistered at
Method
Participants
Power analyses indicated that n = 81 was required to detect a small effect with > 80%
power (linear multiple regression in a random model, two tails, up to 3 predictors,  = .05, 
= .15; using G*Power); in order to test an evenly distributed sample across ages, we pre-
registered to test n = 12 per age from age 4 to age 10 (total n = 84). The final sample (n = 86)
slightly exceeded our pre-registered sample size in an effort to ensure enough sample size after
exclusions. There were 86 four- to ten-year-olds (M = 7.51, SD = 2.04, range 4.02 – 10.95, 45
females), with approximately 12 participants per age year. We also tested a more racially diverse
sample (>50% non-White): among the 65% participants (n = 56) whose parents provided racial
information, there were 27 White, 12 Hispanic or Latinx, 10 biracial or multiracial, 5 Asian, and
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
2 Black participants. An additional 10 children were tested but excluded from data analyses due
to failure to pass memory check questions.
Materials and Design
We used Qualtrics (on laptops or iPads) to introduce participants to the same two novel
groups described above and for all measures. There were three main dependent measures
(administered in a randomized order): stereotypes, expectation of contributions, and
understanding of power (see Procedure).
Procedure
Group Introduction
Groups were introduced as in Study 1, except that now we used Qualtrics instead of
PowerPoint for this part and only asked one question (“who have all these nice things”) as the
first memory check to avoid redundancy. All participants passed this memory check.
The new stereotypes measure focused on traits (e.g., which group is more hardworking)
rather than a specific one-time individual behavior (e.g., who worked harder on a previous task),
and asked children which group has more members with that trait. Importantly, in order to ensure
that children interpreted the questions as intended, we clearly defined each trait before asking the
question. We gave children 3 options, including a no bias option (pre-tested to ensure
showed relative proportions as a visual aid.
Expectation of contributions (2 items)
Participants were asked to guess which group contributed more material resources
(“Kubus and Vivoes gave these other people some cookies. Who gave more cookies?”) and
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
which group contributed more time or effort (“Kubus and Vivoes spent their time cleaning the
classroom. Who spent more time cleaning the classroom?”). On each question, participants first
saw a picture depicting the scenario and then saw pictures of Kubus and Vivoes, side by side, as
two options.
We showed participants pictures of individuals from the two groups (all shirts were
hidden behind black covers to conceal group information) and told them scenarios about power
dynamics between the groups. In each scenario, Kubus and Vivoes each wanted different
left-right position was counterbalanced). After each scenario, we asked them to guess those
individuals’ group memberships, again showing pictures of two T-shirts (one red and one blue)
as visual aids.
Importantly, to capture the broad conceptualization of power we contrasted two levels of
power in these scenarios, one which we called micro-level power (power in interpersonal
interactions) and the other we called macro-level power (power over broader societal issues or
outcomes). For micro-level power, we included three dimensions identified as early emerging in
past work, namely resource control, achieving goals, and granting permission (Gülgöz &
Gelman, 2017). Past work suggests these dimensions are understood by children as young as 3
and 4 (indexed by young children’s ability to identify who was “in charge” in those stories;
Gülgöz & Gelman, 2017). For macro-level power, new to the present inquiry, we included two
dimensions, leadership and policy (designed to reflect important societal decisions and pilot
tested to be comprehensible to young children). In addition, there were two scenarios in each
dimension, one asking about the person or group that was high in power and the other asking
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
about the one that was low in power. Therefore, the expected answers were the rich group on
half of the questions and the poor group on the other half.
Final memory check
As a final check of whether they remembered the wealth information, we asked
participants which group had the nice stuff. We recorded participants’ answers and compared
with the condition they were assigned to ensure accuracy. Ten participants failed to answer this
question and were thus excluded from data analyses, following our pre-registered plan.
Results
Preliminary analyses revealed no participant gender, race/minority status (coded as
“White” or “non-White”), or version (which group was the rich group in the story) effects so
these factors were not discussed further.
Stereotypes
We aimed to conceptually replicate our findings in Study 1 with a different set of
stereotype measures. We fit a linear mixed effects model predicting answer (1 = pro-rich choice,
0 = no bias choice, and -1 = pro-poor choice) as a function of domain (prosociality, talent, and
effort), age (continuous; mean-centered), and their interaction, with a random intercept for
7.77, p < .001) driven by the stronger age effect in prosociality as compared to both talent and
effort (prosociality vs. talent, B = -.21, 95% CI = [-.31, -.10]; prosociality vs. effort, B = -.13,
95% CI = [-.24, -.03]). There was a significant effect of age in prosociality, B = -.18, 95% CI =
[-.25, -.10]: younger children thought that the rich were nicer than the poor (prior to age 5), but
older children thought that the poor were nicer than the rich (it reached significance in 7-year-
olds). By contrast, the age effects on effort and talent were not significant (ps > .23).
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
Expectation of contribution
We predicted that children would show different patterns when they reasoned about
resource vs. time contributions in the wealth context. We fit a binomial linear mixed effects
model predicting answer (1 = thinking that the rich donated more, 0 = thinking that the poor
donated more) as a function of domain (contribution of resource or time), age (continuous;
mean-centered), and their interaction, with a random intercept for participant. As predicted, the
domain by age interaction was significant, B = .31, 95% CI = [.01, .62]: age effects on the two
contributions of resource (compared to younger children, older children were more likely to
expect the rich to contribute more material resources), B = .20, 95% CI = [-.02, .41], but
expectations concerning whether the rich would contribute time did not show an age effect, B =
-.12, 95% CI = [-.33, .09].
Understanding of power
We expected older children to make more wealth-power associations than younger
children. We fit a binomial linear mixed effects model predicting answer (1 = choosing the
predicted answer, i.e., associating the rich with power and the poor with the lack of power, 0 =
choosing the unpredicted answer) as a function of level (macro-level or micro-level power;
contrast-coded), type (asking about the high or low power character; contrast-coded), age
(continuous; mean-centered), and their interactions, with a random intercept for participant.
Neither the 3-way interaction nor the 2-way interactions were significant and thus were dropped
from the model (one by one, dropping the least significant term first). Confirming our
(level and type were both not significant, ps > .32): for both macro-level and micro-level power
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
dynamics, older children associated the rich with power and the poor with the lack of power
more than younger ones. Further analyses revealed that 6-year-olds first made this wealth-power
link at a rate significantly above chance. Additionally, we explored the effect of dimension but
did not find any interactive (2(4, N = 86) = 5.16, p = .27) or main effects (2(4, N = 86) = 6.63,
p = .16), suggesting that children’s understanding of power dynamics emerged in a similar
trajectory for all 5 dimensions.
Discussion
We successfully replicated the main stereotype results observed in Study 1, again finding
that children’s evaluations of the rich and poor are domain-sensitive: younger children thought
that the rich are nicer while older children thought that the rich are meaner while the poor are
nicer. We also found that their expectations for rich people’s generosity are resource-specific:
compared to younger children, older children expected the rich to contribute more material
resources but not necessarily more time than the poor (children across ages did not change their
expectations concerning contributions of time). Another novel finding concerned children’s
reasoning about social power in the context of wealth. Younger children did not associate
material wealth with high social power in influencing outcomes, but older children did (starting
in 6-year-olds and increasing in strength with age), suggesting their conceptualization of wealth
incorporates an understanding of social power in middle childhood.
We note that results on the stereotype measures were not entirely consistent across the
two studies (where age ranges and methodologies differed), specifically in terms of the
developmental patterns on talent and effort stereotypes. That said, the dramatic age-related
change on the prosociality domain is clear and striking, with younger children thinking that the
rich are nice and older children thinking that the poor are nice and the rich are mean. One
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
particularly important future direction is to explore why children begin to judge the rich as mean,
and what experiences or parallel social-cognitive developments might drive the dramatic shift we
observe. Future research could investigate possible underlying mechanisms, and would also
benefit from a longitudinal design to rule out potential cohort effects. It would also be interesting
to explore whether such anti-rich and pro-poor changes also appear in other stereotype domains.
General Discussion
Across two pre-registered cross-sectional studies with a broad array of measures and a
wide age range we provide the first clear evidence that American middle-class children show
age-related decrease in positivity towards the wealthy relative to the poor during early and
middle childhood. This entails developing a conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor that
goes beyond mere positivity towards the wealthy. As in past work, here we also found that
children around ages 4 and 5 hold a highly positive view of the wealthy and have only a shallow
understanding of the concepts of wealth and poverty. New to the current inquiry, we show that
younger children do not appear to understand how wealth links to social power and control,
consistent with the previous work suggesting that mature understandings of power emerge only
later in development (Gülgöz, 2015; Gülgöz & Gelman, 2017). Though these children like the
rich more than the poor and attribute more positive behaviors and traits to the rich, they do not
consistently associate the rich with the ability to exercise social power and control social
outcomes. Also, they do not think the wealth disparity we depicted is unfair. Taken together,
their conceptualization of the wealthy and the poor appears dominated by a positive association
with wealth rather than a deep understanding of broader wealth concepts.
By contrast, and novel to the present study, there is a clear developmental change in pro-
rich preferences, evaluations, and understandings about wealth and inequalities in middle
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
childhood. Children above age 7 or 8 reduced the tendency to associate rich people with positive
valence and poor people with negative valence, and by age 9, they appeared to favor the rich and
the poor similarly. In addition to providing the clearest demonstration of this striking age-related
shift, we also document the complexities in older children’s reasoning about wealth. Older
children hold more differentiated stereotype patterns driven by the prosociality domain as
compared to competence (talent and effort): unlike younger children who think that the rich are
nice, older children actually think that the rich are mean. These differentiated stereotype patterns
especially in older children are consistent with past work on the Stereotype Content Model
(Durante et al., 2017; Fiske et al., 2002; for developmental work, see Roussos & Dunham, 2016).
On behavioral expectations, older children show more complicated patterns as well, thinking that
the rich might contribute more material resources but not more time or effort. In terms of
reasoning about power, older children (around age 6 and above) understand the wealth-power
link, associating the wealthy with high social power and the poor with low social power.
Additionally, older children explain wealth and poverty better than younger children, and they
increasingly indicate that the wealth gap is unfair. Consistent with results from adults suggesting
that they associate the wealthy with negative valence at least in some domains (e.g., thinking that
rich people are cold; Durante et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018), our results suggest that by middle
childhood, children develop a more sophisticated understanding of wealth and poverty and can
reason about complex patterns of stereotypes related to these social groups.
One major contribution of this work concerns children’s developing understanding of
wealth-power associations, i.e. recognizing that material wealth is a cue to the presence of social
power, what we conceptualize as a form of naïve sociology. To our knowledge, this is the first
study to investigate whether and when children understand that the wealthy have
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
disproportionate social power to affect a broad range of outcomes. In a hierarchical world
characterized by power dynamics, such an understanding of power likely improves their ability
to predict the outcome of important social events and to better navigate the social world.
Critically, despite their highly positive evaluations of the wealthy, young children do not reliably
associate the wealthy with greater social power, implying that they may not think the exercise of
social power is itself positive, a possibility that we see as worthy of further investigation. This
possibility somewhat aligns with a recent finding that children do not think “leaders” are
“helpers” (see Heck, Kushnir, & Kinzler, 2020), and that children do not reliably connect other
social categories such as age and gender with power (Gülgöz, 2015). We note that in some of our
power dimensions the high-power character might be seen as mean, especially in the permission
scenarios (e.g., not giving permission), but in other scenarios this does not appear to be the case
(e.g., both parties wanted different outcomes and one party achieved the goal). The fact that we
found largely similar results across all dimensions suggested that children did not simply answer
the power questions based on attributing meanness; still, more work could be done to disentangle
valence and power.
Our research had the main goal of contributing to a more detailed picture of children’s
developing conceptualizations of the wealthy and the poor. Future studies should look into
aspects of social and cognitive development that facilitate the developmental shifts we revealed
here. To speculate, we suggest that understandings of fairness, more complex forms of
perspective-taking, stronger reputational concerns, and a richer understanding of power
dynamics contribute to these shifts. Indeed, past work on some of these topics has found
developmental shifts at similar ages (e.g., Gülgöz & Gelman, 2017; McAuliffe et al., 2017; Shaw
et al., 2014). It would be also interesting to include behavioral measures to explore whether
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
children actually act on their pro-rich preferences. For example, do children selectively choose
rich or poor peers to collaborate with? Furthermore, there has been evidence showing that
children pick up both internal and external or structural cues when they generate explanations
(e.g., Vasilyeva et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2021) and different explanations of wealth and poverty
lead to different levels of endorsement of the status quo and policy changes (see Hussak &
Cimpian, 2015, 2017). Future research could also provide children with different cues that signal
wealth or poverty and explore children’s explanations of them and their subsequent
conceptualizations of the rich and the poor.
In the current work, we adopted a broad array of measures (with new measures probing
naïve sociology) and tested a wide age range, integrating findings previously reported piecemeal
across studies. However, we also call attention to several limitations to the generalizability of the
present findings. First, similar to many other studies in this field, the majority of the participants
were White, and primarily from Western cultures and middle-class backgrounds (c.f. Elenbaas et
al., 2016; Elenbaas & Killen, 2016; Heberle et al., 2018; Heberle & Carter, 2015; Mistry et al.,
2015). Unfortunately, we did not have access to participants’ family SES information (e.g.,
annual income, parent education) when we conducted these studies, and thus we could not
conclude whether family SES influenced children’s conceptualizations of wealth and poverty.
Additionally, of course cultures vary in how they value wealth and meritocracy, such that
different conceptualizations of the wealthy and the poor may emerge (e.g., see Wu et al., 2018
for cross-cultrual differences in adults). Future work should include more individuals from lower
SES populations and individuals of other race or ethnicities, and should seek to incorporate
cross-cultural inquiry (and test how family SES information might affect children’s reasoning).
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
Until such work is conducted, we should be wary of generalizing the current findings too
broadly.
Second, in our studies we only had rich and poor target groups (like most of previous
work; cf. Mistry et al., 2015), thereby omitting important groups in the middle of the wealth-
poverty continuum, namely the middle class. The middle class is the largest group in the US
numerically (e.g., Gilbert, 2017); psychologically, it is perceived as the norm or default class and
is evaluated positively in the US (Fiske et al., 2002). Further, most of the participants are
members of the middle class and it is important to explore how children conceptualize the social
class they belong to. If children prefer the rich over the middle class and prefer the middle class
over the poor, it suggests that children prefer high wealth, consistent with a pro-rich bias
interpretation. However, if children prefer the middle class over both the rich and the poor, then
the seemingly pro-rich bias might instead be an ingroup bias (given how robust ingroup biases
are; for a recent study, see Yang & Dunham, 2019), or bias in favor of the perceived majority.
This would imply that, in our studies as well as past work, children simply treat the rich as closer
to the middle class compared to the poor. Another design feature that might have influenced
interpretation is that we always contrasted the rich and the poor groups and asked relative
questions (as also in e.g., Ahl & Dunham, 2017; Horwitz et al., 2014; Li et al., 2014; Shutts et
al., 2016). Therefore, we cannot conclude whether (for example) the relative preference for the
rich over the poor is driven by the positivity towards the rich, negativity towards the poor, or
both. Future work can further disentangle these possibilities.
Despite these limitations, our work provides a more comprehensive picture of how many
children’s understandings of wealth, poverty, and social inequalities undergo a striking shift from
an overall pro-rich bias to more mature, differentiated conceptualizations. The present studies
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR
suggest a deeper understanding of these concepts than past research had suggested, one that
involves differentiated evaluations and incorporates reasoning about social power dynamics. As
the wealth gap continues to enlarge and the world becomes increasingly unequal, understanding
how children, who grow up against this backdrop, conceptualize the wealthy and the poor
becomes ever more important. These early conceptualizations will guide children as they
navigate an unequal social world, and may set the stage for adult reasoning, including adult
decisions about how society should address issues related to inequality and poverty.
CONCEPTUALIZING THE RICH AND THE POOR