Adolescent-specific memory effects: Evidence from working memory, immediate and 24-
hour recognition memory performance in 8- to 30-year-olds
Lena J. Skalaban1, Alexandra O. Cohen2, May I. Conley1, Qi Lin1, Garrett N. Schwartz1 Tariq
Cannonier1, Steven A. Martinez1, and BJ Casey.1
1Yale University, Department of Psychology
2 New York University, Department of Psychology
Conflicts of Interest: None of the authors report any conflicts of interest
Acknowledgements: This work was in part supported by U01 DA041174 (BJC), a National
Science Foundation SBE Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Grant 1714321 (AOC). We thank all
the participants and families who were a part of this study.
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
INTRODUCTION
Many cognitive abilities such as spatial navigation, decision-making and intelligence rely on
working memory and long-term memory (Acheson & MacDonald, 2009; Baddeley, 2003;
Blacker et al., 2017; Burgess et al., 2002; Collette et al., 2000; Curtis & Lee, 2010; Del Missier
et al., 2013; Engle et al., 1999; Fry & Hale, 2000; Moffat et al., 2007; Shadlen & Shohamy,
2016). Working memory enables the maintenance and manipulation of a limited amount of
information in consciousness (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974) whereas long-term memory has virtually
limitless storage and longevity (Brady et al., 2008). Both forms of memory show changes across
the life course (Alibali, 2005; Bauer, 2015; Case, 1992; Conklin et al., 2007; Cowan, 2014;
Diamond & Goldman-Rakic, 1989; Fischer, 1980; Ghetti & Lee, 2013; Hasher & Zacks, 1988;
Hertzog et al., 2003; Kail & Salthouse, 1994). However, less is known about the interaction
between these memory systems, especially during adolescence. The goal of the current study is
to examine potential changes in the relationship between working memory and long-term
memory from childhood through adolescence and into adulthood.
Developmental studies of working memory show marked improvements throughout childhood
(Cowan & Alloway, 2009; Demetriou et al., 2002; Simmering, 2012) and adolescence (Hale et
al., 1997; Klingberg, 2006; Luna et al., 2001) that extend into young adulthood (Isbell et al.,
2015; Jenkins et al., 1999; H. Kwon et al., 2002; Peverill et al., 2016; Satterthwaite et al., 2013;
Zald & Iacono, 1998) and subsequently decline later in adulthood (Weintraub et al., 2013) with
aging (Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Hertzog et al., 2003). These changes in working memory have
been related to the development of attentional (Buss et al., 2014; Reynolds & Romano, 2016)
and inhibitory processes (Bjorklund & Harnishfeger, 1990; Harnishfeger & Bjorklund 1993;
Casey et al., 2002; Durston et al., 2002; Diamond & Goldman-Rakic, 1989; Hasher & Zacks,
1988) that involve suppression of task-irrelevant information (i.e., distractors) in favor of
relevant information (i.e., targets). As such, developmental changes in working memory
performance may vary by the number, salience and complexity of items to be held in mind or
forgotten (O’Hare et al., 2008; Satterthwaite et al., 2013; Schleepen & Jonkman, 2009).
Moreover, the type of information which different ages attend to may influence working memory
and what information is subsequently retained (Blanco & Sloutsky, 2019; Deng & Sloutsky,
2016; Plebanek & Sloutsky, 2017). During adolescence there is evidence of enhanced attention
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
and memory for reinforced, rewarded and threat-related information during adolescence (Cohen
et al., 2019, 2021; Cohen-Gilbert & Thomas, 2013; Davidow et al., 2016; Grose-Fifer et al.,
2013; Meyer & Pattwell, 2020; Pattwell et al., 2012) and a preference for novelty (Galvan, 2010;
Spear, 2013). Together these findings suggest that developmental patterns in working memory
performance and subsequent recognition memory may be influenced by task demands and
features of the stimuli (e.g., complexity, relevance, salience, novelty).
Long-term recognition and recall, like working memory, show similar patterns of change with
age. Recognition abilities begin to develop in infancy (Nelson, 2001; Nelson, de Haan and
Thomas, 2006) and both recognition and recall increase throughout childhood (Bauer &
Leventon, 2013; Ghetti & Angelini, 2008; Golarai et al., 2010; Güler & Thomas, 2013; Marshall
et al., 2002) and adolescence (Bauer, 2015; DeMaster et al., 2014; Ghetti et al., 2010; Ofen et al.,
2007) with evidence of a decline in adulthood (Weintraub et al., 2013). Changes in long-term
memory with age have been attributed to a number of possible developmental changes in
encoding (e.g., Grady et al., 1995), consolidation (Bauer, 2006; Newcombe et al., 2007) and
retrieval (Li et al., 2014; Alberini & Travalia, 2017).
Although both working memory and long-term memory change with age, these processes are
often studied separately (Axmacher et al., 2009; Burgess & Hitch, 2005; Cotton & Ricker, 2020;
Olivers et al., 2011; Woodman & Chun, 2006). Recent theories suggest that neurocognitive
systems for working memory and long-term memory may overlap significantly (Nee et al.,
2008). In adults, working memory is thought to be vital to encoding and organizing information
for long-term storage (Blumenfeld & Ranganath, 2006; Ranganath et al., 2005) and recall
(Fukuda & Woodman, 2017). Associations between working memory and long-term or
subsequent recognition memory have been shown in children (Gathercole & Adams, 1994;
Lloyd et al., 2009; Rosenberg et al., 2020; Thompson et al., 2019). For example, using Bayesian
probabilistic principal components analysis of data from the neurocognitive battery of the
Adolescent Brain Cognitive DevelopmentSM Study (ABCD Study®) of over 11,000 youth,
Thompson et al. (2019) showed that measures of working memory and immediate recognition
memory were captured by the same learning and memory component in 9 to 10-year-old
children. Rosenberg and colleagues (2020) subsequently showed that performance during both 0-
and 2-back conditions of the ABCD Study n-back task were correlated with immediate
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
recognition memory performance in children. These findings suggest that while sustained
attention, as indexed by the 0-back condition, and working memory, as measured by the 2-back
condition, may differ in cognitive demands and processes, both impact subsequent recognition in
childhood. Yet, neither of these studies investigated long-term memory of information encoded
during a working memory task (i.e., following a 24-hour delay) beyond childhood, which could
provide important insights into how working memory performance impacts long-term storage
and recognition post-consolidation with age, especially during adolescence.
The primary goal of this study was to examine whether working memory differentially
influences what information is retained long-term during adolescence relative to childhood and
adulthood. We used an identical n-back task and subsequent recognition task to those from the
Adolescent Brain Cognitive DevelopmentSM Study (ABCD Study®) to assess working memory
and recognition memory (Casey et al., 2018), but added a 24-hour delay condition in order to
working memory and long-term memory into the early twenties (Satterthwaite et al., 2013;
Weintraub et al., 2013), and recent neurocognitive evidence supporting the expansion in the
definition of adolescence as extending into the early to mid-twenties (Sawyer et al., 2018), we
included participants from childhood to adulthood (8 to 30 years) to test for adolescent-specific
patterns of developmental change (Somerville, 2013). We also selected this age range to have
overlap with the ages to be assessed in the 10- year ABCD longitudinal study of 9 to 10-year-old
children. We hypothesized that: 1) both working memory and long-term memory performance
would improve into the early twenties (Satterthwaite et al., 2013; Weintraub et al., 2013); and 2)
recognition accuracy for novel (i.e., new relative to old items) and salient (i.e., emotional faces
relative to neutral faces or places) items from the working memory task would be enhanced
during adolescence (Pattwell et al., 2012; Spear, 2010).
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
represent trials in which a target item was presented in which the correct response is ‘match’. Red outlines represent
distractor trials in which the correct response is ‘no-match’. B. A subset of participants completed the recognition
memory task immediately after the n-back task C. The remaining participants completed the recognition memory
task 24-hours later. Yellow outlines represent trials that were ‘Old’ (i.e., targets or distractors from the n-back task).
Blue outlines signify trials that were ‘New’ (i.e., stimuli that the participant had not seen before). Outlines are for
visualization purposes and were not included in the task.
RESULTS
Development of working memory
For the working memory task we used the emotional n-back task from the ABCD Study (Casey
et al., 2018) with two load conditions (0-back and 2-back). The stimuli consisted of four different
types (neutral, fear, happy faces and places). In the 0-back condition, a target stimulus was
shown, and participants were asked to respond ‘match’ whenever they saw that target repeat. For
the 2-back condition, the target stimulus was any stimulus that repeated with one item
intervening between presentations. There were also lures (stimuli that repeated but were not the
target item) and non-lures (items that never repeated) to which participants were supposed to
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
examined the effects of age, memory load (0-back, 2-back) and stimulus type (neutral, fear, and
happy faces and places), on working memory performance (d’). We modeled age with linear,
cubic and quadratic polynomial terms of exact age, proposed to represent adolescent nonspecific,
adolescent emergent and adolescent specific developmental patterns, respectively (Somerville,
2013). The quadratic age model fit best compared to the null model (χ² (16) = 62.603, p<.0001)
and revealed a main effect of age (χ² (2) = 11.249, p = .0217) with performance peaking in the
late teens and early twenties (Fig. 2A). There was also a significant main effect of memory load
(χ² (1) = 12.274, p = .0005) such that 0-back performance was better than 2-back performance,
and a main effect of stimulus type (χ² (3) = 30.389, p<.0001) with worse performance for places
Neither stimulus type nor memory load interacted with age or any other predictors. Finally, there
was a main effect of I.Q. (χ² (1) = 5.871, p = .0154) which was treated as a covariate in analyses
results suggest that working memory performance peaks during late adolescence regardless of
stimulus type or memory load.
Performance (d’) was better on the 0-back than 2-back condition of the n-back task with enhanced performance in
the late teens to early twenties relative to younger and older ages for both conditions but no age by load interaction.
B. There was no age by stimulus type interaction, but performance (d’) varied by stimulus type with poorer
performance for places than for faces across all ages.
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
Development of recognition memory
To assess recognition memory we used the recognition task from the ABCD Study (Casey et al.,
2018) that tested memory for old items (targets and lures) from the N-back task as well as new
items participants had never seen before. Unlike the ABCD Study however, 97 of the
participants were tested immediately following the N-back task and 53 of the participants were
tested on an identical recognition task 24-hours later (see S1 for more information on participant
demographics). Each participant was shown an image they had either seen before during the N-
back task (either an old target or old lure) or an image they had never seen before (a novel
neutral, fear, happy face or place) and were asked to respond either ‘Old’ or ‘New’ on each trial
memory performance (d’), by age (linear, cubic and quadratic polynomial terms of exact age),
delay (0-hour vs 24-hour), and stimulus type (neutral, fear and happy faces and places)
controlling for memory load. The quadratic model was the best fit compared to the null model
(F(16) = 3.078, p<.0001). The quadratic model revealed a main effect of age (F(2) = 6.957, p =
.0062) with better recognition memory performance in the late teens and early twenties (Fig.
3A), and a main effect of delay (F(1) = 6.806, p = .0093) with better immediate recognition
memory compared to long-term (24 hour delay) recognition (Fig. 3A). There was a main effect
of stimulus type (F(3) = 9.904, p<.0001), that showed better recognition memory for places than
for faces (Fig. 3B, See supplemental tables 3 and 4 for full model with and without I.Q.) but
stimulus type did not interact with age or other predictors. Overall, the results suggest that
recognition memory performance peaks during late adolescence regardless of stimulus type or
delay.
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
memory performance (d’) was better for the 0-hour than 24-hour delay and varied by age with enhanced
performance in mid- to late adolescence relative to younger and older ages. B. This developmental pattern in
recognition performance did not differ by stimulus type or delay, but overall performance (d’) was better for places
than for faces across all ages.
Associations between working memory and recognition memory with age
A primary aim of this study was to examine whether associations between working memory and
long-term memory vary with age, especially during adolescence. We first tested for associations
between overall working memory performance (d’) and subsequent immediate and long-term
recognition memory performance (d’). As there were no interactions of memory load, stimulus
type or delay with age for either working memory or recognition memory we included these
variables as covariates as opposed to primary predictors of interest. The no-age model fit best
and revealed a main effect of working memory on recognition memory performance (F(1) =
during the working memory task, we performed a subsidiary analysis separately examining
associations between memory load performance (d’) and long-term recognition memory (d’) and
observed no age effects on recognition memory performance for the 0 back or 2 back conditions
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
immediate and long-term recognition performance regardless of age.
To test for adolescent-specific specific effects in recognition for novel items, we tested whether
recognition memory varied by trial type (i.e., old targets and distractors from the n-back task and
new items) with age. As there were no effects of stimulus type or memory load by age for either
working memory or recognition memory, these variables were not treated as primary variables of
age). The cubic age polynomial model fit best compared to the no-age model (F(18) = 7.956,
p<.0001). There was a main effect of trial type (F(1) = 189.046, p<.0001) such that recognition
accuracy was highest for new items, followed by targets and then distractors (See supplemental
(F(1) = 64.085, p<.0001). There was also a main effect of I.Q. (F(1) = 6.9743, p =.00083) which
model not including I.Q.). Central to our developmental hypotheses, there was a two-way
interaction of trial type by age (F(6) = 4.2490, p = .0017) and a three-way interaction of delay by
the two-way interaction showed higher accuracy for new and target items, with peak accuracy
emerging by the mid-teens for new items but not until the early twenties for target items.
The three-way interaction revealed that for immediate recognition (0-hour delay), accuracy was
higher for targets and new items than distractors with the highest accuracy observed for new
items that emerged by the mid-teen years. In contrast, for long-term recognition (24-hour delay),
accuracy was highest for new items, especially for adolescents. However, adolescents showed
more long-term forgetting of distractors relative to targets than adults, who showed similarly
high accuracy for targets and distractors, and children who showed long-term forgetting of both
targets and distractors.
To explore whether the developmental patterns in long-term recognition (24-hour delay) by trial
type were specifically associated with working memory, we then examined recognition accuracy
by trial types for the 0-back and 2-back conditions separately, with the latter condition more
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
closely aligning with definitions of working memory (Baddeley, 1986, Rosenberg et al., 2020).
These analyses revealed a similar pattern for the 2-back condition with the pattern of results
5F for analysis by load results). Specifically, adolescents showed better recognition of novel
items but more long-term forgetting of distractors relative to targets suggesting that working-
memory may influence both long-term memory of relevant information and also subsequent
forgetting of irrelevant information.
Given the difference in sample size between the 0- and 24-hour delay subsamples (n=97, n=53,
respectively), a subsidiary analysis with an even-odd split of the larger 0-hour sample (n=97)
into two smaller samples (n= 48 even, n= 49 odd) was performed. This analysis showed similar
cubic age effects in immediate recognition memory by trial type across the two halves as seen in
have been of sufficient size to detect age effects in memory recognition.
Finally, a response bias analysis to test for an overall tendency by adolescents to reject all items
during the recognition task as new, revealed no significant effect of, or interactions with age
(S7). This result suggests that advantages in detection of novel information by adolescents is not
solely due to a response bias.
1 0
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
association between overall working memory (d’) and recognition (d’) performance that did not vary by age or delay
(0-hour and 24-hour). B. Cubic age model showing predicted accuracy in recognition memory by trial type (new
items, targets and distractors) and delay (0-hour and 24-hour). For the 0-hour delay, accuracy was higher for new
and target items, with peak accuracy emerging by the mid-teens for new items but not until the early twenties for
target items. For the 24-hour delay, adolescents showed better memory for targets than distractors compared to
adults, who remembered targets and distractors equally well and children who forgot both targets and distractors.
Performance on new items 24-hours later peaked in adolescence.
DISCUSSION
The current study examined whether working memory differentially influences what information
is retained long-term during adolescence relative to childhood and adulthood. We first show
that working memory, and immediate and long-term recognition memory performance peaks
during adolescence from the mid-teens to mid-twenties. Expectedly, overall working memory
performance was positively associated with immediate and long-term recognition performance
regardless of age. However, recognition of specific items (i.e., old targets and distractors from
the n-back task and new items) significantly varied by age and delay. For immediate recognition,
accuracy was higher for targets and new items than distractors with the best accuracy observed
for new items emerging by the mid-teen years. Increased accuracy for targets emerged later in
the early twenties. In contrast, for long-term recognition, accuracy was highest for new items,
1 1
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
especially for adolescents, but they also showed more long-term forgetting of distractors relative
to targets than adults, who showed equivalent accuracy for targets and distractors, and children
who showed long-term forgetting of both targets and distractors. Together the findings suggest
that enhanced discrimination of task-relevant from irrelevant items has subsequent effects on
long-term memory of information essential to a goal that may benefit the detection of novel
information in adolescents.
Our findings are consistent with the developmental literature showing improvement in both
working memory and recognition memory from childhood into the late teens and early twenties
(Satterthwaite et al., 2013; Weintraub et al., 2013) and with recent definitions of adolescence
extending into the mid-twenties based on neurocognitive development (Sawyer et al., 2018).
However, in the current study we also showed a slight decline in working memory, immediate
and long-term recognition memory by the late twenties even when controlling for I.Q. in our
community-based sample. This result may be related in part to the number of participants and
greater variability in performance by adults. Nonetheless, the findings are consistent with prior
evidence of enhanced learning during this period when the individual is exploring and
negotiating novel environments (Davidow et al., 2016).
Consistent in part with our developmental hypotheses, long-term recognition of specific items
from the working memory task varied by age. Specifically, we observed different developmental
patterns in immediate and long-term recognition for new versus old items from the n-back task.
For immediate recognition, accuracy was higher for targets and new items than distractors with
higher accuracy observed for new items which emerged by the mid-teen years. Accuracy for
targets peaked slightly later, by the early twenties. This finding may be consistent with changes
in inhibitory processes with age with suppression of irrelevant distractors in favor of relevant
targets (Bjorklund & Harnishfeger, 1990). In contrast, for long-term recognition, accuracy was
highest for new items, especially for adolescents. Thus, adolescents were better in identifying
new items relative to old items for both immediate and long-term memory recognition. However,
adolescents also showed more long-term forgetting of distractors relative to targets than adults,
who showed similarly high accuracy for both targets and distractors. In contrast, children showed
long-term forgetting of both. This ability to discriminate goal-relevant from irrelevant
1 2
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
information (targets vs distractors), and to detect novel information (new items) during the
extended period of adolescence, is consistent with prior evidence of enhanced learning (Davidow
et al., 2016) and novelty seeking during adolescence (Galvan, 2010; Spear, 2013).
A primary goal of the current study was to examine the influence of working memory on long-
term memory. To explore whether the developmental patterns in long-term recognition for new
versus old items were associated more with working memory processes than attention, we
examined recognition accuracy for the low (0-back) and high (2-back) memory load conditions
separately given that they each tap different cognitive processes. The 0-back condition taps
sustained attention for a single rare target for an entire block of trials. In contrast, the 2-back
condition requires attention but also maintenance of several potential targets (i.e., any item that
repeats an item presented two trials back) and dropping prior targets from working memory
when new ones occur. This latter condition more closely aligns with working memory as
characterized in the literature (Baddeley, 2000; Baddeley, 1986). These analyses revealed a
similar pattern for the high memory load condition to the overall pattern of results collapsing
across load, but not for the no load (0-back) condition. Specifically, the high load condition
showed enhanced recognition of new items and more long-term forgetting of distractors relative
to targets in adolescents. Adolescents may drop or forget prior irrelevant information (distractor
items) in favor of relevant information (targets) given the demands on working memory capacity.
Remembering information that was previously essential to a goal and forgetting tangential
information may be an important mechanism for rapidly learning about key features of new
environments during adolescence.
The sensitivity to novel information by adolescents observed in the current study may reflect
enhanced novelty-seeking during this period. Alternatively, this developmental pattern may
reflect an overall tendency by adolescents to reject items regardless of whether the information is
old or new. As the literature suggests that adolescents are more impulsive than adults (Steinberg
et al., 2008) and more vulnerable to false memories (McGuire et al., 2015; Meusel et al., 2012)
we completed a supplemental response bias analysis and found no effect of age in response bias.
These results suggest that the correct rejection of novel items by adolescents could not solely be
attributed to an overall impulsive tendency to reject items more than other ages. As such, our
1 3
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
findings are consistent with prior work suggesting that adolescence is characterized by enhanced
novelty seeking (Galvan, 2010; Spear, 2013)
Although recognition memory performance varied by age for specific trial types, we found no
overall effect of memory load on overall recognition performance (d’) as a function of age
performance is consistent with previous developmental findings suggesting that while attention
(0-back) and working memory (2-back) processes differ, they are both associated with
subsequent recognition memory performance in children (Rosenberg et al., 2020; Thompson et
al., 2019).
Finally, we predicted that salient emotional face stimuli (i.e., fearful and happy) might yield
adolescent-specific effects on memory given that adolescents have shown sensitivity to
emotional and social cues in prior studies (Casey, 2015; Cohen-Gilbert & Thomas, 2013;
Dreyfuss et al., 2014; Grose-Fifer et al., 2013; Irwin & Millstein, 1986; Somerville et al., 2011).
However, there were no interactions of stimulus type with age for overall working memory,
immediate or long-term recognition memory performance. Stimulus type did however
differentially impact memory performance. Working memory was better for faces than places,
while immediate and long-term recognition memory was better for places. Preferential working
memory for faces may be due to faces being more salient stimuli than places especially during
development (Caldara et al., 2003; M.-K. Kwon et al., 2016; Pascalis & de Schonen, 1994) and
thus easier to hold temporarily in memory within a task block. However, there were three
categories of face stimuli (fearful, happy and neutral) and only one category of places. Thus,
there were three times as many faces as places to be remembered in the subsequent recognition
task. This disproportionate frequency of faces over places could have led to greater interference
during subsequent immediate and long-term recognition memory, thus superseding any saliency
effects of faces in the working memory task.
Our results should be interpreted in the context of potential limitations. As described above, there
were more faces than places in our tasks that might explain our differential effects of stimulus
type on working memory and recognition memory. Second, for recognition memory, there were
1 4
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
fewer participants in the 24-hour delay condition than in the immediate memory condition due to
difficulty in recruitment and attrition over two days of assessment. Although our immediate and
24-hour samples were similar in average age and variance, the smaller sample size may have led
to less reliable results and/or impacted our ability to test for robust long-term memory effects by
age. However, our split half analysis of the 0-hour condition revealed strikingly similar
developmental results that replicated across both halves of the data (n=49 and n=48) and were
similar to the effects observed with the full 0-hour delay sample (n=97) (S3) suggesting
sufficient robustness of effects for the two delay conditions. However, replication of the results
would further strengthen our findings. Finally, we used a between-subjects design to test
immediate and long-term memory similar to prior developmental memory research (Johnson &
Casey, 2015; Saragosa-Harris et al., 2021). An alternative design would have been to test each
participant on a subset of items from the working memory task, which would have further
decreased the number of items that could be tested for different conditions (0-hr versus 24-hr
delay). This design may be powerful, but somewhat less feasible given the ABCD task design.
The current study provides evidence of adolescent-specific enhancements in working memory,
recognition memory and long-term memory, with evidence of better long-term recognition of
task relevant items and better accuracy on novel items during both immediate recognition and
long-term memory. Because we used tasks from the ABCD Study that is currently in progress,
and included ages that will ultimately be assessed by that study (i.e., 9 to 20 years), our results
from this cross-sectional sample provide predictions for future studies with longitudinal ABCD
Study data. Moreover, the ABCD Study tests recognition memory immediately after the n-back
task, but not 24 hours later. Thus, our results of similarities and differences in immediate versus
long-term recognition memory may help to constrain predictions and the interpretations of future
studies using ABCD Study data about the development of different memory processes. In sum,
our findings of enhanced memory during adolescence may reflect an adaptive mechanism for
what we remember and forget during a developmental period that demands rapid learning in
novel environments.
1 5
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
METHODS
Participants
A community sample (n = 175, 8–30 years) was recruited from the greater New Haven,
Connecticut area. Twenty-five participants were excluded due to chance performance on the
working memory or recognition tasks, technical difficulties, or not returning for a second session
resulting in a final sample of 150 participants (74 males and 76 females; mean age = 19.13; SD =
6.35; See Supplemental text for exclusion criteria). Participants were assigned to either a 0-hour
a 24-hour delay condition (n = 53; 26 males and 27 females; mean age = 19.41; SD = 6.13,
did not significantly differ (t(150)=0.41, p=0.680, F(150)=1.12, p=0.664, respectively) and a
two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Massey, 1951) of the 0-hour and 24-hour participants
was not significant (D(150)=0.093, p=0.927), indicating the two distributions were likely drawn
from the same population (S2). All participants provided informed written consent and minors
provided written assent approved by the Institutional Review Board
N-back task
The ABCD Study n-back task consisted of high (2-back) and low (0-back) memory load
conditions and 4 stimulus categories including happy, fearful and neutral faces and places (Casey
face stimuli have been reported previously and faces were harmonized for luminosity, head size,
and head position (Casey et al., 2018; Conley et al., 2018; Tottenham et al., 2009). Place stimuli
were from previously published stimulus sets (Casey et al., 2018; Kanwisher, 2001; O’Craven &
Kanwisher, 2000; Park & Chun, 2009). The task consisted of two runs. In each run, there were
four blocks of each load (0 and 2-back) condition by stimulus type (happy, fearful and neutral
faces and places) for a total of 8 blocks, with 10 trials per condition (2.5s each) and 4 fixation
blocks (15s each). Each trial consisted of a 2 second stimulus presentation, followed immediately
by a 500ms fixation cross. In total, there were 160 trials and 96 unique stimuli. Prior to
completing the task, participants completed a brief practice session of four blocks (2 of each n-
back memory task; 2 face blocks, 2 place blocks) of four trials each. The stimuli used in the
1 6
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
practice were different from those in the n-back task and subsequent recognition memory tasks.
On each trial, participants were instructed to respond “Match” or “No Match” to each stimulus.
A “Match” in the 2-back condition was when the current stimulus was the same as two trials
back. A “Match” in the 0-back condition was when the current stimulus was the same as a target
stimulus shown at the start of the block. In the 0-back condition, there were three different trial
types: 1 target repeated 3 times per block, 2 distractors/(lures) repeated 3 times per block and 6
distractors/(non-lures) shown only once each. In the 2-back condition, there were the same trial
types: 2 targets repeated twice, 2 distractors/(lures) repeated twice per block and 6
distractors/(non-lures) shown only once each. To control for the number of stimulus repetitions
across trial types, only targets and distractors that were lures from both load conditions were
subsequently tested in the recognition memory task.
Recognition Memory Task.
The recognition memory task was identical to that of the ABCD Study (Casey et al., 2018),
except that it was administered 24-hours later to assess long-term memory in addition to
were presented during the task. These included on average 24 targets (M =24.23, SD =0.61,
range =22-25), 24 distractors/lures (M = 23.667, SD = 0.474, range= 23-24) and 48 new items (M
=48.088, SD =0.509, range= 48-51) during the recognition task (see S4 for more details on
distributions of trial types). Each stimulus was presented for 2s followed by a 1s fixation cross.
Instructions and a 2-trial practice (one “Old” from the practice and one new stimulus) preceded
the recognition memory task. A total of 96 stimuli were presented during the task, including 48
of the 96 “old” stimuli (targets and distractors only) presented during the emotional n-back task
and 48 new stimuli, with equal numbers of each stimulus type (12 each of happy, fearful, and
neutral facial expressions as well as places). Participants were asked to rate each picture as either
“Old” or “New.” Participants were randomly assigned to either a 0- or 24-hour recognition
condition to in part control for the frequency in presentation of each trial type when comparing
the effects of working memory on subsequent recognition memory (0-delay) and long-term
memory (24-hour delay) by stimulus type.
1 7
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
Data analysis
Trial by trial accuracy data from the emotional n-back and recognition memory tasks were
extracted using MATLAB R2016a and analyses were conducted using R version 3.6.3 (R Core
Team, 2020). We calculated both d prime (d’) and accuracy data for both the working memory
and recognition memory tasks. All d’ values were adjusted for extreme values (Hautus, 1995)
and were calculated using the psycho package in R (Makowski, 2018). For the working memory
task, d’ was calculated by aggregating the number of hits, misses, false alarms and correct
rejections for each subject separately for the 0 and 2 back conditions and different stimulus types
of the n-back task. For the recognition memory task, d’ was calculated for each subject in both
the 0-hour and 24-hour conditions separately for each stimulus type. When assessing the
relationship between working memory performance and recognition memory performance d’
was calculated for working memory separately for each stimulus type and d’ for recognition
memory was calculated for each delay condition (0-hour and 24-hour) and each stimulus type.
When measuring recognition memory performance for individual trial types (targets, distractors
and new items) binary accuracy (0 for incorrect, 1 for correct) was calculated for each stimulus
type, load type and delay, as you cannot calculate a d’ score for each of these items separately.
Both accuracy and d’ values were then used to assess age effects in working memory and
recognition memory performance using polynomial linear regression and mixed effect models
using the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015).
All within-subject analyses (analyses not including an effect of delay) were performed with a
linear mixed effect model including a random effect of subject to control for repeated measures.
Between-subjects’ analyses (i.e., for the 0- and 24-hour conditions) were performed with a
simple regression with delay as a predictor. Z-scored, age-corrected I.Q. (Weschler Abbreviated
Scale of Intelligence WASI-II; Weschler, 2011) and sex were included in all models in the main
text as covariates. I.Q. scores were collected for all but seven participants. These participants
were included in the analyses given that linear models can account for missing data, and the key
results hold regardless of whether I.Q. was included in the models or not (See supplemental
tables 2, 4, 6 and 8). All reported age-effects and statistics in all tables were corrected for
multiple comparisons using Bonferroni correction.
1 8
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects
To test for age-related changes in working memory, 0- and 24-hour recognition memory, we
modeled age with linear, quadratic, and cubic polynomial terms of exact age. Next, we tested
each model against the others and a null model without age using either a log-likelihood ratio test
for mixed effect models, or an analysis of variance (ANOVA) for simple linear models. All
nested models were tested for goodness of fit relative to a null model with the same fixed effects
using either a log-likelihood ratio test for the mixed effect models, or an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) for linear models. A p-value < 0.05 in either case was taken to indicate a better fit of
one model over the other. Following the identification of the best fitting age model, covariates
were then added to each model and compared directly to the simpler model using a log-
likelihood ratio test or ANOVA. A p-value < 0.05 on either test was taken to indicate that the
covariate explained a significant amount of variance. Otherwise, the simpler model was
preferred. Full descriptions of the best fitting models are reported in the main text and in
Supplemental Tables 1-8.
To assess the impact of working memory on recognition memory across age, we used overall n-
back task performance (d’) as a continuous predictor of recognition memory performance for the
0- and 24-hour delay conditions. We then examined binary accuracy (0 for incorrect, 1 for
correct) for each of the three trial types (old targets, old distractors, and new items) in the
immediate and long-term recognition memory conditions controlling for stimulus type and
memory load (see S6 examining interactions with stimulus type). We also tested accuracy for
each of the three trial types for 0-back and 2-back items separately in a follow-up exploratory
analysis (see S5). Binomial models were used to predict accuracy by trial type, delay (0-hour and
24-hour), and age polynomials compared to a model without age as a factor.
Given the difference in sample size between the 0- and 24-hour delay subsamples, a subsidiary
analysis with an even-odd split of the larger 0-hour sample (n = 97) into two smaller samples (n
= 48 even, n = 49 odd) was performed to test for robustness of developmental patterns in
recognition memory for the two delay conditions (see S3). Finally, we calculated non-parametric
response bias (B”D) for recognition memory to test for any age effects to determine if there was
an increased tendency in adolescents to reject recognition items as new regardless of whether
they were old or new items (see S7).
1 9
Running head: Adolescent specific memory effects