Abstract
Objective: The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an increase in adverse psychological
outcomes world-wide. This paper discusses the development of a manualised online group
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy intervention in a secondary care setting targeting the maintenance
factors of COVID-19 related distress.
Method: This paper details (i) the development of the intervention using the six steps in quality
intervention development (6SQuID; Wight, Wimbush, Jepson & Doi, 2016) methodology (ii) a
mixed-method feasibility study exploring a manualised online group Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy intervention targeting the maintenance factors of COVID-19 related distress.
Results: Using the 6SQuID methodology, a theoretical coherent, novel intervention, which did not
replicate existing treatment designs, was developed. In relation to feasibility, engagement with this
remote group program was poor. There were low levels of engagement in online data-gathering,
making it difficult to ascertain indicators of effectiveness. In relation to acceptability, retention
rates of participants were high. Participants described a high level of treatment appropriateness
and positive post-intervention change.
Conclusion: A theoretically coherent manualised treatment was developed. It did not meet initial
assessments of feasibility, though it did meet qualitative and quantitative measures of
acceptability.
Keywords: clinical intervention, group telepsychology, depression, anxiety, CBT, remote
Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an increase in adverse psychological outcomes
world-wide (Bueno-Notivol et al. 2021; Plomecka et al., 2020; Salehi et al., 2021). Cross-
sectional surveys have indicated that approximately that 20-30% of international populations
have experienced anxiety or depression in 2020 (Santabárbara et al., 2021; Shevlin et al., 2020).
Due to how specific national responses, guidelines and restrictions to COVID-19 have been, it is
likely that there is a wide range of mental health variation between different countries. In the
Republic of Ireland, where this research took place, data indicated that around 27% of a
representative sample tested in April 2020 screened for Generalised Anxiety Disorder or
Depression (Hyland et al., 2020). Irish tracking data have indicated that these rates deteriorated
over the course of 2020-2021 (CSO, April, August, November 2020; April 2021).
Correspondingly, posttraumatic stress symptoms related to the COVID‐19 pandemic are
suggested to be common in the general Irish population at approximately 17% (Karatzias et al.,
2020). Furthermore, recent evidence demonstrates that the remission of the epidemic in China
was associated with greater prevalence of severe depression and anxiety (Wang, Zhao, Hu,
Wang, Cao, Huang & Yang, 2021).
Due to a lack of knowledge of the effectiveness of standard psychological treatments within the
context of a pandemic and related societal restriction, COVID-19 specific clinical interventions
are required. We present the development of a secondary care, public health treatment using the
six steps in quality intervention development framework (6SQuID) (Wight, Wimbush, Jepson &
Doi, 2016), specifically targeting COVID-19 related anxiety and depression.
The six phases were created to amplify the likely effectiveness of interventions by ensuring a
practical, and evidence-based approach of intervention development. These steps involve: (1)
defining and understanding the problem and its causes; (2) identifying which causal or
contextual factors are modifiable:(a) which have the greatest scope for change and (b) who
would benefit most; (3) deciding on the mechanisms of change; (4) clarifying how these will be
delivered; (5) testing and adapting the intervention; and (6) collecting sufficient evidence of
effectiveness to proceed to a rigorous evaluation.
(1) Defining and understanding the problem
Repeated research has highlighted the mental health impact of living through the COVID-19
pandemic (Plomecka et al., 2020; Talevi et al., 2020; Taylor, Landry, Paluszek, Fergus, McKay,
& Asmundson, 2020). Unlike typical anxiety disorders the threat to health, livelihood and
wellbeing are high and realistic. It is unclear whether typical psychological treatments are
appropriate and helpful in addressing a realistic and constant threat (Lahav, 2020; Nuttman-
Shwartz & Shoval-Zuckerman, 2016; Stevens, Eagle, Kaminer & Higson-Smith, 2013).
(2a) Identifying which causal or contextual factors are modifiable:
Predictors of increased anxiety and depression during the COVID-19 pandemic include various
domains; financial, occupational, social and health (Shevlin, McBride, Murphy, Miller, Hartman,
Levita & Bentall, 2020; Taylor et al., 2020). These have little scope for change outside of the
national public health endeavours.
Within cognitive models, it is hypothesised that disordered anxiety occurs when there is an
overestimation of how likely a perceived threat is to occur. These models suggest that excess
levels of distress may be underpinned by cognitive misappraisals, cognitive misinterpretation,
safety seeking and avoidance behaviors (Beck & Haigh, 2014). Equally in cognitive models of
depression, biased interpretations of events are attributed to the activation of negative
representations of the self, the personal world, and the future (the Negative Cognitive Triad). A
variety of dysfunctional beliefs that make individuals prone to depression make them vulnerable
to specific life events that impinge on this vulnerability (Beck, 1979).
If identified as relevant factors in COVID-19 related distress, these cognitive maintenance factors
are potentially modifiable. NICE guidelines indicate that treatments that address cognitive
misappraisals, cognitive misinterpretation, safety seeking and avoidance behaviors (Kendall,
Cape, Chan & Taylor, 2011), are likely to be amenable to change through a psychological
treatment.
(2b) Which have the greatest scope for change and who would benefit most.
Certain populations have appeared at risk during the virus outbreak and may be more susceptible
to favourable change. In the Republic of Ireland, it has been reported that those at risk for the onset
of the COVID-19 related anxiety and depression are younger in age, female sex and experienced
a loss of income (Hyland et al., 2020). This is similar to international studies (Bueno-Notivol et
al., 2021; Salehi et al., 2021). Although older adults (aged 65+) have also displayed a large
prevalence of COVID-19 specific anxiety, particularly due to vulnerability to the virus. These
demographics may need increased psychological support along with front line workers, who have
displayed an increase in psychopathology (Preti et al., 2020).
(3) Deciding on the mechanisms of change
The second author developed and tested a cognitive model of COVID-19 related distress using a
cross-sectional study, examining typical cognitive factors in a convenience sample from the
general population (Delz, Gaynor, O'Connor, & Somers, 2021). The survey took place between
December 2020 and February 2021 (N=550). This study found, in a confirmatory factor analysis,
that Loneliness, Post-Traumatic Cognitions about Self, Post-Traumatic Cognitions about the
World, Emotional Stability, and Mental Effort related to COVID-19 loaded onto a single factor.
The final model showed adequate fit (CFI=0.988, TLI=0.980, RMSEA=0 .059(0.034-0.086,
GFI=0.984, SRMR=0.0232), χ2=26.461, p=0.002). Stepwise linear regressions found that the
model also significantly predicted Depression and Anxiety as measured by the Depression Anxiety
2 2
Stress Scales 21 (DASS-21) (R =.611; F(6, 548)=143.29, p<.000; (R = .529, F(8, 546)=76.55,
p<.0001.
This model was used to identify potential mechanisms of change. An 8- session group treatment
was developed addressing six core processes (i) feelings of loneliness; (ii) physical anxiety (iii)
cognitions of threat and loss related to COVID-19, (iv) safety behaviours (v) worry and
rumination, (vi) mental effort related to COVID-19. Safety behaviours were carefully addressed
as government guidance has often indicated the restricted social contact and increased
handwashing are appropriate behaviours in the context the pandemic. Therefore, safety behaviours
were targeted that increased a sense of isolation while not creating a health risk (e.g., not engaging
in phone calls/ zoom meetups) or cognitive load (e.g., over-analysing the news).
Cognitive restructuring throughout this intervention targeted cognitions of threat/vulnerability and
loss, which are central themes in anxiety and depression, respectively (Beck, 2005). Threat
reappraisal is considered a key mediator underlying the effects of cognitive-behavioral therapy for
anxiety disorders (Smits, Julian, Rosenfield & Powers, 2012). In addition, core beliefs about the
world may be conducive to a traumatic response but also have the potential to develop traumatic
growth (Vazquez et al., 2021).
(4) Delivery
Online group psychotherapy has the capacity to be cost effective, treat multiple clients, and
overcome physical barriers to engagement (location, geographical restrictions, infection concerns).
Remote telepsychology psychotherapy has displayed a “clear, consistent evidence of beneficial
effect” with anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress, and adjustment disorder (Varker, Brand,
Ward, Terhaag & Phelps, 2019). Whilst contemporary findings on the outcomes are promising,
there is limited research regarding online group psychotherapy (Weinberg, 2020).
This intervention provided a structured, manualized approach to facilitate the therapeutic group
format, focusing on the underlying maintenance factors of COVID-19 related anxiety and
depression using a CBT approach with a specified population.
The delivery of this therapeutic intervention was within an online synchronous group format. This
online group format took place with two-hour sessions weekly, for a period of eight weeks. Each
session had a central theme, for example, worry, threat cognitions, ever-changing demands.
These themes are extrapolated from the maintenance factor model of COVID-19 related distress
throughout the course of the program (Gaynor, 2021; this workbook is accessible online from the
Psychology Society of Ireland). The treatment has been manualized to assist
practitioners/facilitators to implement the intervention and guidelines have been inserted on whom
may deliver the intervention.
(5) Testing and adapting the intervention
This online group CBT intervention was piloted at a secondary care level with an outpatient
population in St. John of God Hospital, Stillorgan, Co. Dublin. This is a private, health insurance-
based service with both inpatient and outpatient services. A feasibility study was supported by the
St John of God Regional Ethics committee.
The group CBT intervention was offered to all outpatients on an outpatient waiting list between
October 2020 and February 2021 (40 approx. as the waiting-list varied) and was offered to all
MDTs, and consultant psychiatric teams to refer relevant clients. The treatment was offered via
Zoom to any adult outpatient (aged 18-75) of the St John of God Hospital service presenting with
COVID-19 related distress, anxiety or depression during this period.
Group members were invited to take part in surveys before and after the intervention to assist in
the evaluation process. Further outcome data was gathered by post-intervention interviews. The
intervention was also open to those who did not consent to research.
(6) Collecting sufficient evidence of effectiveness to proceed to a rigorous evaluation
In this paper, the authors report on the feasibility of the intervention. Feasibility was assessed by
measures of Demand, quantitative and qualitative measures of Acceptability, and potential
Implementation (Bowen et al., 2009). Demand was examined by a comparison of treatment
uptake in relation to the potential number of participants. Acceptability was examined in line
with the Theoretical Framework of Acceptability (TFA) (Sekhon, Cartwright & Francis, 2017)
comprising of seven component constructs: affective attitude, burden, perceived effectiveness,
ethicality, intervention coherence, opportunity costs, and self-efficacy, as measured by
qualitative interviews. Implementation was examined by the manner in which the intervention
could be applied in a way sufficient to conduct a control trial.
Demand: At the time of writing, two cycles of the group had been completed. Eight clients
participated in the groups out of a potential 20 group spaces. The group had been offered to
approximately 40 people (this is approximate as it is unknown how many clients were offered the
treatment through their MDT). The demand for the intervention was low with fewer that 50% of
the places being taken up and fewer than 25% of the potential participants engaging in the
intervention. This rate of uptake shows a low level of demand for the intervention.
Acceptability: All participants completed the intervention, with only one participant missing a
session (due to a childcare issue on the day). These data indicate a high level of qualitative
Acceptability as measured by attendance and completion (Sekhon, Cartwright & Francis, 2018).
age from 25 to 83, indicating that age was not a particular barrier to engagement. Six out of the
eight clients were female. Baseline data indicate that participants experienced high levels of
anxiety or depression. Due to the low rate of participant and poor completion of questionnaires,
completeness.
Participant demographics (N=6), means and standard deviations of pre and post intervention
scores in Covid Stress Scale.
Gender Female (n=4) Male (n=2)
(67%) (33%)
Age 18-24 25-35 35-44 55-64 65+
(32%) (17%) (17%) (17 %) (17%)
Living Situation Living with family Owning
(50%) (50%)
Employment Full time Student Retired/Pens Unemployed Homemak
worker (17%) ioner (17%) (17%) er (17%)
(32%)
Covid Stress Scale (CSS)
PRE (n=5) POST(n=3)
Variable M SD M SD
CSS Danger 13.25 6.91 6.33 2.50
CSS 11.40 5.57 2.33 2.05
Contamination
CSS Trauma 7.50 4.56 2.33 1.25
CSS Checking 5.8 4.71 2.67 1.25
CSS Total 39.25 20.17 16.25 9.73
Subscales
Qualitative Analysis of Intervention Acceptability
The participants’ opinions and experience of the remote group CBT intervention were collected to
assist in evaluating the acceptability of the intervention. Acceptability was assessed to confer
intervention feasibility, by judging to what extent the intervention was suitable to those who took
part in it (Bowen et al., 2009).
Participant’s perceptions of acceptability was assessed via the client change interview schedule
(Elliot & Rodgers, 2008), exploring: (i) the participants’ experience of taking part in the
intervention; (ii) any noticeable change for participants due to the intervention; (ii) their perception
of the source of how this change occurred (iii) to highlight any specific examples of positives or
negatives of the intervention
Three participants agreed to take part in post-intervention interviews. This follow-up interview
was conducted 6 months after both cycles of the intervention took place. Interview length ranged
from 35-50 minutes. Thematic analysis methodology was followed as recommended by Braun and
Clarke (2006).
As a result of using a structured interview schedule, the self-reported experience of engaging in
the intervention deductively mapped onto the following three themes – the period before the
intervention, being in the intervention and mechanisms of change, and the participants experience
after engaging in the intervention. See Tables 2-4 for a further description of inductively developed
subthemes.
Subtheme Description Illustrative Quotes
Wellbeing Participants’ reflection on “I thought I was the only one in the World who
their wellbeing before the was having the anxiety attacks and head going,
remote intervention always.”
“Maybe before I got as bad as I was, it would
have staved off going as low as I did. Cause I
did, there was no doubt about it. I was very
anxious; I was shaking, and it was crazy. But you
wouldn’t have known you needed it because you
wouldn’t give in to the fact that you needed it. I
with me.”
“I couldn’t stop thinking about the pandemic for
one thing and now I take it in my stride.”
Emotion Participants’ expression of “Well, I was in a different space, I was very
emotions before engaging uncomfortable with the anxiety. I just can't tell
in the intervention - you how real it frightened me, and I wasn’t sure
anxiety, worry, fear, what I was up to or what I was doing. I just felt
confusion, shame, an absolute loser and I was looking at everything
obsessive behaviours like a doomsday scenario.”
“I really felt ashamed myself that I hadn't more
control, so I couldn't believe that I had let myself
get so…so down. I thought everything was going
wrong.”
“As I say, I don’t know what happened to me. It
just hit me, and I was getting worse and worse
and worse. I was even worried about leaving the
hospital, I was thinking how I would cope in
ordinary situations.”
Covid-19 Impact of Covid-19/ “The fact that you had to distance yourself from
lockdown restrictions on people and not get close to them, it kind of cut
work, wellbeing, and life. off your personal and social contacts a good bit
which wasn’t good and then you were afraid to
meet people, so there was a fear factor there and
it helped to kind of curb that fear factor.”
“I was convinced that I was never going to be
able to drive again. I was sure everything was
going to end.”
“I had this misgiving because I had spent months
of cocooning and just got more upset.”
Intervention Apprehension felt before “It was a novel experience for me. I had never
Concern engaging in the engaged in any kind of group work like that
intervention. before and I was slightly apprehensive.
I think, the prospect of a group situation, for
somebody who's never done it before, it can be
quite daunting. The actual execution of it was
much easier than I thought.”
Subtheme Description Illustrative Quotes
Intervention Specific “I think what's been helpful about the group is that; what
Component examples of the they presented was quite relevant, and it was easy enough to
intervention apply, but you did have to read over it a few times. I think
elicited by that that subject on the inner critic was quite good that we're
participants always criticising ourselves. And we're always, you know
including our own worst enemy. So, I'm realising that there's things we
techniques, can control and there's things we can't control. And there's
theory, group people, the way they react to you, they can't control it, but
sharing. you can control how you react to them. I think, it does help
day to day and what we come up against.”
“The group was great. It really was. I have this feeling now,
that you just get on with it and that is what I got the most out
of it. It was great at the time because it was like having a
little lifeboat standing by, if I had any of these feelings, I was
in a position to be able to talk to experts about it. You know,
it didn’t happen, but I got comfort from it.”
“Then, as I say, when I did the course. I just thought it was
very, you know, it seemed to normalise things.”
Intervention Participants “There were people that were presenting things that had a
Facilitation experience of good background of knowledge, and of psychology, they
“being” in the could apply the theory to the day-to-day stuff. You know, so
intervention and that's how you felt supported in it, about your thinking and
feedback of your worries and your anxiety.”
facilitation. “You were more than encouraged to say anything that you
yourself are feeling or any of the people there. Yeah, I, I
think everybody felt this is their time if they want to discuss
anything.”
Learning Manifestation “And you know, just listening to the small, or what looked to
of learning via be very small incremental steps that they took to deal with
intervention their situation, so learning from other people and sharing
components, stories, with the other participants.”
self-learning or “You know to try and stay in the moment of things, and not
learning via to get overwhelmed and try to kind of just pick my way
group members. through things and treat myself with compassion and all
those things that I did learn.”
“It was my first experience, but you know, I really did feel I
learned a lot from other participants.”
Intervention Feedback on “Maybe if the group just had been more clinically
Suggestions points of appropriate, maybe or age group appropriate. It might have
improvement or helped. And both at an inpatient level, you can see you can
issues with the relate to some. You could have related to some people on the
intervention. ward better than you could have related to people on the
group.”
“I think in the beginning it was that we were all different age
groups. So, we all had different life experiences and we were
all, I suppose we were all doing it from home. I think maybe
sometimes there was a bit of a cultural and age difference to
how people took up the advice that was being presented.”
“I think a larger group would have been nice, I know it's
probably something you have very little control over but, the
group of four was - you know it worked - when that there
was a diversity of you know experiences, but you know
people were very, you know, open and contributed well so. I
think it would have been interesting just to have a somewhat
larger group, just again, just to see the experiences and the
dynamics of the different participants”
Without Likelihood of “I think it certainly was a set of tools to fall back on, it would
Intervention identified be a struggle to find that otherwise, I think.”
changes “I wouldn't have prioritised it, you know self-care and self-
occurring compassion to the same extent, definitely not.”
without taking “I think without the group I wouldn't have ‘bounced back’
part in the say, let’s put it that way.”
intervention.
Subtheme Description Illustrative Quotes
Coping Daily “So, it was helping to kind of curb that fear factor and to
management of build yourself up so that you have a certain amount of
circumstances courage as well. You know that you could deal with life on a
and application daily basis. It's just in a different way.”
of intervention “The vaccine in my case is not a solution, so for me and for a
techniques. lot of other people you know it's learning to live with the
constant drum of anxiety. In that context, like you need tools
in your toolkit.”
“Well, I didn't really expect to get the strength from it that I
did, you know? I think now when I am dealing with people. I
can stand back and just let them say what they want to say,
but you can remain detached, and you don't have to get so
involved. You know you have a different way of coping with
them and that. I don't have to let it affect me if they're feeling
this way, I don't have to feel this way as well, kind of thing.”
Change Aspects of “I was so frightened of everything. I thought certainly, it (the
change that intervention) was a great antidote after the whole experience,
occurred post- it felt normal and very natural. I didn’t feel at all strange,
intervention. except very positive.”
“I think I just kind of realised - this is normal. That I
shouldn't be ashamed of having been very, very anxious. Not
wanting to even go see the family because I felt that it wasn't
right for the younger ones to see me out of control. You
know, because of that feeling in my chest, that I just couldn't,
I didn’t want to talk to anybody, so that was - all of that is
just a bad memory.”
“From the time my anxiety completely got better at me I had
this course and I thought, I am good. I am grand, you know?
Everything is fine. I got over that. Even listening to the other
people in the course, I was kind of able to say, they’re going
to be fine. When before it, I was in doomsday, I thought I
cannot come back from this. I just realised you can, and it
was just all very nice.”
Perspective New insight, “In the broader scheme of things over the last few months I
change in certainly felt I was able to draw on some of the “insights” if
perspective since you like from the therapy sessions.”
intervention, re- “No, because funny enough I would say to myself. He could
referring to get through; this will come right. You know, there was
intervention nothing that I would say, that is the end of them. My
content. doomsday thoughts just disappeared. To me, it wasn’t, it was
the end of the journey, rather than part of it, does that make
sense?”
“I suppose any of the negatives are circumstantial, you
know. We couldn't predict, how work-related issues were
going to unfold, and medical issues were going to unfold.”
Pre-Intervention Theme
Participants self-reported wellbeing before engaging in the remote intervention contributes to
baseline quantitative data, that participants were experiencing mental health difficulties.
Participant’s pre-intervention distress was particularly around the Covid-19 virus and the
associated restrictions, emphasising the impact of lockdown and a sense of threat. Where emotion
was described by participants, it manifested in the form of anxiety, worry, obsessiveness and
contamination fears. Fear and confusion were elicited in two forms; uncertainty in terms of the
coronavirus and lockdown; the isolated experience of suffering without a shared experience to
relate to or a sense of shared understanding.
Participants were apprehensive about engaging in the intervention due to the novel format of group
psychotherapy but did not claim any concerns about the remote aspect.
Mechanisms of Change Theme
Participants emphasised a range of positive and negative aspects in the intervention and what they
believed was the source of positive intervention change. In terms of the remote intervention, they
highlighted that the content was relevant and appropriate. It was applicable to daily life. It provided
psychoeducation alongside intervention techniques such as mindfulness, locus of control and
thought regulation. This feedback providing strong indicators of intervention coherence.
Participants elicited that a key to the intervention experience was the concept of normalisation. All
participants reported a sense of normality - whether it be from the psychoeducational intervention
components, from the intra-group membership or the structure provided by a weekly organised
event. They reported that it normalised their distressing experience and provided a shared
experience to understand and manage one’s symptomology.
Participants also described the intervention “atmosphere” as a central component of the
intervention, whereby participants felt supported and encouraged to express themselves. This
comforting atmosphere was attributed to facilitation and mediated positive group outcomes such
as managing interpersonal dynamics, group sharing and learning. Shared experience and learning
were two changes that were attained predominately as a result of the intervention structure - group
psychotherapy, providing evidence to retain the intervention format as a group intervention rather
than individual.
Participants described their personal experience of the online group therapy structure as positive.
Participants reported reduced vulnerability due to the intervention taking place online, as it felt
“less intimidating” or “exposing”, particularly for those new to group interventions. Moreover,
two participants suggested the remote aspect improved their engagement. However, as mentioned
by one participant, they were fortunate to have enough privacy to participate.
In terms of burden, consistent feedback reported by all interviewed participants was the need for
group members to be of relative age and clinically appropriate. Participants felt the intervention
would have been more favourable if fellow group members were of similar age. Moreover, one
participant found this lack of similarity to be a hindrance to their own engagement. This was
fundamentally due to higher intragroup differences and lowered the possibility of shared
experiences. The issue of group size was also mentioned by all participants, whilst a smaller group
felt more intimate, participants suggested that they would have preferred a larger group – mainly
to provide additional variety of experiences and opportunities of learning.
Participants reinforced the notion of the importance of the intervention. All participants were
certain that while some change might have occurred without the intervention, it would have not
been to the same extent, would be more difficult to source and would have taken longer to occur.
Suggesting a sufficient degree of perceived effectiveness.
Post- Intervention Theme
There was a stark difference between the participants description of their pre-intervention
wellbeing and their post-intervention coping. The underlying features of this contrast were
attributed to post-intervention change and a difference in perspective. Participants felt a dramatic
change in their management of and focus on the ongoing coronavirus threat and the associated
restrictions. This resulted in a reported reduction in experiencing hopelessness, obsessive
behaviours, and anxious thoughts. Participation in the intervention provided a sense of self-
efficacy or resilience described as “strength” in dealing with the pandemic, central to post-
intervention coping. A favourable affective attitude towards the intervention was present.
Participants disclosed newly gained insights which led to a change of perspective toward the inner
experience and interactions with the outside World. Participants reported developing a higher
capacity to regulate and control their thoughts and emotions. Potentially due to cognitive
restructuring, a core component of the intervention and contributes to findings of perceived
effectiveness.
Discussion
The COVID-19 pandemic has created a range of mental health challenges, included in these is an
increased rate of mental health problems in the community (Hyland et al., 2020). A challenge to
the existing evidence-base is the unique nature of the societal restrictions and health risks faced by
the public, and restrictions on services’ ability to provide treatment in traditional ways. This has
placed an impetus on clinicians and researchers to design effective, acceptable alternatives to
traditional treatment that address COVID-19-related needs.
This paper describes the development and initial testing of the feasibility of a cognitive behavioural
therapy intervention for COVID-19-related distress. The study used the 6SQUID methodology to
ensure that the intervention was designed from a coherent theoretical base, did not replicate
existing treatment designs, had a likelihood of therapeutic success, and included the target group
experience.
The intervention is based on a cognitive model specifically adapted to the issues arising during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Based on data of a coherent CBT model of COVID-19 related distress
developed within a general population sample (Delz et al., 2021), a CBT intervention was designed
and tested in a feasibility study.
Intrinsically important to the 6SQuID framework is to ensure that the intervention functions as
intended and achieves demonstrable outcomes (Wight, Wimbush, Jepson & Doi, 2016).
Feasibility was assessed through measures of Demand, Acceptability and the potential for further
Implementation. The demand for the intervention was low with fewer that 50% of the places being
taken up and fewer than 25% of the potential participants engaging in the intervention. This
feasibility study indicates a low level of demand, potentially due to the teletherapeutic format.
Previous studies have indicated that even regular therapeutic services can have low levels of uptake
(Gaynor, Dooley, Lawlor & Lawoyin, 2014). Although we cannot predict the long-term impact of
COVID-19, it is likely that teletherapy will be a necessary format for services in the short to
medium-term. However, for a significant group of participants, it is a barrier to accessing
treatment. There are range of reasons why this may be the case. Clients may not have adequate
private space during lockdown or when isolating at home (Stoll, Müller & Trachsel, 2020). There
may be technological discomfort (Weinberg, 2020) or lack of therapeutic alliance when engaging
remotely (Inchausti, MacBeth, Hasson-Ohayon & Dimaggio, 2020). There may also be specific
service-related reasons for the low level of referral and intervention uptake.
While it is possible that the online format was disconcerting for individuals during recruitment,
participants’ experience of the remote intervention was positive. Qualitative data reinforced the
notion that participants were struggling to cope with aspects of the pandemic before engaging in
the intervention, particularly the sense of threat from anticipating danger and contamination.
Emphasising the need for problem-specific treatment. The intervention was found to be
appropriate in addressing the clinical problem, was convenient and suitable to individual’s
lifestyle, and effective in managing the clinical problem. Group size, age and clinical presentation
similarity were highlighted as issues required to be addressed. It is unclear if remedying the issue
of heterogeneity of age, that a larger group would still be required. Perhaps, participants felt they
could not relate to other members as much as they would have liked and as a result, would have
preferred more involved.
Quantitatively, those who partook in the intervention showed a high level of acceptability with
100% retention and a high level of weekly attendance. Qualitative interviews with the participants
after the intervention found three themes pertaining to before the intervention, the intervention
itself and mechanisms of change and the post-intervention period. These map well onto the
constructs of acceptability as described by Sekhon et al., (2018). Participants reported a positive
attitude to the intervention as indicated by post intervention coping, and low level of burden as
suggested by heterogeneity of age and clinical presentation. They described a high degree of
perceived effectiveness as indicated by a change in perspective and intervention importance. The
intervention was experienced as appropriate, relatable, and applicable to daily life, reflecting
intervention coherence. Self-efficacy was present by the implementation of intervention strategies
and techniques following the intervention. No ethical concerns or complications were identified.
Overall, participants who engaged in the remote online CBT intervention found it acceptable,
highlighted by criteria found within the Theoretical Framework of Acceptability (Sekhon et al.,
2017). However, due to the low level of demand, there is a significantly reduced potential for the
next stage of testing, further implementation (Bowen et al., 2009). Therefore, it is not currently
appropriate to address this intervention in a larger trial, as it did not meet initial investigations of
feasibility.
Limitations
There are several limitations to this study. It took place within a private, insurance-based service.
The intervention was limited to those whose insurance policy covered it. This is a serious
confounding variable and undermined the ability to recruit the largest possible sample. It is a single
arm feasibility study. Due to the study design, it is not possible to determine the reason for the low
level of treatment uptake and whether it was the content or teletherapeutic format that had low
demand. There was a small recruitment window. Data is being reported at this point, due to the
impetus of the COVID-19 pandemic and the unlikelihood that the pattern of participation would
be significantly changed by further recruitment.
Conclusion
This paper describes the development and initial mixed-method testing of the feasibility of a
cognitive behavioural therapy intervention for COVID-related distress. The study describes the
development of a novel intervention, designed from a coherent theoretical base, which did not
replicate existing treatment designs, had a likelihood of therapeutic success. This feasibility study
indicates a low level of demand within the service where this intervention was first tested. It
described a high-level acceptability among participants, a high level of reported change. Future
research within other services may experimentally examine the effectiveness of this intervention.