Animals in flow – towards the scientific study of intrinsic reward in animals
1,*,† 2,†
Sara Hintze & Jason R. Yee
Institute of Livestock Sciences, Department of Sustainable Agricultural Systems, University of Natural
Resources and Life Sciences, Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 38, 1180 Vienna, Austria
Institute of Animal Welfare Science, Department for Farm Animals and Veterinary Public Health,
University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria
*Author for correspondence
Email: sara.hintze@boku.ac.at; Tel.: +43 677 623 66 020
Email: jsn.r.yee@gmail.com; Tel.: +43 664 602 57 6994
Authors contributed equally to this work.
ABSTRACT
The concept of flow, a state of complete absorption in an intrinsically rewarding activity, has played a
pivotal role in advancing notions of human well-being beyond minimising suffering towards promoting
flourishing and thriving. While flow has played a fundamental role in human positive psychology, it has not
yet been explored in non-human animals, leaving an enormous void in our understanding of intrinsic
motivation in animals. As ethology and related fields keep progressing in uncovering complex cognitive and
affective capacities of non-human animals, we propose the time is ripe to translate the concept of flow to
animals. We start by embedding flow in the topic of intrinsic motivation and describe its impact on positive
human psychology and potentially positive animal welfare. We then disambiguate flow from related
concepts discussed in the animal literature. Next, we derive experimental approaches in animals from the
canonical characteristics of flow in humans and provide guidelines for both inducing and assessing flow by
focusing on two characteristics that do not necessarily depend on self-report, namely resistance to distraction
and time distortion. Not all aspects of the human flow experience are (yet) translatable, but those that are
may improve quality of life in captive non-human animals.
Key words: animal welfare, positive psychology, optimal experience, affective states, motivation, play,
curiosity, agency, effectiveness, contrafreeloading, Eureka moment.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction
II. Why study flow in non-human animals?
(1) Methodological advantages for the study of flow in non-human animals
(2) Advancing the field of positive animal welfare
III. Integrating the concept of flow into the archipelago of related concepts in animal research
(1) Play
(2) Curiosity
(3) Agency and competence
(4) Effectiveness
(5) Contrafreeloading
(6) Eureka or Aha! moment
IV. Towards the study of flow in non-human animals
(1) Flow induction
(a) Environmental enrichment and flow induction
(b) Chronic stress
(c) Flow proneness and personality traits
(2) Flow assessment
(a) Resistance to distraction
(i) What to consider
(b) Distortion of time
(i) What to consider
(3) Identifying the behavioural, physiological and neurophysiological signature of flow
V. Conclusions
VI. Acknowledgements
VII. References
I. INTRODUCTION
Humans have an intuitive understanding of engaging in an activity out of pure enjoyment, because the very
engagement itself is fun not necessarily because it results directly in some desired outcome. Many people
will spend money, sometimes a lot of it, or make painful sacrifices, to engage in activities like rock
climbing, surfing, or golf. While there are many ways for humans to access these kinds of experiences, there
are very few that we can provide to non-human animals in our custody. In companion animals like dogs, we
train them with treats or provide them with toys or chewing material. We provide farmed animals with
access to resources like bedding material, brushing stations or objects to manipulate. Animals kept in the lab
are commonly motivated to perform tests with rewards of fruit juice, sugar pellets, etc. However, these
examples are likely insufficient in stimulating animals to levels of enjoyment that humans attain through
recreational activities. Can we provide animals with the same access to a sense of enjoyment that we as
humans value so dearly?
Human motivational psychology proposes that the pursuit of happiness can be fuelled in two ways. The first
involves a motivational stance centred on achieving extrinsically rewarding outcomes that play an
instrumental role in aiding survival. Early theories of human motivation proposed that all behaviours are
motivated by basic physiological drives such as hunger, thirst, and sex (Deci & Ryan, 2009; Freud, 1962;
Hull, 1943). However, researchers began to uncover phenomena that revealed the insufficiency of drive
theories, for example, noting that rats with their basic drives fulfilled would still inexplicably cross
electrified grids to explore a new area of the cage (e.g. Dashiell, 1925; Nissen, 1930). Reviewing this
evidence, White (1959) introduced what has become a second way of understanding motivation, as deriving
from intrinsic psychological sources. In contrast to extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation leads to the
performance of an activity that is interesting and rewarding for its own sake. Decades of systematic
experimentation in humans has provided a clear picture of the bidirectional causal relationship between
competence and autonomy on the one hand, and intrinsic motivation on the other, with each augmenting the
other in a feedforward manner (Diener et al., 1999; Ryan & Deci, 2000; Ryff, 1989; White, 1959). Findings
from both cross-sectional (Ryan et al., 1999; Ryan & Deci, 2000) and longitudinal (Sheldon & Kasser,
1998) studies suggest that while fulfilment of intrinsic goals enhances well-being, fulfilment of extrinsic
goals does not, or does so to a lesser extent. Moreover, when people performing intrinsically motivating
activities are given extrinsic reward for their performance, this tends to undermine their motivation to
continue rather than reinforce it (Deci, 1971). Thus, a strong case can be made that, at least for humans, the
cultivation of intrinsic motivation is a key determinant of well-being.
Can we be sure that the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation is more than a pedantic one? If
the distinction is meaningful and consequential, careful experiments to elucidate proximate mechanistic
differences should be able to recapitulate it. However, while there are ample mechanistic studies on extrinsic
motivation, there are few that target intrinsic motivation. The few studies employing neuroimaging to reveal
patterns of brain activation in response to mild intrinsic motivation (e.g. curiosity) have repeatedly shown
activity in the striatum during times subjects felt more intrinsically motivated in the task (Gruber, Gelman &
Ranganath, 2014; Kang et al., 2009; Murayama et al., 2010). Striatal activity is a hallmark of reward
processing and its presence during the performance of intrinsically motivating tasks is a strong indication
that both types of motivation share overlapping mechanisms. However, in the only study to directly test
differences in brain activation as a function of the presence or absence of intrinsic motivation, intrinsic
motivation was associated with unique activation of the anterior insular cortex (AIC) as well as heightened
connectivity between the AIC and striatum (Lee et al., 2012; Lee & Reeve, 2013). The AIC is thought to
contribute to the processing of bodily satisfaction (Goldstein et al., 2009; Lee & Reeve, 2017; Naqvi &
Bechara, 2009) and subjective feelings (Craig, 2009; Damasio, 1999; Lee & Reeve, 2017). Its unique
involvement during intrinsic, but not extrinsic, tasks indicates that the distinction between the two types of
motivation is worth further pursuit.
One of the best-known concepts driven by intrinsic motivation is the concept of flow or optimal experience.
Flow is a state of complete absorption or engagement in an autotelic activity, an activity that one finds
rewarding intrinsically irrespective of any end-product or extrinsic benefit. As such, it has been a paragon
for research on well-being and positive psychology of human flourishing, thriving, and optimal experience
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Research subjects on flow include rock climbers (MacAloon & Csikszentmihalyi,
1983; Schattke et al., 2014), dancers (Bernardi, Bellemare-Pepin & Peretz, 2018) and other athletes (Swann
et al., 2012), chess players (Tozman, Zhang & Vollmeyer, 2017), musicians (Chirico et al., 2015) and
surgeons (Mulligan, 2016) who describe their state of complete absorption and full involvement as being “in
flow” or, in more colloquial terms, as being “in the zone”. While much of the scholarly work on flow comes
from western-educated, industrialised, rich, democratic (WEIRD) contexts, continued investigation outside
these contexts is revealing that the core features of the experience are widespread, present across cultural
contexts and perhaps throughout history as well. Descriptions of states similar/indistinguishable to flow
have been reported outside WEIRD contexts while engaged in activities as diverse as reading religious texts
(Han, 1988), riding motorcycles in a Japanese parade (Sato, 1988), herding sheep on horseback, rug-
weaving, or gardening (Csikszentmihalyi & Asakawa, 2016). Eastern philosophical doctrines such as the
Bhagavad Gita and writings of Taoist master Chuang Tzu discuss concepts that bear a striking resemblance
to flow (Csikszentmihalyi & Asakawa, 2016).
Entering a flow state requires striking a balance between ‘perceived action capacities’ or skill, and
‘perceived action opportunities’ or challenge (Fig. 1; Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1990). The balance is not
static, but rather unfolds dynamically over the course of an activity by applying effort to a series of small
and just-manageable goals, processing feedback about progress, and adjusting action according to the
feedback (van der Linden, Tops & Bakker, 2021). The goals provide benchmarks for feedback
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1990). Imbalance leads to two types of psychological perturbation. If challenge
outweighs skill, the resulting psychological experience can be frustration or anxiety because we realise that
we cannot meet the requirements of the task (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). If, on the other hand, skill outweighs
challenge, the resulting psychological experience can be boredom (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). However, it is
important to be aware that boredom occurs not only when challenges are too simple, but also when they are
too hard since in both cases the individual fails to engage with the task (Danckert & Eastwood, 2020).
Harmony with the activity and a feeling of control are important for deriving satisfaction from the activity
and thus to achieving the flow state.
While we and others conceptualise flow as a state that unfolds over the course of a bout of activity, the
dynamic interplay between skill and challenge can also unfold over an ontogenetic timescale. When skill
increases across ontogeny the individual gradually develops mastery within the given domain of challenge.
While flow experiences are thought to facilitate and accelerate mastery, it remains in question whether they
are necessary to achieve it.
So far, studies on flow have all been conducted with human subjects; to our knowledge no empirical data on
flow in non-human animals exist. Here we propose translating the concept of flow to non-human animals (a)
to explore flow from a broader perspective than just the human one and (b) to provide another approach to
improve animal welfare. We start by describing how the study of flow in non-human animals may be a
quantum leap forward for both positive psychology and positive animal welfare and how it is related to other
concepts in animal research, namely play, curiosity, agency and competence, effectiveness,
contrafreeloading and the Eureka moment. We continue by describing methodological approaches to assess
flow. To this end, we first characterise flow in humans as a basis to identify which of these characteristics
have the potential to be applied to non-human animals. We suggest how to study the concept of flow in
animals by differentiating between flow induction and flow assessment. Both components are presented
with practical considerations and a discussion of their potential risks and benefits.
Fig. 1. Matching challenge and skill to achieve flow. Adapted from Csikszentmihalyi (1975, 1990).
II. WHY STUDY FLOW IN NON-HUMAN ANIMALS?
(1) Methodological advantages for the study of flow in non-human animals
Studies of flow in humans have mostly relied on self-report including the Flow
Questionnaire, the Experience Sampling Method as well as scales capturing flow as a
multidimensional state–trait variable (reviewed in Moneta, 2012). While self-report has clear
advantages, there are also several limitations, e.g. report biases (Fisher, 1993) or the
differentiation from other constructs such as motivation or mindfulness (e.g. van der Linden
et al., 2021; Reid, 2011). If we aim to investigate flow in the animal kingdom, different
methodological approaches, i.e. on a behavioural, physiological, neural or cognitive level,
will be required. These approaches may not only enable us to study flow in non-human
animals but may also broaden our understanding of the concept by looking at it from different
perspectives. Moreover, the methodological approaches used to study flow in animals may
also be translated back to humans, which may stimulate research on the convergent validity
of the methods used so far, i.e. whether and to what extent commonly used indicators are
related to the new indicators intended to measure the same construct, namely flow. Thus,
studying flow in non-human animals will not only provide deeper knowledge on intrinsic
motivation drawn from a broader range of species, but will also advance the methodological
study of flow in humans.
(2) Advancing the field of positive animal welfare
The desire to study flow in non-human animals derives also from a desire to improve their
lives. Until the beginning of this millennium, animal welfare science has predominantly
focused on how to avoid and assess negative experiences including stress and pain. More
recently, the study of positive experiences has gained momentum (Mellor, 2012; Rault et al.,
2020; Yeates & Main, 2008), reflecting society’s expectations of how we should keep and
treat animals (Rault et al., 2020; Vigors, 2019). The unique focus of positive welfare research
can be characterised by a desire to describe the conditions under which animals thrive, not
simply survive.
While the vast literature on motivation deals with extrinsic goals, research on intrinsic
motivation in non-human animals is almost completely lacking. Considering the fundamental
role intrinsic motivation has been shown to play in creating subjective well-being (Cantor &
Sanderson, 1999; Diener, 2000; Diener et al., 1999), happiness (Diener, 2000; Diener et al.,
1999), and a life worth living (Csikszentmihalyi, 2006) in humans, it may be fair to say that
these topics have yet to be truly and systematically investigated in non-human animals. While
scholarship on effectiveness (e.g. Franks & Higgins, 2012), agency (e.g. Špinka, 2019;
Špinka & Wemelsfelder, 2018) and competence (e.g. White, 1959) indicate an interest in
understanding and providing positive animal welfare, the near-complete abstention from
acknowledging the potential for intrinsic motivation in animals has left the field in a state of
arrested development. Introducing the concept of flow to non-human animals may add a
promising novel layer to the emerging field of positive animal welfare.
III. INTEGRATING THE CONCEPT OF FLOW INTO THE ARCHIPELAGO OF
RELATED CONCEPTS IN ANIMAL RESEARCH
The concept of flow stems from the psychology of human well-being and flourishing. For
clarity, we refer to flow as the state one enters during an autotelic activity that offers repeated
opportunities for skill and challenge to come into balance . An autotelic experience is one in
which the subject having it feels intrinsically rewarded by having it and continues to do it in
the absence of extrinsic reward. Intrinsic motivation is the drive to engage in a set of actions
for their own sake rather than for the sake of an indirect gain. In animal welfare science, flow
has been mentioned by few authors (e.g. Arhant et al., 2020; Clark, 2011, 2017; Meehan &
Mench, 2007; Špinka, 2019), and empirical data do not exist. We do not claim that flow is an
isolated concept, but rather argue that it forms part of an archipelago of related themes that
have been studied theoretically and/or empirically in non-human animals and that link to the
concept of flow. Here we provide a brief overview of these related themes and conclude that
while there are many concepts relevant to the study of flow already discussed in the
literature, we propose that they are necessary but not sufficient for a full-blown flow
experience.
(1) Play
Play is likely the first activity which comes to mind when considering flow and both are often
linked in the literature as much of the seminal work on flow is set against a backdrop of play.
While they are undoubtedly linked, play refers to an activity while flow refers to the mind–
body state experienced when the activity takes on a certain dynamic (Fig. 1). More
importantly, however, we contend that both should remain conceptually distinct since play
does not necessarily lead to flow and flow can be induced by activities other than play.
Although it is widely accepted that play is enjoyable in both human (Burghardt, 2010; Harris,
1978) and non-human animals [Held & Špinka, 2011; Vanderschuren, 2010, but see Blois-
Heulin et al. (2015) for a different opinion on adult play], this enjoyment can arise through
mechanisms independent of flow. For example, play can be enjoyable because of the social
component many games have or because one feels comfortable with the rules and just wants
to focus on something other than daily routine. Furthermore, a prerequisite hallmark of flow
– being consistently challenged – is not necessary to enjoy playing. Conversely, flow can
emerge through activities other than those typically categorised as ‘play’, such as solving
maths problems, reading, or performing surgery. Thus, both play and flow may precipitate
each other, but neither is absolutely necessary for the other to be invoked. While both often
work together in the course of daily life, we believe there is utility in keeping the terms
conceptually distinct.
(2) Curiosity
As with any wide-ranging concept, there is no universal definition of curiosity but rather a
variety of definitions with different emphases and an associated taxonomy of curiosity-
related topics, including exploration, reinforcement learning, latent learning, and play (Kidd
& Hayden, 2015). Different descriptions of curiosity, including to explore for the sake of
exploring (Kashdan et al., 2018) and to reduce a perceived gap in knowledge (Loewenstein,
1994), emphasise a core information-seeking element to curiosity. A common thread linking
curiosity and flow is that both are often described as arising out of intrinsic motivation.
However, whereas curiosity is a basic motivational state, flow is the state that results from
motivations that have been continuously and iteratively satisfied. Their close conceptual
relationship makes it plausible that they frequently play important roles in regulating each
other. In support of this, curiosity has been shown to trigger and maintain a flow state in
humans (Lavoie & Main, 2022; Schutte, 2020).
(3) Agency and competence
There is no doubt that agency (Welzel & Inglehart, 2010) and autonomy (Baluku, Kikooma
& Otto, 2018; Holliman, Revill-Keen & Waldeck, 2020) are relevant for human well-being.
While philosophers still debate whether or not animals are agents (Jamieson, 2018; Steward,
2009), animal welfare scientists have begun to consider the concept (Rault et al., 2020;
Špinka, 2019; Špinka & Wemelsfelder, 2018). In this context, agency is defined as active
engagement with the environment whose aim is to gather knowledge and build competencies
to prepare for novel challenges in the future (Špinka & Wemelsfelder, 2011, 2018). As such,
agency is very close related to the concept of curiosity.
One difference between agency and flow is that entering a flow state requires a balance
between skill and challenge whereas a sense of agency can be obtained regardless of
challenge level. For example, provision of rooting material or other enrichment in animals’
housing environments, if frequently provided and regularly changed, may enhance a sense of
agency, but will only induce flow if the use of the enrichment is linked with challenge
matched to skill level as in the case of some cognitive enrichment items designed for
primates (Gray et al., 2018). This difference also holds true for competence. Only if an
animal can apply their competence to a challenging activity that matches their competence
can they access a flow state. Agency and competence are often viewed as means to cope with
negative situations in a more resilient manner, e.g. to be better prepared for stressful
situations like regrouping, transport for slaughter, etc. Complementarily, we propose
enhancing agency and competence so that animals can master a challenging but intrinsically
rewarding task. Exercising agency and thus building competences or skills are a precondition
for experiencing flow, necessary but not sufficient. We argue that flow is something more
than expressing agency – it is developing and applying increasing competences to increasing
challenges in a manner that feels effortless.
(4) Effectiveness
Effectiveness is an approach to the study of motivation asserting that humans and other
animals aim to be successful in three domains (Franks & Higgins, 2012): achieving desirable
outcomes (value effectiveness), developing a firm grasp on reality (truth effectiveness) and
having a sense of control over outcomes (control effectiveness). Like flow, effectiveness is
not an isolated concept. Agency (see Section III.3) and contrafreeloading (see Section III.5),
for example, are means to achieve both truth and control effectiveness. Similar to flow,
challenges are crucial since they facilitate engaging in effectiveness as long as they are not
too frequent, unpredictable or unmanageable (Franks, 2012). The relevance of challenge is
thus a commonality for both the concept of flow and effectiveness. In addition, both flow and
effectiveness share an emphasis on process (Franks, 2012). However, the difference between
the two hinges on the idea that, for effectiveness the focus is still on what is achieved, i.e. a
desired outcome, whereas for flow the focus is on the activity itself independent of the final
outcome or end product resulting from having performed the activity. Further research into
both concepts may shed light on the extent to which the desired outcomes of effectiveness,
truth and control, are related to the intrinsic motivation to engage in an activity for its own
sake.
(5) Contrafreeloading
Contrafreeloading refers to phenomena in which an animal is willing to work for food or
other resources when the same resource is freely available (Inglis, Forkman & Lazarus, 1997;
Osborne, 1977). It has been the subject of decades of research and has been described in a
range of different species including animals housed in zoos [e.g. grizzly bears (Ursus arctos
horribilis, McGowan et al., 2010) and maned wolves (Chrysocyon brachyurus, da Silva
Vasconcellos, Adania & Ades, 2012)], in laboratories (e.g. rats; Jensen, 1963) or on farms
[e.g. pigs (Sus scrofa, de Jonge et al., 2008) and cattle (Bos taurus taurus, Van Os et al.,
2018)]. For animals living in changing environments, the functional advantage of
contrafreeloading is to gather information for the future (Inglis et al., 1997), stressing the link
with effectiveness and competence resulting from agency.
The phenomenon of contrafreeloading includes an important aspect of flow, namely
developing resistance to distraction, or in this case ignoring the freely available resource.
However, we do not necessarily view all contrafreeloading phenomena as flow-inducing
since in some contexts the effort to achieve access to the resource leads to rote repetition of
the same behaviour (e.g. bar pressing in rats; Jensen, 1963) or exploration (e.g. foraging for
food in pigs; de Jonge et al., 2008) rather than mastering a challenge. Nevertheless, studies
on contrafreeloading may generate ideas for how to construct special devices that allow the
degree of challenge to be systematically modulated according to the changing
competence/mastery of the individual and thus to enter a flow state.
(6) Eureka or Aha! moment
The Eureka or Aha! moment refers to the experience of suddenly and unexpectedly arriving
at a solution to a previously intractable problem. In contrast to a more deliberate course of
problem-solving, it is accompanied by “a sense of surprise and a burst of positive emotions
spanning from satisfaction to euphoria” (Sprugnoli et al., 2017, p. 101). Due to its
unpredictable nature, studying the Eureka moment is challenging, but first attempts have
been made to identify behavioural and physiological signatures in non-human animals. In a
yoked control experiment, Hagen & Broom (2004) found that heifers who learned to press a
panel to obtain access to a food reward had higher heart rates and tended to show more
vigorous behaviour at the very moment in which they learned the contingency. This finding
was interpreted as a first indication of an emotional reaction to the heifers’ own learning
performance. It was only a decade later that Broom (2015) used the term Eureka effect when
referring to this study. McGowan et al. (2014) aimed to identify the Eureka moment in dogs
trained on a problem-solving task, again using a yoked control experiment. They found
behavioural signs of excitement, e.g. increased tail-wagging, in the experimental dogs that
could control their access to rewards but not in control dogs.
The primary difference between the Eureka moment and flow is that they occur on different
timescales. Whereas the Eureka moment is an instant of realisation of how something works,
flow is a longer-lasting state of mastering a challenge and enjoying the process of doing so.
However, both have in common that the subject needs to realise the connection between their
behaviour and the consequent outcome. We speculate that flow might thus be accompanied
by a series of ‘Eureka micro-moments’, one for every different level of challenge, which are
necessary for experiencing flow. We propose that achieving a full-blown flow state requires
(at least) one Eureka moment for every new challenge that needs to be overcome, and
therefore many Eureka moments for the final flow state to be achieved.
IV. TOWARDS THE STUDY OF FLOW IN NON-HUMAN ANIMALS
Research on flow in humans has always relied on self-report, mainly using the Flow
Questionnaire, the Experience Sampling Method, and standardised scales that emphasise
various aspects of flow (Moneta, 2012). While research relying on self-report has advantages,
not the least of which are convenience and feasibility, it also has drawbacks, such as report
biases (Fisher, 1993). We propose that the study of flow in animals should be approached
similarly, namely with an expectation of both advantages and limitations. At least at the start,
many of the subjective, experiential aspects of flow in humans will not be accessible to
investigation in animals. For example, the subjective feelings of heightened control and
effortlessness reported by humans in flow (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1990) seem empirically
out of reach at present. However, we believe such limitations should not preclude the study of
flow in animals altogether. Stimulating research on flow in animals can only deepen our
overall understanding of the concept with the hope of using it to improve positive animal
welfare science.
A large body of work in humans has led to a crystallised understanding of what it takes, vis-
a-vis both the individual and the activity, to achieve flow: (i) a balance between the
individual’s skill and the degree of challenge or difficulty provided by the activity; (ii) clear
goals while performing the activity such that the individual knows exactly what to do; and
(iii) immediate feedback to allow ongoing monitoring of performance (Csikszentmihalyi,
1975, 1990; van der Linden et al., 2021). These characteristics can be thought of as
preconditions for a flow experience. In addition, researchers have identified a consistent set
of subjective, experiential aspects that characterise the phenomenology or outcomes of a flow
activity such that the surrounding world seems to fade to the background; (ii) merging of
action and awareness such that there is a sense of perceived automaticity; (iii) loss of
awareness of the self in that everyday worries and fears vanish; (iv) a sense of control and
competence such that the demands of the task must be within reach but not totally predictive
of the outcome (i.e. a ‘stretch goal’); (v) a distortion of time in which time seems to pass
faster than normal (but be aware that also the opposite might be true in that time seems to
stand still); (vi) a feeling that one’s action is effortless; and (vii) a sense of intrinsic reward in
which the end goal is only an excuse for engaging in the process (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975,
1990; Csikszentmihalyi, Abuhamdeh & Nakamura, 2014; van der Linden et al., 2021).
We propose that these characteristics can be classified according to two categories. The first
is flow induction, i.e. how to induce a state of flow; the second is flow assessment, i.e. how to
detect and assess a flow experience. Below we discuss both flow induction and flow
assessment based on the flow characteristics described for humans and propose approaches to
Flow characteristic 1 Description Precondition Relevant for flow Translatable to Additional considerations for translating to
or induction or flow non-human non-human animals
outcome2? assessment? animals?
Match between skill and Challenge must fit to the Precondition Flow induction Yes Consider the ecological niche of the species as
challenge individual’s skills and must well as breed and individual differences.
dynamically adapt to improved
skills due to repetition of the
task; one can make full use of
whatever skills are required.
Well-defined goals One knows what has to be done; Precondition Flow induction Yes Define intermediate goals and consider the size
goals provide benchmark for and speed of each step to reach the intermediate
feedback. goals.
Clear and immediate Ongoing monitoring of Precondition Flow induction Yes Consider the feedback you want to give and how
feedback on progress performance and evaluation of to give it promptly throughout the activity.
feedback (not necessarily
conscious).
Heightened focus and Intense and focused Precondition Flow assessment Yes Assess resistance to distraction: ability to ignore
concentration concentration on the present and outcome increasingly attractive distractors (e.g. strange
activity; attention is intensively noises, moving objects, food rewards) will
focused on a limited stimulus indicate the likelihood to which the individual is
field. in flow. Beware of different concepts where the
individual is also resistant to distraction,
including obsession, addiction and stereotypic
animal behaviour.
Merging of action and Some aspects of the activity are Precondition Flow assessment Not yet; self-
awareness performed in an automatic way; and outcome report required
one is aware of the action but not
of the awareness itself.
Reduced self-reflection One is not preoccupied with Outcome Flow assessment Not yet; self-
and absence of worrying thinking about oneself; levels of report required
thinking about oneself, and thus
worrying, are low.
Heightened sense of Understanding how one’s Outcome Flow assessment Not yet; self-
control and competence behaviour affects the situation. report required
No worry about lack of control.
Distorted sense of time During flow time seems to stand Outcome Flow assessment Yes Assess time distortion by applying a Temporal
still, but post-hoc it seemed to Bisection Task or Peak Procedure. Consider that
fly. flow leads to a sense of ‘time flying by’ but also
‘time standing still’ and that it is unknown how
long the time distortion lasts when tested after
the flow experience has ended.
Effortlessness Perceived mental effort is low Outcome Flow assessment Not yet; self-
while objective effort may be report required
high.
Sense of intrinsic reward Activity is performed for its own Outcome Flow assessment Not yet; self-
sake; no external reward needed; reporting
intrinsic motivation. required
371 1Based on Csikszentmihalyi (1975, 1990), van der Linden et al. (2021) and Harris et al. (2017).
372 2 We chose the term outcome here for the sake of simplicity. This term refers either to the phenomenology of flow or to the outcome this experience leads to.
(1) Flow induction
A critical factor in inducing flow is finding the right balance between the skills and abilities
of a subject and the challenge of the task they are faced with (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1990).
Striking this balance is the prerequisite to enter a flow state. If the task is too trivial, a subject
is likely to lose focus and to become bored. If, on the other hand, it is too difficult, it may
cause anxiety or frustration and, if the subject does not manage to engage with the task, they
may become bored as well. The level of the task needs to be constantly adapted to the
subject’s skills that are likely to improve through repetition of the task. In other words,
“challenge and skill chase each other” (Špinka & Wemelsfelder, 2018, p. 45), rendering the
task highly dynamic and emphasising the importance of tailoring it to the individual.
Adapting the challenge to the individual is relevant for both choosing the initial degree of
task difficulty as well as the speed and degree to which the challenge is adapted from one
level to the next to match skill level, i.e. whether the animal advances in quick or slow steps
or in small or large steps. It is important to note, however, that the tuning of challenge and
skill level for the purpose of striking a precise balance between the two is likely to be
dependent on the context of the flow-induction experiment, determined by factors relating to
the animal, the activity, or the animal’s performance of the activity.
The range of flow-inducing activities in humans is large, including a variety of sports
(Schattke et al., 2014), chess (Tozman et al., 2017), performing surgery (Mulligan, 2016),
playing music (Chirico et al., 2015) or even reading a book (Thissen, Menninghaus &
Schlotz, 2018). If we consider non-human animals with very different sensory and perceptual
capacities, the variety of activities that induce flow will probably be even larger. Certain
characteristics of the species need to be considered, e.g. their cognitive abilities, whether they
are relatively neophilic or neophobic, whether they are a prey or predator species, and
whether they are eager to be physically active or not. In humans, flow-inducing situations
span from physically and cognitively demanding activities, e.g. rock climbing, to mostly
cognitively demanding situations, e.g. chess playing or reading, depending on individual
preferences and skills. It has been shown that scales differentiating between internal flow-
inducing tasks (e.g. thinking) and external flow-inducing tasks (e.g. playing sports) are highly
correlated but still separate constructs as a model treating them as separate fitted the data
significantly better than a model treating them as one construct (Marty-Dugas & Smilek,
2019). Some species or individuals may require both cognitive and physical challenge to be
induced into a flow state whereas others may be able (or better able) to achieve this solely
through cognitive challenge. It is thus relevant to consider the level of physical activity when
designing a flow-inducing task. It is also relevant to consider that the boundary between
physical and cognitive challenge is a fuzzy one, especially as we compare across species with
divergent abilities. Activities (e.g. running in place) considered mostly physical for one
species (e.g. humans) may offer enough of a cognitive component for other species (e.g.
mice) that they become elective and thus intrinsically motivated (Meijer & Robbers, 2014). It
remains to be seen whether such activities are additionally capable of inducing (full-blown)
flow states in these species.
Decisions should be based on considerations of the species (e.g. rhinos may have a different
physical activity profile than monkeys), breeds within one species (e.g. mastiffs versus
poodles), age (e.g. adult cows versus calves) and the individual per se (Dog A versus Dog B).
While individual preferences and differences are paramount to induce flow, the central design
principles of potential flow-inducing tasks should be derived by considering the species’
ecological niche and the challenges they face in it. In the case of cooperative hunters, e.g.
wolves, wild dogs or some marine mammals, simulation of cooperative hunts may be
promising to induce flow. For example, zoos moving artificial prey on a rope to induce
hunting and thus to keep their animals active may vary the challenge of hunting the ‘prey’,
e.g. by changing its speed, rendering its moves unpredictable, and so on. However, since
cooperative hunting is a group activity, it cannot be adapted to one single individual, and one
may thus induce flow in one or a few but not necessarily in all animals of a group. A similar
approach could be applied to herding dogs, albeit in an individual setting. One proposal for
such an approach would involve simulating the herding experience on a computer touch
screen in which the dog ‘herds’ moving dots by tapping the screen in different locations.
Comparable to the example of the cooperative hunters, the difficulty of the task can be
modulated by increasing the number of dots, the speed and complexity with which the dots
move or the initial degree of dispersal. The degree of challenge can be augmented by simply
modulating one parameter, e.g. increasing the speed of dot movement, or by introducing
additional challenges, e.g. allowing single dots to ‘react’ differently thus requiring the dog to
split its attention to be successful. Ideally, the task records the performance of the subject,
gives them immediate feedback and automatically adapts to their progress by increasing the
complexity of the task.
In species that neither hunt nor herd flow needs to be induced differently. For pigs, an
intensively farmed species, we suggest a task based on odours considering the highly
developed olfactory capabilities of this species. For example, one could use a modified hole-
board (e.g. Roelofs, Nordquist & van der Staay, 2017), where a naturally rewarding odour,
e.g. from truffles or acorns, originates from one of the holes. The pig then needs to use the
gradient of the odour to locate the source. Once they have poked their snout through the
target hole (the target behavioural response), an odour emanates from a different hole
effectively presenting the pig with their next challenge. The task resembles the Japanese
‘Whac-A-Mole’ game where a human needs to hit a mole popping out of one of several holes
with a hammer. Once the mole has been hit, another mole appears from a different hole,
which now must be hit. For pigs, the difficulty of the task could be adapted by increasing the
distance between consecutive scented holes, the strength of the odour, other odours used to
distract from the target, etc. The advantage of using scent would be that they are naturally
appetitive but do not allow a consummatory phase, thus avoiding the classical properties of
extrinsic motivation. However, the volatile nature of odours makes them hard to control and
presents practical challenges. Alternatively, the principle of the proposed task set-up could be
used with other stimuli such as sounds or flashing lights instead of odours.
Considering pigs and other farmed animals, most of them are young, often even prepubertal.
Thus, their developmental stage, including their cognitive development, needs to be taken
into account when aiming to induce flow in farmed animals. However, from humans we
know that children experience flow, for example when playing games (Inal & Cagiltay, 2007;
Mesurado & Richaud de Minzi, 2014), indicating that experiencing flow plays a role in
young individuals too. ‘Playgrounds’ with a variety of tasks to address the dispositions of
different individuals and with different challenge levels to address different skill levels
among individuals, may be a way forward to induce flow in farmed and other young captive
animals.
Besides the importance of regarding a species’ ecological niche when thinking about the type
and quality of flow-inducing activities, it is also important to consider that species may differ
quantitatively in how important flow is for them. We thus need to recognise that the
motivation to experience flow, the rewarding value of it and hence the potential that flow has
to promote positive welfare may vary across species and individuals.
(a) Environmental enrichment and flow induction
The use of environmental enrichment to improve animal welfare in captive species has a long
tradition and has consequently received much research attention (Young, 2003). Whereas
most enrichment is aimed at providing captive animals with the opportunity to express
natural behaviour, its potential to stimulate animals cognitively has also been investigated
(Clark, 2017). We believe that enrichment that fulfils the criteria for flow induction, as
described above, has great potential to induce flow in captive animals. For example, the
above-mentioned playgrounds can be seen as a kind of enrichment, too. However, whereas
approaching flow induction from the standpoint of upgrading existing enrichment may lead
to important insights regarding flow in animals, it may be additionally necessary to advance
the field by taking a different point of departure, one that begins by reflecting on what may
induce flow in a specific species or clade.
(b) Chronic stress
Animals in captivity are exposed to various sources of stress (Morgan & Tromborg, 2007).
This raises the question whether and how stress impacts on a subject’s ability to achieve a
flow state. From humans we know that intermediate arousal levels are optimal: heightened
arousal seems to enhance flow whereas too much arousal undermines it (Peifer et al., 2014;
Tozman et al., 2015). However, how chronic stress impacts on flow is less well known and
we can only speculate about this relationship in non-human animals. It is possible that
chronic stress inhibits the ability of an animal to achieve flow because they may not be able
or willing to focus fully on the flow-inducing task if other stimuli require their attention.
Moreover, chronic stress can lead to depression-like states including anhedonia (Stepanichev
et al., 2016), and an anhedonic subject may not be motivated to start engaging with the task.
However, entering a flow state may also provide a useful mechanism to cope with stressful
circumstances. Whether or not experiencing flow helps to cope with adverse conditions may
depend on the subject’s coping style. For example, a reactive individual with high levels of
behavioural flexibility (Koolhaas et al., 1999) may be better able to master progressively
more difficult challenges and enter a flow state to cope with stress, whereas a more proactive
individual with high levels of routine formation (Koolhaas et al., 1999) may experience
frustration using this strategy.
(c) Flow proneness and personality traits
In humans, flow proneness, i.e. the tendency to experience flow, has been shown to be
affected by personality traits. For example, it has been positively correlated with
extraversion, conscientiousness and playfulness and negatively correlated with neuroticism
and agreeableness [for playfulness (Ross & Keiser, 2014; Jin, 2012); for conscientiousness
and neuroticism (Ullén et al., 2012)]. In addition, the human literature has introduced the
concept of the autotelic personality to describe individuals who tend to seek out intrinsically
rewarding activities (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Psychometric tools have been developed to
operationalise autotelic personality and flow propensity, and recent work finds that positive
associations between autotelic personality and well-being are mediated by experiences of
flow (Tse, Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2020). However, the intensity of a flow
experience is less affected by characteristics of the person and more by the flow-inducing
situation (Kocjan & Avsec, 2017). To what extent flow tendency and intensity are affected by
individual differences in non-human animals remains a subject for future research.
Furthermore, when evaluating flow proneness in animals, one must consider the possibility of
rather large species differences. Flow may be a powerful avenue for enhancing welfare for
some species but not others.
(2) Flow assessment
To check whether flow has been successfully induced, we need to be able to identify it. As
with flow induction, we suggest deriving ways to assess flow from our understanding of flow
(but not limited to) loss of reflective self-consciousness, loss of sight of oneself,
effortlessness and a heightened sense of control and competence (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990;
van der Linden et al., 2021). Unfortunately, non-human animals cannot verbally express their
feelings or subjective experiences, making it impossible to study the characteristics of flow
experiences with most of the methodological approaches used in humans. However, two of
the characteristics to assess flow can be applied to non-human animals: resistance to external
distraction and time distortion.
(a) Resistance to distraction
We propose to measure the degree of engagement or absorption in an activity by introducing
a series of graded stimuli intended to distract the subject from performing the activity. The
ability to ignore increasingly attractive stimuli (e.g. strange noises, moving objects, food
rewards) will indicate the degree to which the individual is having an autotelic, intrinsically
rewarding experience – one of the characteristic outcomes of the flow state. Thus, we suggest
a novel test in which intrinsic motivation is measured by how difficult it is to stop the
individual from performing the task. Once the subject has demonstrated a willingness to
remain engaged, stimuli are introduced to test the degree of absorbed engagement in the task.
The stimuli increase in intensity throughout the course of the activity, starting from mild (e.g.
playback of sounds) and ranging to strong (e.g. food rewards).
(i) What to consider
Our proposal to operationalise flow by incorporating into its definition a resistance to
distraction forces us to consider other psychological states that may include a similar degree
of absorption in an activity, e.g. obsession, addiction and stereotypic behaviour. Below we
describe these different phenomena and how to differentiate between them, if possible.
The American Psychological Association defines an obsession as “recurrent and persistent
thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced as intrusive and unwanted” (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 235). Since one of the main goals of cultivating flow in
animals is to improve their affective wellbeing, cultivating it in a way that avoids obsession,
and the associated anxiety, distress or discomfort, is critical to its implementation for the
purposes of animal welfare. Whereas obsessions over thoughts, ideas or images, such as
irrational concerns over contamination, are not relevant to the current discussion, cultivation
of flow states in animals may well involve engendering strong impulses to perform certain
activities. Any activity that generates such strong impulses may develop into what social
psychologists call ‘passions’, defined as “a strong inclination toward an activity that people
like, that they find important, and in which they invest time and energy” (Vallerand et al.,
2003, p. 757). In their studies of passion, Vallerand et al. (2013) provide empirical evidence
for a dualistic conceptualisation of passion into ‘harmonious passion’ and ‘obsessive
passion’. Although they define these concepts largely by the way the passion is internalised
into the subject’s identity, something that is either irrelevant or unobtainable in non-human
animals, features of the distinction may yet provide useful guidance. Harmonious passions
are ones in which the subject is in control and engagement in the activity is flexible, leading
to minimal conflict between the passionate activity and other activities in the subject’s life.
By contrast, obsessive passions are ones in which an internal compulsion leads the subject to
engage in the activity even when they should not, thus causing conflict between the
passionate activity and other important activities. Therefore, in attempting to cultivate flow in
animals for the purpose of improving welfare, care should be taken to avoid achieving a
degree of resistance to distraction that ultimately renders the animal obsessively passionate
and incapable of engaging in other important daily activities. For example, while ignoring a
tasty treat in an otherwise well-fed dog may be a good indicator of flow, refusal to eat normal
meals may indicate a dog that has developed an obsessive passion.
Another state capable of engendering a degree of absorption resistant to distraction is
addiction. Addiction is the most severe form of substance-use disorder and is described as a
state of uncontrolled psychological or physical dependence (or both) on a chemical substance
or behaviour despite harmful consequences or impairment of daily life function (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). While aspects concerning dependence on a chemical
substance are irrelevant to this discussion, the term is also commonly applied to behavioural
disorders such as sex, internet, or gambling addiction. The topic of online gaming has
challenged the conceptual boundary between the flow state and addiction. Online gaming has
experienced enormous growth in recent years and represents a sizable portion of economic
activity, with highly skilled players able to make lucrative careers out of their play. As an
activity, it lends itself extremely well to the cultivation of the flow state. The majority of
studies demonstrate a positive association between the degree of flow and addictive
tendencies in online gaming (Chou & Ting, 2003; Wu, Scott & Yang, 2013), as well as
physical activities like surfing (Partington, Partington & Olivier, 2009), and further show a
stronger positive association in the most skilled individuals. Thus, addiction is a valid
concern for any attempt to induce flow in animals. While flow-inducing provisions can be
removed more easily from animals than from humans who are more capable of providing it
for themselves, denied access to a desired provision is aversive and should not be taken
lightly if an addiction starts to develop.
Another behavioural concern involving resistance to distractibility is stereotypic animal
behaviour (SAB). SAB is well studied in captive animals and is typically seen as an animal
welfare concern (Mason & Latham, 2004), even though the various proposed mechanisms
underlying this behavioural disorder are associated with different types of concerns (Mason,
2006; Würbel, 2006; Würbel, Bergeron & Cabib, 2006). Once established, SAB is difficult to
interrupt and discourage (Mason, 1991). It becomes resistant to distractors, posing the
question what differentiates SAB from behaviour performed when in flow. In contrast to
obsession and addiction that have been shown to be associated with the experience of flow in
humans, SAB and flow differ fundamentally in both the characteristics of the performed
behaviour and the context in which they develop. Whereas SAB is, by definition, repetitive
and invariant (reviewed by Mason, 1991), behaviour performed during a flow state needs to
be highly flexible to adapt to the progressively evolving challenges. Moreover, the context in
which animals develop stereotypic behaviours differs greatly from the context that elicits a
flow state. SAB usually starts to develop when the animal is prevented from performing
highly motivated appetitive and/or consummatory behaviour (Clubb, Vickery & Latham,
2006). By contrast, a flow-inducing context allows the subject to have control over the
situation, is challenging and flexibly adapts to the subject’s advancing skill. In short, SAB
develops in contexts of deprivation while flow develops in contexts that offer opportunities
for skill enrichment.
In sharing resistance to distraction, flow can be both conceptually and practically difficult to
distinguish from obsession, addiction, and stereotypy. Differentiating them involves invoking
a functionalist perspective that examines how the activity impacts the overall well-being and
quality of life of the individual. While typically discussed in a positive context, work on the
“dark side” of flow (Partington et al., 2009) or “dark flow” (Dixon et al., 2018) has
recognised the potential negative impact the cultivation of flow states can also have. Indeed,
formative discourse on flow recognised that, “the self becomes captive of a certain kind of
order and is then unwilling to cope with the ambiguities of life’’ (Csikszentmihalyi, 2002, p.
62). In this way, engaging in flow-inducing activity can lead to neglect of essential life-
sustaining activities. Thus, animal caretakers attempting to cultivate flow states should
carefully monitor behaviour for notable changes that may indicate a collapse into dark flow.
(c) Distortion of time
Altered time perception is one of the key characteristics of a flow experience
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1990; van der Linden et al., 2021). We tend to judge time as
passing more quickly or as ‘flying by’ when we experience flow (Christandl, Mierke &
Peifer, 2018; Conti, 2001), and we tend to judge time as passing more slowly or ‘dragging’
when we are bored (Fahlman et al., 2013; Watt, 1991). In humans, time distortion is typically
assessed by interviewing the study subjects about how quickly time seemed to pass while
being in flow (passage of time judgement; Jones 2019) or, more specifically, by asking them
to judge how much time has elapsed from the beginning to the end of their flow experience.
As this methodological approach relies on verbal communication, it cannot be used in the
study of non-human animals, but other approaches to study time perception can overcome
this challenge.
Retrospective time perception can, for example, be investigated with the Temporal Bisection
Task, which has been translated from humans to non-human animals, including mice
(Akdoğan & Balci, 2016), rats (Church & Deluty, 1977) and dogs (Macpherson & Roberts,
2017). In this task, subjects are trained to associate a long stimulus, e.g. a long tone, with an
operant response, e.g. pressing the right lever, and to associate a shorter stimulus, e.g. a
shorter tone, with a different operant response, e.g. pressing the left lever. After subjects have
mastered the association, they are given tones of intermediate length thus presenting them
with a perceptual dilemma. Whether subjects go right or left therefore informs us about
whether they perceived the intermediate tone as long or short.
Prospective time perception can be assessed in non-human animals as well. In the Peak
Procedure, for example, subjects first learn to show an operant response (e.g. pressing a
button for food) to a conditioned stimulus (e.g. onset of a light or tone) only after the stimulus
has been on for a specified interval (e.g. 30 s) (Meck, 1996). In fixed-interval trials, subjects
receive reinforcement (i.e. food) only when they press the button after the specified interval
has elapsed. Then, during probe trials, the duration of the signal is extended (e.g. up to 90 s)
without reinforcement allowing the experimenter to observe the gradual increase in response
rate as it reaches a maximum at the time when the subject expects reinforcement. This reveals
their perceived sense of time and is referred to as the peak time. The aim of the task is
essentially to ask the subjects, “Tell me when 30 seconds are over” and has been translated to
pigeons (Aum, Brown & Hemmes, 2004), mice (Balci et al., 2008) and rats (Kaiser, 2008).
(i) What to consider
As for reduced distractibility, the limitations of time distortion as an indicator of flow need to
be discussed. Unfortunately, even though time during flow is usually compressed, i.e. flies
by, the opposite is also possible: “Intense attention to detail […] can also make time feel as
though it is standing still” (Danckert & Eastwood, 2020, p. 174). The fact that the
relationship between a flow experience and time distortion can go in both directions is less of
a problem in human studies since the expansion of time during flow has different qualities:
liberation from time during flow compared to time dragging when bored (Danckert &
Eastwood, 2020). This difference in quality can be easily assessed in humans but may render
the interpretation of the results from time-perception tasks such as the Temporal Bisection
Task and the Peak Procedure challenging. However, it has been suggested that time stands
still during the flow experience whereas afterwards it feels like it has been flying by
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990); as the proposed time-perception tasks would only be performed
after a flow experience, we would expect animals to respond as if time was flying by as
hypothesised above.
Unfortunately, the assessment of time distortion once a flow experience has elapsed is
challenging since it is unclear for how long the effect lasts. Whereas we can ask humans how
they perceived the time during their flow experience retrospectively, the proposals outlined
above rely on the flow experience producing a lasting effect that does not vanish with the
start of the subsequent testing procedure in non-human animals. However, to date this
limitation is due to a lack of research rather than a conceptual hurdle and we are thus
optimistic to gather insights into the duration of time distortion in the future.
(3) Identifying the behavioural, physiological and neurophysiological signature of flow
Once flow-like states in non-human animals have been validated by measures of
distractibility and time distortion, this opens the possibility to explore other correlates less
accessible to investigation, whether behavioural, physiological or neurophysiological.
Identifying correlates with strong discriminant validity could be used further to identify flow-
like states in animals in situations not conducive to measuring distractibility or time
distortion.
Flow assessments based on self-report play the largest role in human studies. Only a few
studies have explored behavioural correlates of flow experiences, mainly with children
involved in musical activities (Addessi, Ferrari & Carugati, 2015; Custodero, 2005). More
recently, the Flow Observational Grid has been developed and validated in people playing
video games (Tordet et al., 2021). The grid consists of the three dimensions concentration,
enjoyment and frustration, which are each rated on a scale from 0 to 3 (or 4) by the observers.
We suggest that such an approach could be easily applied to non-human animals, using, for
example, the methodology of Qualitative Behaviour Assessment (QBA), which is well
established in animal welfare science (Wemelsfelder et al., 2001). In QBA, the qualitative
expressions of an animal’s behaviour are described using adjectives (e.g. relaxed, frustrated)
and these expressions are then quantified using Visual Analogue Scales. This approach is
comparable with the Flow Observational Grid and thus offers a suitable starting point in the
search for behavioural correlates of flow in non-human animals. In addition, we suggest
detailed analysis of body postures and facial expressions, thereby not only focusing on
durations and frequencies, but also the simultaneous occurrence of postures (e.g. Hintze et
al., 2020) and their sequence over time (e.g. Asher et al., 2009).
Physiological correlates of flow have been explored in humans (Keller et al., 2011; Knierim
et al., 2018; de Manzano et al., 2010; Peifer et al., 2014) and may also be fruitful in animals
to identify physiological patterns indicative of flow-like states. In humans, flow seems to be
associated with a moderate co-activation of both parasympathetic and sympathetic branches
of the autonomic nervous system (de Manzano et al., 2010; Peifer et al., 2014; Tozman et al.,
2017). However, the relationship between flow and sympathetic arousal is U-shaped whereas
flow and parasympathetic activity are linearly and positively correlated (de Manzano et al.,
2010; Peifer et al., 2014). This supports the notions that (i) too much and too little
arousal/challenge inhibit flow, and (ii) perceptions of effortlessness thought to be associated
with parasympathetic activity increase with increasing flow. In line with the idea that co-
activation of both branches supports flow states, Arhant et al., (2020) found a strong positive
correlation between sympathetic (Heart Rate, HR) and parasympathetic (Root mean square of
successive RR interval differences, RMSSD) measures in dogs that were gradually
introduced to a game but a negative correlation in dogs that were hastily introduced to the
same game. The authors suggest that, unlike dogs that were hastily introduced to the game
and thus prone to frustration, dogs from the first group developed a better match between
challenge and skills and perhaps experienced a flow-like state, characterised by a similar
physiological signature as found previously in humans (Arhant et al., 2020). While further
research is necessary, co-activation of the autonomic nervous system branches may well
mediate the effort paradox widely discussed as a hallmark of human flow in which energetic
effort is high but perceived effort is lower than expected (Harris, Vine & Wilson, 2017).
Several studies conducted in humans have investigated the neurophysiological correlates of
flow. Relevant to using resistance to distraction as an assessment tool, flow has been
associated with neurophysiological indices that suggest improved top-down attentional
control, a prerequisite for the ability to ignore a distraction. Regions associated with the
multiple demand network, which regulate top-down attentional control, demonstrated greater
activation during flow states (Ulrich et al., 2014; Ulrich, Keller & Grön, 2016). Van der
Linden et al. (2021) propose further investigation into dopaminergic and noradrenergic
neuromodulatory systems as well as the salience, central executive, and default-mode resting-
state networks to provide neurobiological accounts for subjective aspects of the flow
experience, such as deciding whether to stay on task or move on to something else, shown to
be regulated by the noradrenergic system. Another study reported greater dopamine D2
receptor availability in individuals prone to flow states (de Manzano et al., 2013). Given that
greater D2 receptor availability has been associated with greater impulse control and
response inhibition, this property of dopaminergic regulation may mediate an individual’s
ability to ignore distractions during flow. Given the practical challenges of inducing flow in
animals in a neuroimaging setting, further investigation on the neurophysiological correlates
of flow in animals could follow the strategy of de Manzano et al. (2013) by studying animals
prone to experiencing flow in their daily lives.
Once the experience of flow has been validated, longer-lasting effects of flow states can be
investigated. From studies in humans we know that the experience of flow leads to positive
affect in the short term (Rogatko, 2009) and that it is correlated with high life satisfaction and
hedonic balance in the long term (Bassi et al., 2014). Flow may affect mood in non-human
animals too, which may be assessed in a Judgement Bias Task where more optimistic
subjects judge ambiguous stimuli more positively than pessimistic subjects (Harding, Paul &
Mendl, 2004).
V. CONCLUSIONS
(1) While a large part of human enjoyment occurs through engaging in intrinsically
rewarding activities, we have a limited understanding of intrinsic reward in non-human
animals and thus no way of systematically providing it. The time is ripe to translate the
concepts of flow and intrinsic motivation to non-human animals.
(2) Studying flow in non-human animals will advance methodological approaches to intrinsic
motivation beyond self-report, thereby advancing both the fields of positive human
psychology and positive animal welfare.
(3) While there are roadblocks and challenges to studying flow and intrinsic motivation in
non-human animals, observations scattered across the field of biology suggest these concepts
are not unique to humans.
(4) Focusing on a subset of operationalisable characteristics, namely resistance to distraction
and time distortion, provides an avenue to deepen investigations of positive well-being across
the animal kingdom.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Jean-Loup Rault for his valuable comments on an earlier version of
this review.
VII. REFERENCES
Addessi, A. R., Ferrari, L. & Carugati, F. (2015). The flow grid: a technique for observing
and measuring emotional state in children interacting with a flow machine. Journal of
New Music Research 44(2), 129–444.
Akdoğan, B. & Balci, F. (2016). Stimulus probability effects on temporal bisection
performance of mice (Mus musculus). Animal Cognition 19, 15–30.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Anxiety disorders. Diagnostic And Statistical
Manual Of Mental Disorders 5.
Arhant, C., Altrichter, B., Lehenbauer, S., Waiblinger, S., Schmied-Wagner, C. & Yee, J.
(2020). Balancing skill against difficulty - behavior, heart rate and heart rate variability
of shelter dogs during two different introductions of an interactive game. Applied
Animal Behaviour Science 232, 105141.
Asher, L., Collins, L. M., Ortiz-Pelaez, A., Drewe, J. A., Nicol, C. J. & Pfeiffer, D. U.
(2009). Recent advances in the analysis of behavioural organization and interpretation as
indicators of animal welfare. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6,1103–19.
Aum, S. W., Brown, B. L. & Hemmes, N. S. (2004). The effects of concurrent task and gap
events on peak time in the peak procedure. Behavioural Processes 65, 43–56.
Balci, F., Ludvig, E. A., Gibson, J. M., Allen, B. D., Frank, K. M., Kapustinski, B. J.,
Fedolak, T. E. & Brunner, D. (2008). Pharmacological manipulations of interval timing
using the peak procedure in male C3H mice. Psychopharmacology 201, 67–80.
Baluku, M. M., Kikooma, J. F. & Otto, K. (2018). Positive mindset and entrepreneurial
outcomes: the magical contributions of psychological resources and autonomy. Journal
of Small Business and Entrepreneurship 30(6), 473–98.
Bassi, M., Steca, P., Monzani, D., Greco, A. & Delle Fave, A. (2014). Personality and
optimal experience in adolescence: implications for well-being and development.
Journal of Happiness Studies 15, 829–43.
Bernardi, N. F., Bellemare-Pepin, A. & Peretz, I. (2018). Dancing to ‘groovy’ music
enhances the experience of flow. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1423,
415–26.
Blois-Heulin, C., Rochais, C., Camus, S., Fureix, C., Lemasson, A., Lunel, C., Bezard, E. &
Hausberger, M. (2015). Animal welfare: could adult play be a false friend? Animal
Behavior and Cognition 2(2), 156–85.
Broom, D. M. (2015). Sentience and pain in relation to animal welfare. Pp. 3–7 in
Proceedings of XVII International Congress on Animal Hygiene. Košice: International
Society for Animal Hygiene.
Burghardt, G. M. (2010). Defining and recognizing play. Pp. 10–18 in The Oxford Handbook
of the Development of Play, edited by Nathan, P. and Pellegrini, A. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Cantor, N. & Sanderson, C. A. (1999). Life task participation and well-being: the importance
of taking part in daily life. Pp. 230–43 in Well-being: The Foundations of Hedonic
Psychology, edited by Kahnemann, D., Diener, E., & Schwarz, N. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Chirico, A., Serino, S., Cipresso, P., Gaggioli, A. & Riva, G. (2015). When music ‘flows’.
state and trait in musical performance, composition and listening: a systematic review.
Frontiers in Psychology 6, Article 906.
Chou, TJ. & Ting, CC. (2003). The role of flow experience in cyber-game addiction.
CyberPsychology & Behavior 6(6), 663–75.
Christandl, F., Mierke, K. & Peifer, C. (2018). Time flows: manipulations of subjective time
progression affect recalled flow and performance in a subsequent task. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 74, 246–56.
Church, R. M. & Deluty, M. Z. (1977). Bisection of temporal intervals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes 3(3), 216–28.
Clark, F. E. (2011). Great ape cognition and captive care: can cognitive challenges enhance
well-being? Applied Animal Behaviour Science 135(1–2), 1–12.
Clark, F. E. (2017). Cognitive enrichment and welfare: current approaches and future
directions. Animal Behavior and Cognition 4(1), 52–71.
Clubb, R., Vickery, S. & Latham, N. (2006). Motivation and motivational explanations for
stereotypies. P. 12 in Stereotypic Animal Behaviour, edited by Mason, G. & Rushen, J.
Oxfordshire: CAB International.
Conti, R. (2001). Time flies: investigating the connection between intrinsic motivation and
the experience of time. Journal of Personality 69(1), 1–26.
Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel - now? the anterior insula and human awareness.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10, 59–70.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond Boredom and Anxiety: The Experience of Play in Work
and Games. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York:
Harper and Row.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). Flow: The Classic Work on How to Achieve Happiness.
London: Random House.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2006). Introduction. Pp. 3–14 in A life worth living, edited by
Csikszentmihalyi, M. & Csikszentmihalyi, I. S. New York: Oxford University Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., Abuhamdeh, S. & Nakamura, J. (2014). Flow. Pp. 227–38 in Flow and
the Foundations of Positive Psychology, edited by Csikszentmihalyi, M. Dordrecht:
Harcourt.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. & Asakawa, K. (2016). Universal and cultural dimensions of optimal
experiences. The Japanese Psychological Research 58(1), 4–13.
Custodero, L.A. (2005). Observable indicators of flow experience: a developmental
perspective on musical engagement in young children from infancy to school age.Music
Education Research 7(2), 185–209.
Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of
Consciousness. New York: Harcourt.
Danckert, J. & Eastwood. J. D. (2020). Just go with the flow. Pp. 164–86 in Out of my skull.
The psychology of boredom, edited by Danckert, J. & Eastwood, J. D. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Dashiell, J. F. (1925). A quantitative demonstration of animal drive. Journal of Comparative
Psychology 5(3), 205–8.
Deci, E. L. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 18(1), 105–15.
Deci, E. L. & Ryan, R. M. (2009). Intrinsic motivation. The Corsini Encyclopedia of
Psychology 1–2.
de Jonge, F. H., Tilly, S. L., Baars, A. M. & Spruijt, B. M. (2008). On the rewarding nature
of appetitive feeding behaviour in pigs (Sus Scrofa): Do domesticated pigs
contrafreeload? Applied Animal Behaviour Science 114, 359–72.
de Manzano, Ö., Cervenka, S., Jucaite, A., Hellenäs, O., Farde, L. & Ullén, S. (2013).
Individual differences in the proneness to have flow experiences are linked to dopamine
D2-receptor availability in the dorsal striatum. NeuroImage 67, 1–6..
de Manzano, Ö., Theorell, T., Harmat, L. & Ullén, F. (2010). The psychophysiology of flow
during piano playing. Emotion 10(3), 301–11.
Diener, E. (2000). Subjective well-being: the science of happiness and a proposal for a
national index. American Psychologist 55, 34–43.
Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E. & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective well-being: three
decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin 125(2), 276–302.
Dixon, M. J., Stange, M., Larche, C. J., Graydon, C., Fugelsang, J. A. & Harrigan, K. A.
(2018). Dark flow, depression and multiline slot machine play. Journal of Gambling
Studies 34, 73–84.
Fahlman, S. A., Mercer-Lynn, K. B., Flora, D. B. & Eastwood, J. D. (2013). Development
and validation of the multidimensional state boredom scale. Assessment 20(1), 68–85.
Fisher, R. (1993). Social desirability bias and the validity of indirect questioning. Journal of
Consumer Research 20, 303–15.
Franks, B. (2012). Engaging in effectiveness: highlighting the role of challenge in well-being
and welfare.
Franks, B. & Higgins, E. T. (2012). Effectiveness in humans and other animals: a common
basis for well-being and welfare. Pp. 285–346 in Advances in Eperimental Social
Psychology. Vol. 46, edited by Zanna, M. P., Devine, P., Olson, J. M. & Plant, A. San
Diego: Elsevier.
Freud, S. (1962). The Ego and the Id. New York: Norton.
Goldstein, R. Z., Craig, A. A., Bechara, A., Garavan, H., Childress, A. R., Paulus, M. P. &
Volkow, N. D. (2009). The neurocircuitry of impaired insight in drug addiction. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences 13(9), 372–80.
Gray, S., Clark, F., Burgess, K., Metcalfe, T., Kadijevic, A., Cater, K. & Bennett, P. (2018).
Gorilla game lab: exploring modularity, tangibility and playful engagement in cognitive
enrichment design. P. Article 6 in Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Animal-Computer Interaction.
Gruber, M. J., Gelman, B. D. & Ranganath, C. (2014). States of curiosity modulate
hippocampus-dependent learning via the dopaminergic circuit. Neuron 84, 486–96.
Hagen, K. & Broom D. M. (2004). Emotional reactions to learning in cattle. Applied Animal
Behaviour Science 85, 203–13.
Han, S. (1988). The relationship between life satisfaction and flow in elderly korean
immigrants. Pp. 138–49 in Optimal experience: psychological studies of flow in
consciousness, edited by Csikszentmihalyi, M. & Csikszentmihalyi, I. S. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Harding, E. J., Paul, E. S. & Mendl, M. (2004). Cognitive bias and affective state. Nature
427, 312.
Harris, D. J., Vine, S. J. & Wilson, M. R. (2017). Is flow really effortless? The complex role
of effortful attention. Sport, Exercise, and Performance Psychology 6(1), 103–14.
Harris, J. C. (1978). Play and enjoyment: perspectives and implications. Harris, JC 29(1),
60–72.
Held, S. D. E. & Špinka, M. (2011). Animal play and animal welfare. Animal Behaviour
81(5), 891–99.
Hintze, S., Maulbetsch, F., Asher, L. & Winckler, C. (2020). Doing nothing and what it looks
like: inactivity in fattening cattle. PeerJ 8, e9395.
Holliman, A. J., Revill-Keen, A. & Waldeck, D. (2020). University lecturers’ adaptability:
examining links with perceived autonomy support, organisational commitment, and
psychological wellbeing. Teaching Education.
Hull, C. L. (1943). Principles of Behavior: An Introduction to Behavior Theory. New York:
Appleton Century Company.
Inal, Y., & Cagiltay, K. (2007). Flow experiences of children in an interactive social game
environment. British Journal of Educational Technology 38(3), 455–64.
Inglis, I. R., Forkman, B. & Lazarus, J. (1997). Free food or earned food? A review and fuzzy
model of contrafreeloading. Animal Behaviour 53(6), 1171–91.
Jamieson, D. (2018). Animal agency. The Harvard Review of Philosophy 25, 111–26.
Jensen, G.D. (1963). Preference for bar pressing over ‘freeloading’ as a function of number
of rewarded presses. Journal of Experimental Psychology 65(5)451–54.
Jin, S. A. A. (2012). Toward integrative models of flow: effects of performance, skill,
challenge, playfulness, and presence on flow in video games. Journal of Broadcasting
and Electronic Media 56(2), 169–86.
Jones, L. A. (2019). The perception of duration and the judgment of the passage of time.
philosophical and psychological essays on timing and time perception. Pp. 53–67 in The
Illusions of Time, edited by Arstila, V., Bardon, A., Power, S.E. & Vatakis. A. Cham:
Soringer Nature Switzerland AG.
Kaiser, D. H. (2008). The proportion of fixed interval trials to probe trials affects acquisition
of the peak procedure fixed interval timing task. Behavioural Processes 77, 100–108.
Kang, M. J., Hsu, M., Krajbich, I. M., Loewenstein, G., McClure, S. M., Tao-yi Wang, J. &
Camerer, C. F. (2009). The wick in the candle of learning: epistemic curiosity activates
reward circuitry and anhances memory. Psychological Science 20(8), 963–73.
Kashdan, T. B., Stiksma, M. C., Disabato, D. D., McKnight, P. E., Bekier, J., Kaji, J. &
Lazarus, R. (2018). The five-dimensional curiosity scale: capturing the bandwidth of
curiosity and identifying four unique subgroups of curious people. Journal of Research
in Personality 73, 130–49.
Keller, J., Bless, H., Blomann, F. & Kleinböhl, D. (2011). Physiological aspects of flow
experiences: skills-demand-compatibility effects on heart rate variability and salivary
cortisol. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47, 849–52.
Kidd, C. & Hayden, B. Y. (2015). The psychology and neuroscience of curiosity. Neuron 88,
449–60.
Knierim, M. T., Rissler, R., Dorner, V., Maedche, A. & Weinhardt, C. (2018). The
psychophysiology of flow: a systematic review of peripheral nervous system features.
Pp. 109–20 in Information Systems and Neuroscience, edited by Davis, F. D., Riedl, R.,
vom Brocke, J., Léger, P. M. & Randolph, A. B. Cham: Springer International
Publishing AG.
Kocjan, G. Z. & Avsec, A. (2017). Bringing the psychology of situations into flow research:
personality and situation characteristics as predictors of flow. Psychological Topics
26(1), 195–210.
Koolhaas, J. M., Korte, S. M., De Boer, S. F., Van Der Vegt, B. J., Van Reenen, C. G.,
Hopster, H., De Jong, I. C., Ruis, M. A. W. & Blokhuis, H. J. (1999). Coping styles in
animals: current status in behavior and stress-physiology. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 23, 925–35.
Lavoie, R. & Main, K. (2022). Optimizing product trials by eliciting flow states: the enabling
roles of curiosity, openness and information valence. European Journal of Marketing
56(13), 50–77.
Lee, W. & Reeve, J. (2013). Self-determined, but not non-self-determined, motivation
predicts activations in the anterior insular cortex: an FMRI study of personal agency.
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 8, 538–45.
Lee, W. & Reeve, J. (2017). Identifying the neural substrates of intrinsic motivation during
task performance. Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 17, 939–53.
Lee, W., Reeve, J., Xue, Y. & Xiong, J. (2012). Neural differences between intrinsic reasons
for doing versus extrinsic reasons for doing: an FMRI study. Neuroscience Research 73,
68–72.
Loewenstein, G. (1994). The psychology of cuiosity: a review and reinterpretation.
Psychological Bulletin 116(1), 75–98.
MacAloon, J. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1983). Deep play and the flow experience in rock
climbing. Pp. 361–84 in Play, games and sports in cultural contexts, edited by Harris, J.
C. & Park, R. J. Champaign, Illinois: Human Kinetics Publishers.
Macpherson, K. M. & Roberts, W. A. (2017). On the clock: interval timing and
overshadowing in domestic dogs (Canis Familiaris). Journal of Comparative
Psychology 131(4), 348–61.
Marty-Dugas, J. & Smilek, D. (2019). Deep, effortless concentration: re-examining the flow
concept and exploring relations with inattention, absorption, and personality.
Psychological Research 83, 1760–77.
Mason, G. J. & Latham., N. R. (2004). Can’t stop, won’t stop: is stereotypy a reliable animal
welfare indicator? Animal Welfare 13, S57-69.
Mason, G. J. (1991). Stereotypies : a critical review. Animal Behaviour 41, 1015–37.
Mason, G. J. (2006). Stereotypic behaviour in captive animals: fundamentals and
implications for welfare and beyond. Pp. 325–56 in Stereotypic Animal Behaviour,
edited by Mason, G. J. & Rushen, J. Oxfordshire: CAB International.
McGowan, R. T. S., Rehn, T., Norling, Y. & Keeling, L. J. (2014). Positive affect and
learning: exploring the ‘Eureka Effect’ in dogs. Animal Cognition 17, 577–87.
McGowan, R. T. S., Robbins, C. T., Alldredge, J. R. & Newberry, R. C. (2010).
Contrafreeloading in grizzly bears: implications for captive foraging enrichment. Zoo
Biology 29(4), 484–502.
Meck, W. H. (1996). Neuropharmacology of timing and time perception. Cognitive Brain
Research 3, 227–42.
Meehan, C. L. & Mench, J. A. (2007). The challenge of challenge: can problem solving
opportunities enhance animal welfare? Applied Animal Behaviour Science 102, 246–61.
Meijer, J. H. & Robbers, Y. (2014). Wheel running in the wild. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 281, 20140210.
Mellor, D. J. (2012). Animal emotions, behaviour and the promotion of positive welfare
states. New Zealand Veterinary Journal 60(1), 1–8.
Mesurado, B. & de Minzi, M. C. R. (2014). Optimal experience in argentinean children and
adolescents. Pp. 161–77 in Positive Psychology in Latin America. Cross-Cultural
Advancements in Positive Psychology, edited by Castro Solano, A. Dordrecht: Spinger.
Moneta, G. B. (2012). On the measurement and conceptualization of flow. Pp. 23–50 in
Advances in Flow Research, edited by Engeser, S. New York, NY: Springer New York.
Morgan, K. N. & Tromborg, C. T. (2007). Sources of stress in captivity. Applied Animal
Behaviour Science 102, 262–302.
Mulligan, M. S. (2016). Achieving flow in surgery. The Journal of Thoracic and
Cardiovascular Surgery 151(6), 1435–39.
Murayama, K., Matsumoto, M., Izuma, K. & Matsumoto, K. (2010). Neural basis of the
undermining effect of monetary reward on intrinsic motivation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107(49), 20911–16.
Naqvi, N. H. & Bechara, A. (2009). The hidden island of addiction: the insula. Trends in
Neurosciences 32(1), 56–67.
Nissen, H. W. (1930). A study of exploratory behavior in the white rat by means of the
obstruction method. The Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology
37(3), 361–76.
Osborne, S. R. (1977). The free food (contrafreeloading) phenomenon: a review and analysis.
Animal Learning & Behavior 5(3), 221–35.
Partington, S., Partington, E. & Olivier, S. (2009). The dark side of flow: a qualitative study
of dependence in big wave surfing. The Sport Psychologist 23, 170–85.
Peifer, C., Schulz, A., Schächinger, H., Baumann, N. & Antoni, C. H. (2014). The relation of
flow-experience and physiological arousal under stress - can u shape it? Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 53, 62–69.
Rault, J. L., Hintze, S., Camerlink, I. & Yee J. R. (2020). Positive welfare and the like:
distinct views and a proposed framework. Frontiers in Veterinary Science 7, 370.
Reid, D. (2011). Mindfulness and flow in occupational engagement: presence in doing.
Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy 78, 50–56.
Roelofs, S., Nordquist, R. E. & van der Staay, F. J. 2(017). Female and male pigs’
performance in a spatial holeboard and judgment bias task. Applied Animal Behaviour
Science 191, 5–16.
Rogatko, T. P. (2009). The influence of flow on positive affect in college students. Journal of
Happiness Studies 10, 133–48.
Ross, S. R. & Keiser, H. N. (2014). Autotelic personality through a five-factor lens:
individual differences in flow-propensity. Personality and Individual Differences 59, 3–
8.
Ryan, R., Chirkov, V., Little, T., Sheldon, K., Timoshina, E. & Deci, E. (1999). The
american dream in russia: extrinsic aspirations and well-being in two cultures.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 25(12), 1509–24.
Ryan, R. M. & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic
motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist 11.
Ryff, C. D. (1989). Happiness is everything, or is it? explorations on the meaning of
psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57(6), 1069–
81.
Sato, I. (1988). Bosozoku: flow in japanese motorcycle gangs. Pp. 92–117 in Optimal
experience: psychological studies of flow in consciousness, edited by Csikszentmihalyi,
M. & Csikszentmihalyi, I. S. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schattke, K., Brandstätter, V., Geneviève, T. & Kehr, H. M. (2014). Flow on the rocks:
motive-incentive congruence enhances flow in rock climbing. International Journal of
Sport Psychology 45(6), 603–20.
Schutte, N. S. (2020). The impact of virtual reality on curiosity and other positive
characteristics. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 36(7), 661–68.
Sheldon, K. M. & Kasser, T. (1998). Pursuing personal goals: skills enable progress, but not
all progress is beneficial. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 24, 1319–31.
da Silva Vasconcellos, A., Adania, C. H. & Ades, C. (2012). Contrafreeloading in maned
wolves: implications for their management and welfare. Applied Animal Behaviour
Science 140(1–2), 85–91.
Špinka, M. (2019). Animal agency, animal awareness and animal welfare. Animal Welfare
28, 11–20.
Špinka, M. & Wemelsfelder, F. (2011). Environmental challenge and animal agency. Pp. 27–
43 in Animal Welfareelfare, edited by Appleby, M. C., Mench, J. A., Olsson, I. A. S. &
Hughes, B. O. Oxfordshire: CAB International.
Špinka, M. & Wemelsfelder, F. (2018). Environmental challenge and animal agency. Pp. 39–
55 in Animal Welfare, edited by Appleby, M. C., Olsson, I. A. S. & Galindo, F.
Oxfordshire: CAB International.
Sprugnoli, G., Rossi, S., Emmendorfer, A., Rossi, A., Liew, S. L., Tatti, E., di Lorenzo, G.,
Pascual-Leone, A. & Santarnecchi, E. (2017). Neural correlates of eureka moment.
Intelligence 62, 99–118.
Stepanichev, M. Y., Tishkina, A. O., Novikova, M. R., Levshina, I. P., Freiman, S. V.,
Onufriev, M. V., Levchenko, O. A., Lazareva, N. A. & Gulyaeva, N.V. (2016).
Anhedonia but not passive floating is an indicator of depressive-like behavior in two
chronic stress paradigms. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis 76, 324–33.
Steward, H. (2009). Animal agency. Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy
52(3), 217–31.
Swann, C., Keegan, R. J., Piggott, D. &a Crust, L. (2012). A systematic review of the
experience, occurrence, and controllability of flow states in elite sport. Psychology of
Sport and Exercise 13, 807–19.
Thissen, B. A. K., Menninghaus, W. & Schlotz, W. (2018). Measuring optimal reading
experiences: the reading flow short scale. Frontiers in Psychology 9, 2542.
Tordet, C., Erhel, S., Wodey, E., Jamet, E., Nardi, N. & Gonthier, C. (2021). The flow
observational grid: an observation-based solution to assess flow states. Journal of
Happiness Studies 22, 3069–89..
Tozman, T., Magdas, E. S., MacDougall, H. G. & Vollmeyer, R. (2015). Understanding the
psychophysiology of flow: a driving simulator experiment to investigate the relationship
between flow and heart rate variability. Computers in Human Behavior 52, 408–18.
Tozman, T., Zhang, Y. Y. & Vollmeyer, R. (2017). Inverted U-shaped function between flow
and cortisol release during chess play. Journal of Happiness Studies 18, 247–68.
Tse, D. C. K., Nakamura, J. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2020). Beyond challenge-seeking and
skill-building: toward the lifespan developmental perspective on flow theory. Journal of
Positive Psychology 15(2), 171–82.
Ullén, F., de Manzano, Ö., Almeida, R., Magnusson, P. K. E., Pedersen, N. L., Nakamura, J.,
Csíkszentmihályi, M. & Madison, G. (2012). Proneness for psychological flow in
everyday life: associations with personality and intelligence. Personality and Individual
Differences 52, 167–72.
Ulrich, M., Keller, J. & Grön, G. (2016). Neural signatures of experimentally induced flow
experiences identified in a typical FMRI block design with BOLD imaging. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 11, 496–507.
Ulrich, M., Keller, J., Hoenig, K., Waller C., & Grön, G. (2014). Neural correlates of
experimentally induced flow experiences. NeuroImage 86, 194–202.
Vallerand, R. J., Blanchard, C., Mageau, G. A., Koestner, R., Ratelle, C., Léonard, M.,
Gagné, M. & Marsolais, J. (2003). Les passions de l’ame: on obsessive and harmonious
passion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85(4), 756–67.
van der Linden, D., Tops, M. & Bakker, A. B. (2021). Go with the flow: a neuroscientific
view on being fully engaged. European Journal of Neuroscience 53, 947–63.
Vanderschuren, L. J. M. J. (2010). How the brain makes play fun. American Journal of Play
2, 315–37.
Van Os, J. M. C., Mintline, E. M., DeVries, T. J. & Tucker, C. B. (2018). Domestic cattle
(Bos Taurus Taurus) are motivated to obtain forage and demonstrate contrafreeloading.
PLoS ONE 13(3), e0193109.
Vigors, B. (2019). Citizens’ and farmers’ framing of ‘positive animal welfare’ and the
implications for framing positive welfare in communication. Animals 9, Article 147.
Watt, J. D. (1991). Effect of boredom proneness on time perception. Psychological Reports
69, 323–27.
Welzel, C. & Inglehart, R. (2010). Agency, values, and well-being: a human development
model. Social Indicators Research 97, 43–63.
Wemelsfelder, F., Hunter, T. E. A., Mendl, M. T. & Lawrence, A. B. (2001). Assessing the
‘whole animal’: a free choice profiling approach. Animal Behaviour 62, 209–20.
White, R. W. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: the concept of competence. Psychological
Review 66(5), 297–333.
Tsung Chiung, W., Scott, D. & Yang, C. C. (2013). Advanced or addicted? exploring the
relationship of recreation specialization to flow experiences and online game addiction.
Leisure Sciences: An Interdisciplinary Journal 35(3), 203–17.
Würbel, H. (2006). Behavioural pathology - attempt at a biologically meaningful definition.
Pp. 15–16 in Stereotypic Animal Behaviour, edited by Mason, G. J. & Rushen, J.
Oxfordshire: CAB International.
Würbel, H., Bergeron, R. & Cabib, S. (2006). The coping hypothesis of stereotypic
behaviour. Pp. 14–15 in Stereotypic Animal Behaviour, edited by Mason, G. J. &
Rushen, J. Oxfordshire: CAB International.
Yeates, J. W. & Main, D. C. J. (2008). Assessment of positive welfare: a review. The
Veterinary Journal 175, 293–300.
Young, R. J. (2003). Environmental Enrichment for Captive Animals. Oxford: Blackwell
Science Ltd.