Depressive traits are associated with a reduced effect of choice on intentional binding
Scott, N. J.1*, Ghanem, M.1,*, Beck, B.1, & Martin, A. K.1
1 School of Psychology, The University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom
* NJS and MG contributed equally to this work
Corresponding author: Andrew K. Martin - a.martin-2440@kent.ac.uk
Abstract
A sense of agency (SoA) over wilful actions is thought to be dependent on the level of choice
and the nature of the outcome. In a preregistered study, we manipulated choice and valence of
outcome to assess the relationship between SoA across the depression and psychosis
continuum. Participants (N=151) completed a Libet Clock task, in which they had either a free
or forced choice to press one of two buttons and received either a rewarding or punishing
outcome. Participants also completed questionnaires on depressive and psychosis-like traits.
Rewarding outcomes increased intentional binding. The evidence favoured no effect of choice
on average, but this was influenced by inter-individual differences. Individuals reporting more
depressive traits had less of a difference in intentional binding between free and forced choice
conditions. We show that implicit SoA is sensitive to outcome valence and the effect of choice
differs across the depression continuum.
Keywords: Sense of agency; depression; psychosis; valence; retrospective; choice
Introduction
Understanding how actions and their subsequent outcomes are accompanied by a sense of
agency (SoA) is of foundational importance for understanding the human condition. SoA is
commonly studied using temporal compression between events. For example, the perception
of a temporal delay between pressing a light switch and the light turning on, is commonly
shorter than the objective temporal delay. This phenomenon is known as temporal binding, or
intentional binding when involving a wilful or intentional act. A SoA helps distinguish between
actions and events initiated or caused by oneself and those caused by an external source
(Balconi, 2010; Dewey & Knoblich, 2014; Frith, 2005). Studying this feeling of agency, has
been a strong focus of studies interested in human consciousness (David et al., 2008), but little
is known about how this differs across the depressive and psychosis continuums.
SoA is conceptualised as two separable processes, consisting of an explicit judgement of
agency and an implicit feeling of agency (Saito et al., 2015; Synofzik et al., 2008). Explicit
SoA reflects a higher-level and conscious interpretation of our actions (Moore et al., 2012;
Synofzik et al., 2013) and is often measured by directly asking an individual to reflect on the
degree of control they experienced over their actions (Haggard & Chambon, 2012; Metcalfe &
Greene, 2007). However, such measures are susceptible to both response and social desirability
biases (Moore, 2016; Wegner, 2003). This results in a tendency for individuals to overestimate
or even misattribute agency for their actions (Tsakiris & Haggard, 2005; Wegner & Wheatley,
1999). An implicit feeling of agency is thought to emerge from the sensorimotor processes
required to execute an action. This aspect of SoA is considered implicit as it is pre-reflective
and occurs outside of conscious awareness (Gallagher, 2012; Moore, 2016). The most robust
and frequently used implicit SoA measure is the intentional binding paradigm (Balconi, 2010;
Moore & Obhi, 2012). This paradigm relies on the phenomenon of temporal binding, whereby
the brain groups separate events into a coherent and meaningful event sequence. The perceptual
attraction of distinct events is thought to reflect the neural mechanisms of sensory awareness,
a proposed requirement for short-term memory and thus accessible to consciousness (Crick &
Koch, 1990). A relationship between binding and consciousness has also been suggested by
Damasio (1989), with conscious recall of sensory contents requires the binding of information
from distinct cortical regions. The link between temporal binding and agency has received
empirical support from studies measuring temporal compression between an action and a
subsequent outcome. Crucially, temporal binding can be enhanced when a person makes an
intentional action, a phenomenon known as intentional binding (Haggard et al., 2002; Haggard
& Clark, 2003). Intentional binding is considered a proxy for implicit SoA (Moore & Haggard,
2008; Saito et al., 2015). However, this theoretical positional has not gone unchallenged. For
example, several studies have suggested that intentional binding may simply be a form of
causal binding (Buehner, 2012; Buehner & Humphreys, 2009; Fereday et al., 2019; Hoerl et
al., 2020), thus having little to do with intention or agency. It is therefore crucial to control for
causality between events to test whether an intentional act has any effect on temporal binding
over and above that observed when two events are causally related.
Intentional binding is commonly measured using a Libet Clock Task. Developed by Benjamin
Libet in the 1980’s, the Libet clock experiment was designed to understand human volition
(initiating an action based on an internal motivation, rather than an external stimulus; Haggard
& Lau, 2013). Here, participants perform a voluntary action (usually a button press), and using
a “Libet clock”, estimate the perceived time of this action or its subsequent outcome. When
doing so, the participant’s time perception between the action and outcome, is shifted towards
each other. This compression is referred to as the Intentional Binding effect, where greater
intentional binding is indicative of greater SoA (Ebert & Wegner, 2010). Research using
intentional binding paradigms have significantly informed our theoretical understanding of
implicit SoA (Wolpe & Rowe, 2014). Both prospective and retrospective factors are involved
in SoA (Moore & Obhi, 2012). The prospective component is thought to emerge from the motor
system in the form of an efference copy to predict the sensory consequences of the voluntary
action (Wolpert et al., 1995; Zaadnoordijk et al., 2019). Detailed within the comparator model
of SoA (Frith et al., 2000), the predicted sensory input is compared with the actual sensory
feedback resulting from the action, and greater similarity between the two results in a stronger
SoA (Gallagher, 2000; Jeannerod, 2009; Wolpert & Ghahramani, 2000).
One prospective factor that theoretically should influence our SoA, is the ability to choose a
course of action. Agency and freedom are closely associated and agency is thought to be
greatest when humans are presented with an “environment of opportunities” in which to act
(Pettit, 2001). It could be argued that being instructed to act diminishes or removes any
opportunity of agency. Previous empirical work supports this theoretical position. For example,
free choice over which action to perform has been show to increase judgements of agency
(Wenke et al., 2010). Subsequent research has focused on implicit measures of agency
including intentional binding. For example, using a Libet Clock, Barlas and Obhi (2013a)
demonstrated greater intentional binding when participants had a greater choice of actions.
Retrospective influences on SoA have also been manipulated by varying the valence of the
outcome. It has previously been demonstrated that SoA is subject to a self-serving bias (Yoshie
& Haggard, 2013a), with positive outcomes associated with self-agency to a greater extent than
negative outcomes (Barlas & Obhi, 2014; Takahata et al., 2012). However, this has been shown
to depend on the predictability of an outcome occurring. When outcomes are unpredictable,
positive outcomes enhanced the retrospective component of intentional binding, whereas when
an outcome was predictable, no retrospective effect was found (Christensen et al., 2016).
Further research provided evidence that retrospective effects on intentional binding were
dependent on the ability to predict the valence of the outcome, rather than the mere occurrence
of a specific outcome (Yoshie & Haggard, 2017). In addition to predictability, the ability to
choose an action has been shown to influence the effect of valence, with greatest binding for
freely chosen actions resulting in positive outcomes (Barlas et al., 2018). It should be noted
that contrary evidence showing no effect of outcome valence on temporal binding, including a
non-replication of the Yoshie and Haggard (2013a) study, has also been documented (Moreton
et al., 2017). In the present study, we will further investigate how choice and outcome valence
influence intentional binding.
Understanding the contribution of prospective and retrospective factors on SoA is important
for understanding psychiatric conditions associated with self-disturbances. The most frequently
studied psychiatric conditions, in terms of SoA differences, are those associated with psychosis
(Franck et al., 2001; C. Frith, 2000; Jeannerod, 2009; Jones & Fernyhough, 2007). Across the
psychosis continuum, consistent evidence points to a reduced prospective effect on SoA
(Maeda et al., 2013; Synofzik et al., 2013). In terms of the comparator model (Frith et al.,
2000), this may emerge due to a discrepancy between the executed motor commands and the
corollary discharge or efference copy. This theoretical approach has encouraged studies
focused on prospective factors such as making a self-initiated voluntary action or motor
movement (Hauser et al., 2011; Synofzik et al., 2010; Voss et al., 2010). However, to date,
research is lacking on the effect of action choice on SoA across the psychosis continuum.
Previous research has shown that patients with chronic schizophrenia show an attenuated
intentional binding, especially for the prospective aspect of SoA (Synofzik et al., 2010;
Synofzik & Voss, 2010; Voss et al., 2010). Yet, it is interesting to note that greater intentional
binding has also been identified in patients with schizophrenia (Haggard & Clark, 2003) and
in the prodromal stage of illness (Hauser et al., 2011). As psychosis is thought to exist on a
continuum, with conditions such as schizophrenia representing the extreme end of a normal
distribution of psychosis-like experiences (van Os & Reininghaus, 2016; Verdoux & van Os,
2002), it is important to assess SoA differences across the psychosis continuum. Moreover, this
approach avoids confounds such as medications, effects of stigmatisation, and hospitalisations,
whilst allowing for larger sample sizes avoiding issues surrounding limited statistical power in
clinical research (A. S. David, 2010; DeRosse & Karlsgodt, 2015). Larger sample sizes are also
important for detecting effects in individuals with less severe expressions of psychosis (or other
psychiatric-relevant trait), as the effect size may be smaller.
Altered SoA across the depression continuum has received considerably less focus. This is
surprising considering the strong evidence for self-referential processing differences
experienced in clinically diagnosed depression (Obhi et al., 2013). Moreover, several
symptoms characteristic of depression, such as learned helplessness or hopelessness, point to
an altered SoA to affect change in their lives. Depression is associated with a tendency to
selectively ascribe actions to factors outside self-control, leading to a loss of motivation
(Bandura, 2002). Seligman (1989) outlined the theory of learned helplessness showcasing how
these agency perceptions in depression can be sustained. Seligman suggested that persistent
exposure to uncontrollable events can lead to an expectation that we have little agency and
therefore, prompt individuals to make fewer attempts in changing their behaviours resulting in
disengagement and maintenance of depression in a self-perpetuating cycle. Understanding and
improving explicit agency over an individual’s life forms a key component of several
therapeutic approaches such as Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) in treating depression
as modifying maladaptive cognitions regarding our own SoA can strengthen agency and foster
more pro-active behaviours to hinder the cycle of low agency, disengagement, and depression
maintenance (Keeton et al., 2008). Despite the clear theoretical link and clinical awareness of
the importance of explicit agency in depression, no research has investigated altered implicit
SoA across the depression continuum. Although, explicit and implicit SoA may represent
unique cognitive processes (Dewey & Knoblich, 2014; Haggard, 2017), an altered implicit SoA
may also be altered in those with depression. For example, depressed patients show a reduced
self-serving bias (Alloy & Abramson, 1982) which has not been assessed using intentional
binding paradigms. Likewise, an external locus of control is commonly associated with
depression. Locus of control is defined as the degree to which a person expects an outcome of
their behaviour is contingent on their own behaviour, rather than a function of luck or fate
(Rotter, 1966). An external locus of control is commonly associated with depressive disorders
(Dimitrovsky et al., 1987; Richardson et al., 2012; Wiersma et al., 2011) which may manifest
in altered SoA when choice is manipulated. Moreover, depressed individuals may experience
less feeling of control over events and subsequently a reduced effect of choice on intentional
binding tasks.
In the current study we adopt a continuum approach to assess the relationship between
intentional binding and both depression and psychosis continuums using a Libet Clock task
that manipulates both choice and valence outcome. We predicted that 1) temporal compression
would be greater when an action preceded an outcome, demonstrating intentional binding 2)
Individuals would exhibit greater intentional binding when they had a choice compared to no
choice in their actions. 3) Greater intentional binding when the outcome was rewarding. We
also predicted that 4) intentional binding would be greatest when individuals had both a choice
and received a rewarding outcome. Given that schizophrenia is associated with a reduced effect
of prospective factors on SoA (Synofzik et al., 2010; Synofzik & Voss, 2010; Voss et al., 2010),
we expected that 5) individuals displaying more psychosis-like traits would exhibit a reduced
effect of choice on intentional binding. We also predicted that because depressed individuals
are generally less sensitive to positive feedback, 6) those with a greater number of depressive
traits would show a reduced effect of a rewarding outcome on SoA.
Materials and Methods
Participants
We used the software program G*Power to conduct a power analysis. Our goal was to obtain
.90 power to detect a medium effect size of .30 at 0.016 alpha error probability (Bonferroni
corrected for 3 correlation analyses). This returned a sample size of 140. We collected
additional data to ensure that any exclusions due to non-task compliance or extreme scores, did
not result in a reduced cohort. 181 participants returned complete datasets; 25 failed the quality
control check as they did not respond with sufficient accuracy (>80%) to the forced choice
condition and were excluded and four were excluded as the relevant intentional binding scores
were outside 3SDs of the mean (i.e. difference in IB for the choice or outcome conditions). It
should be noted that the inclusion of outliers made no difference to the conclusions of the study.
Therefore, the study comprised a final total of 151 healthy adults (126F:25M), aged 18-30 (M
= 19.30, SD = 1.71). Participants were all undergraduate psychology students, recruited
through The University of Kent Psychology Research Participation Scheme and reflect the
broader student population in terms of ethnicity and socioeconomic backgrounds. Participants
reported no history of neurological or psychiatric diagnoses prior to participation, and normal
or corrected-to-normal vision. Upon completion, all participants received course credit for their
time.
Ethical Considerations
Full ethical approval was granted by the University of Kent Psychology Ethics Committee
[Ethics ID: 202016044826956677]. All participants gave full informed consent prior to
participation and had the right to withdraw at any point. Participants were made aware of the
sensitive nature of the questionnaires prior to consenting to the study.
Equipment
to present the study information to the participant and acquire consent. Demographic
information and questionnaire data were also collected. The cognitive task (Libet clock) was
Sense of Agency Task
can be measured by measuring the temporal shift of the action towards an outcome (action
binding), or the temporal shift of the outcome towards an action (outcome binding). Action and
outcome binding are often conceptualized as a reflection of a unitary temporal binding process.
However, recent evidence suggests no correlation between the two temporal compressions
(Tonn et al., 2021). We decided to focus on outcome binding as it permits a baseline condition
that has a greater control over causality. We presented the same outcome stimuli (rewarding or
punishing sound) and also the prompts to press a button, but crucially, without the participant
pressing the button. This allows for baseline variables for each of the conditions (free/forced
prompts and rewarding/punishing sounds). Using action binding with the same paradigm
would result in only two baseline scores as an outcome sound could not be presented.
Participants were presented with a clockface (labelled at 5 minute intervals from 0-55). In each
trial, a smaller circle rotated continuously around the clockface indicating the time on the clock,
with a complete revolution lasting 2000ms. The centre of the clock had a fixation cross and
after a random interval between 750-2000ms, was replaced with an arrow cue (“<”, “>”, or “<
>”) that remained on the screen for 500ms, before returning to a fixation cross for the remainder
of the trial. All conditions were fixed in number but presented in a random manner within each
block.
Schematic Illustration of the Sense of Agency Libet Clock Task.
Note. Schematic illustration for both baseline and operant blocks of the Sense of Agency Task.
In operant blocks, participants watched a Libet clock-hand rotation and made an action (“<” or
“>” key press). This action produced a rewarding or punishing auditory sound after a 250ms
interval, of which they would report the perceived time-onset that this sound occurred on the
position of the clock. In baseline blocks, participants made no action, and were only required
to indicate the time of which the rewarding or punishing sound occurred.
Baseline Condition
In baseline blocks, participants were instructed to focus their attention on the fixation cross in
the centre of the clock, before being presented one of three arrow cues (“<”, “>”, “<>”). A
sound (cash register or klaxon) would occur at a random interval of 400-1400ms after the action
cue. Participants were instructed to wait for a sound and were then prompted to provide the
time on the clock that the sound occurred. Therefore, the baseline was identical to the operant
condition except for the requirement to press a button. Each participant completed two baseline
blocks; the first presented at the start of the study, with a total of 32 trials – the first four of
which were considered practice trials and excluded.
Operant Condition
In operant blocks, participants were informed that they now had to select an action when
prompted and that their key press would initiate a point gain or loss – represented through a
rewarding or punishing sound respectively (cash machine or klaxon sound, as used in the
baseline condition). The cue instructed each participant to press either the corresponding “<”
or “>” key, or they were given a choice between the two buttons if presented with “< >”. After
each key press, one of these sounds was randomly presented after 250ms interval. Participants
were informed that their responses would be recorded for a total score and that they would be
rewarded with an extra credit if they finished in the top 25% of participants. However, this was
simply to motivate attention and effort and as the sounds were randomly allocated across trials,
every participant received this extra credit. After the sound during both baseline and operant
blocks, the clock disappeared after a random interval between 2000-4000ms, and participants
reported the perceived onset-time of the sound by typing a number into the response window.
The following seven operant blocks each consisted of 24 trials (6 for each condition), with a
brief break offered between blocks if the participant required. Following the operant blocks,
the second baseline block was presented and consisted of 28 trials. Therefore, a total of 144
operant trials (36 for each condition) and 56 baseline trials were presented. Reliability of the
intentional binding index (difference between operant and baseline temporal binding) was
calculated using the splithalf function in R, following a permutation based splithalf approach
(Parsons et al., 2019) with 5000 random splits. The (Spearman-Brown corrected) splithalf
internal consistency of the intentional binding score was r =0.88, 95% CI [0.83, 0.92].
SB
Psychosis-like traits
To measure the participants’ psychosis-like traits, the Prodromal Questionnaire (PQB; Loewy
et al., 2011) was administered. The PQ-B is a condensed 21-question self-report screening
measure for psychosis-like traits. This identified the number of positive-oriented psychosis-
like symptoms the participant had felt over the past month. The PQ-B is shown to be a valid
and efficient measure for use in adolescents, young adults (Savill et al., 2018) and
representative samples of nonclinical adolescents (Fonseca‐Pedrero et al., 2018) with good
internal consistency (a=0.95) and test-retest reliability (r=0.81; Kline et al., 2012, 2015).
Within the current sample, the psychosis PQ-B had good internal consistency (a=0.85). A total
score for each participant ranged from 0-21, with greater scores representing greater number
of psychosis-like symptoms. This score was then used in the analyses. PQ-B scores ranged
from 0-19 with a mean score of 6.37 (SD=4.56).
Depressive traits
Depressive symptoms were measured using the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; Beck et
al., 1996). The BDI-II consists of 21 questions on a 4-point scale. The BDI-II measures
depressive symptoms experienced over the previous two weeks. The BDI-II is well validated
for use in a healthy, university-aged sample, with high internal consistency (a=0.91) and test-
retest reliability (r=0.93; Beck et al., 1996; Sprinkle et al., 2002; Storch et al., 2004). Within
the current sample, the BDI-II had good internal consistency (a=0.93). It should be noted that
the BDI-II is not a clinically diagnostic tool and although some participants scored at clinically
relevant levels, all participants included in the study reported no diagnosis of depression or any
other psychiatric condition. A total score for each participant ranged from 0-63, with greater
scores representing greater number of depressive traits. The total score was used in all analyses.
BDI-II scores ranged from 0-53 with 92 reporting minimal depressive traits (BDI-II range: 0-
13), 25 mild (BDI-II range: 14-19), 18 moderate (BDI-II range 20-28), and 20 severe (BDI-II
range: 29-63). The mean score of the cohort was 13.15 (SD=11.20).
Procedure
All participants completed the study on a personal computer or laptop. Upon signing up for the
study, participants followed a link directing them to the Qualtrics page. Here, they were
provided information about the study, the requirements of the study, and the risks of
participation. All participants gave full informed consent, before providing their basic
demographic details. Subsequently, participants completed the PQ-B and BDI questionnaires
before being directed to complete the second part of the study via Pavlovia. On Pavlovia,
participants performed a soundcheck to ensure they could sufficiently hear the stimuli.
Participants were then presented with the instructions for the Libet Clock task, before
performing the first baseline block, the seven operant blocks, followed by the second and final
baseline block. After completion, participants were each debriefed and provided the full details
of the study’s aims. The entire study took approximately 90-minutes to complete.
Statistical Analyses
Intentional Binding
To compute intentional binding, the mean baseline judgement error was subtracted from the
mean operant judgement error for each condition (free reward, free punish, forced reward,
forced punish; see Supplementary Data). It should be noted that the judgement error during the
baseline condition was based on the identical prompt used in the operant condition but
crucially, without the requirement for the participant to press a button. Using this method, we
produced a baseline condition that matched the operant condition and the difference between
the two provided a measure of intentional binding. These perceptual shift values are indicative
of the intentional binding scores – i.e., a shift in time of the outcome towards the action. Greater
negative values therefore represent greater intentional binding, indicating a greater temporal
compression between the action and outcome.
To assess the prospective and retrospective effects on SoA, the intentional binding scores were
included in a 2 x 2 repeated-measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA), with both choice
(free or forced) and outcome valence (rewarding or punishing) as within-subject factors. Effect
sizes are provided in the form of partial eta-squared (η 2). We also provide Bayesian alongside
frequentist statistics computed in JASP v0.14.1 (JASP Team, 2020). For the Bayesian analyses
we adopted the default Cauchy priors as recommended (Wagenmakers et al., 2018). A Bayes
factor (BF) quantifies the evidence for a particular model. For example, a BF of 8 equates to
data that is 8 times as likely from the alternate model as from the null model. Evidence for the
alternate model is interpreted in a linear scale but for the ease of interpretation we conclude
BF = 1–3 as inconclusive or preliminary evidence, 3-10 as moderate evidence, and >10 as
strong evidence for the alternate model. Likewise, a BF between 0.33 and 1 should be
considered inconclusive or preliminary evidence, between 0.1-0.33 as moderate evidence, and
<0.1 as strong evidence for the null model.
Relationship with depression and psychosis
The second analysis assessed the relationship between depression and psychosis and the
calculated effects of choice (IB = IB – IB ) and outcome (IB = IB
choice free choice forced choice outcome
– IB ) where IB refers to intentional binding. Therefore, a greater negative value for
reward punish
IB indicates a greater difference in intentional binding when presented with a free choice
Choice
compared with a forced choice. Likewise, a greater negative value for IB indicates a
Outcome
greater difference in intentional binding when presented with a rewarding outcome compared
with a punishing outcome. Pearson’s correlations were conducted to examine the relationship
between depression and psychosis-like traits and IB and IB
choice outcome
Both inverted raincloud plots (Allen et al., 2019) and scatterplots were computed using ggplot2
in R (R Core Team, 2020). The project was preregistered and all data is available online
preregistered cut-off of 1.5 SD above or below the mean was too conservative. Again, it should
be noted that the overall results did not differ when using the preregistered outlier cut-off. We
preregistered a sample size of 140, but due to the parallel nature of data collection online and
the need to collect more data than necessary to factor in exclusions, the final sample size was
151. We decided that it was transparent to include the complete dataset rather than the
preregistered sample size of 140.
Results
Intentional Binding
To assess the first hypothesis, we analyzed whether temporal compression was greater during
the operant (i.e. action required) than the baseline (i.e. no action required) conditions. Temporal
compression was greater during the operant condition (M= -31.95, sd= 141.34) than the
baseline condition (M= 52.17, sd= 103.15), providing strong evidence for a difference, t(150)=
10.57, p<0.001 [BF = 6.76e+16].
To assess hypotheses two to four, we analyzed the effects of choice available (free v forced)
and subsequent outcome (reward v punish).
Both means and standard deviations of intentional binding for the prospective (choice; free or
forced) and retrospective factors (outcome valence; rewarding or punishing) are presented in
Means and Standard Deviations of Intentional Binding (ms) for Both
Choice and Outcome Valence.
Choice
Free Forced
Outcome Valence M SD M SD
Rewarding -107.02 115.68 -96.87 123.52
Punishing -66.67 104.25 -65.92 98.53
Note: M and SD represent mean and standard deviation,
respectively. Negative numbers reflect greater shift of the sound
towards the action.
A main effect of outcome valence was identified, F(1, 150) = 43.61, p < .001, [BF =
3.02e+10], η2 = .23, with greater intentional binding after receiving the rewarding (M = -
101.95, SE = 8.40), compared to the punishing outcome (M = -66.30, SE = 8.40). A null effect
of choice was identified, F(1, 150) = 1.72, p = .19, [BF = 0.16] η2 = .01. The interaction
10 p
between both choice and outcome on intentional binding was also not supported, F(1, 150) =
.84, p = .36, [BF = 0.19] η2 =.01.
10 p
For the Bayesian analyses, we assessed the sensitivity of the analysis to the specification of the
prior. We identified comparable effects with a wider prior (i.e. r=2) and a narrower prior (i.e.
r=0.1). The results from both these analyses are not qualitatively different from the initial
To summarise, our findings reveal strong evidence for an effect of outcome, moderate evidence
between choice and outcome. The results were robust across prior specification. Therefore,
hypothesis three was supported but hypotheses two and four were not.
Raincloud Plot Displaying the Distribution of Intentional Binding for Both Free and Forced
Choice and Punishing and Rewarding Outcomes
Note. Raincloud plots depicting the distribution of participants’ Intentional Binding scores
(msecs) for both prospective (choice; free or forced) and retrospective factors (outcome
valence; rewarding or punishing) of the SoA task. Greater negative values correspond to greater
IB. Each dot corresponds to an individual participant. Boxplots display the mean and the
interquartile range with error bars extending to the furtherest datapoint within 1.5 standard
deviations from the mean. Distribution of Intentional Binding scores are also provided.
Relationship between SoA and depression and psychosis
We calculated correlations between both psychosis and depressive traits with the difference
scores for both choice and outcome. IB is the difference in intentional binding for free
Choice
and forced choice trials, and IB is the difference in intentional binding between reward
Outcome
ing and punishing outcomes. Strong evidence for a correlation between IB and depressive
Choice
relationship was identified for psychosis-like traits, r(149)= .13 [95% CI: -.03 – .29], p=.11
[BF = 0.37], not supporting hypothesis 5, although the evidence only weakly supported the
null model. Regarding IB , we demonstrate moderate evidence supporting the null model
Outcome
for both depressive-traits, r(149)= .04 [95% CI: -.12 – .20], p=.61[BF = 0.12] and psychosis-
like traits, r(149)= -.03 [95% CI: -.19 – .13], p=.68 [BF = 0.11]. Therefore, hypothesis six
was not supported. We also examined the correlation between psychosis and depressive traits
and IB in general. Moderate evidence in favour of the null model was demonstrated for both
psychosis, r(149)= .08 [95% CI: -.08 - .24], p=.31 [BF = 0.17] and depressive traits,
r(149)=.06 [95% CI: -.10 - .22], p=.48 [BF =0.13].
In sum, at the lower end of the depression continuum, greater intentional binding was
demonstrated for trials consisting of a free choice. The effect diminished with increasing
Relationship Between the Effect of Choice on Intentional Binding and Depressive Traits.
Note. A positive correlation between the effect of choice on IB with depressive traits was
identified. Effect of choice on intentional binding represents the difference between the effect
of free and forced choice. A greater negative number reflects a greater effect of free choice on
intentional binding. The scatterplots provide a graphical representation of the relationship
between the effect of choice on IB with depressive traits with the grey line representing the line
of best fit and the shaded area representing the 95% confidence interval.
Choice
A) B)
Note. A) Prior and posterior distribution and B) Strength of evidence across a range of alternate priors, for the
correlation between depressive traits and IB . Strong evidence was demonstrated in favour of a correlation
Choice
and this was consistent across a range of prior distributions.
Discussion
We manipulated action choice and outcome valence to assess prospective and retrospective
effects on implicit SoA and explore differences across the psychosis and depression
continuums. Intentional binding was demonstrated and was greater when the outcomes were
rewarding, evidencing a strong retrospective effect of valence. No overall effect of choice on
intentional binding was found but this was dependent on inter-individual differences.
Individuals reporting more depressive traits had less of a difference in intentional binding
between free and forced choice conditions.
Several symptoms characteristic of depression indicate an altered SoA. For example, a
depressed individual may state that they feel helpless to change their current situation or
hopeless regarding the outcome of their actions. Despite clear theoretical links with agency,
this is the first study to demonstrate altered implicit SoA in relation to depressive traits. The
reduced effect of choice, coupled with no effect of outcome, did not support our hypothesis.
Therefore, although cognitive biases related to sensitivity to rewards have been implicated in
depression (Halahakoon et al., 2020), we provide evidence that this does not extend to valence
effects on an implicit SoA with random rewarding outcomes. Future research is warranted to
assess the relationship between depressive traits and retrospective factors on SoA using
alternative paradigms, especially those where participants can learn that one choice is
associated with a superior outcome (Di Costa et al., 2018; Majchrowicz et al., 2020). The
implicit SoA task used in the present study required the participant to make a choice between
competing actions, but this had no influence on the valence of the subsequent outcome.
Therefore, a SoA may only emerge if the individual falsely perceives they have some control
of the nature of the outcome. It is possible that depressed individuals do not show this cognitive
bias and do not display an illusion of control. The results tentatively support previous findings
of reduced illusion of control in depressed individuals (Moore & Fresco, 2012). As with the
self-serving bias, such cognitive biases may well be protective, allowing a greater feeling of
control and self-determination in circumstances where control is lacking.
Enactive theorists claim an intimate relationship between emotion and action. Rather than an
action being a consequence of an emotion, they claim that the action itself may be constitutive
of the emotion. In other words, emotions can be understood as specific modifications of our
active engagement with the world rather than mental states that are separate from action or
behaviour (Hutto, 2012; Kyselo, 2014). Under this framework, depression has been
characterized by an altered basic form of goal-pursuit, resulting in passivity and reduced
agency (Slaby et al., 2013). The reduced effect of choice on implicit SoA, identified in the
present study, may reflect greater passivity in simple actions in those with greater depressive
symptoms and should encourage future research addressing enactive accounts of depression
and the integrated role of emotion and action.
Psychosis has been linked with altered SoA across a range of tasks and stages of illness
(Synofzik et al., 2013). Under a comparator model framework (Frith et al., 2000), consistent
evidence has identified altered prospective factors amongst patients with chronic schizophrenia
(Haggard et al., 2003; Synofzik et al., 2010; Synofzik & Voss, 2010; Voss et al., 2010), early
psychosis (Hauser et al., 2011), and in subclinical psychosis (Di Plinio et al., 2019). The results
from the present study support no association between increased psychosis-like traits and a
decreased effect of choice on implicit SoA. Although this is inconsistent with previous research
(Di Plinio et al., 2019) it should be noted that the evidence for the null was only weakly
supported in the present study. Despite clear diagnostic overlap between psychosis and mood
disorders such as depression (Wigman et al., 2011), no research to date has explored the role
of negative mood on the relationship between psychosis and an altered SoA. If the present
results extend to those with clinically diagnosed psychosis-related conditions, it demonstrates
that mood symptoms, rather than psychosis, may be the crucial factor in terms of distortions to
implicit SoA. However, although psychosis is considered to exist on a continuum, with
diagnosed conditions such as schizophrenia simply reflecting the extreme end, the relationship
with SoA may not follow a simple linear relationship. Therefore, the current results provide
evidence that challenges differences in SoA across the psychosis continuum, but further
research is required to determine whether this extends across the entire psychosis continuum.
Future research could also include questionnaires with a greater focus on specific agency-
related symptoms that may show a greater association with implicit measures of SoA such as
intentional binding tasks.
Although the focus of the paper was the relationship between implicit SoA and depression and
psychosis continuums, the paper also extends our cognitive understanding of implicit SoA. The
effect of outcome in the present study is consistent with a retrospective effect on intentional
binding. Previous research has used a financial reward to show a similar effect (Takahata et al.,
2012), and we extend this evidence to show that it is consistent across both choice and no-
choice conditions. The results are consistent with a self-serving bias, whereby individuals
attribute greater agency over positive compared with negative outcomes (Yoshie & Haggard,
2013b). As the SoA task used in the present study was not predictable, in that the choice in
which button to press had no effect on the outcome, the strong effect of outcome is consistent
with the integrated cue theory (Lau et al., 2007; Moore & Fletcher, 2012; Synofzik et al., 2013;
Wolpe et al., 2013). According to this model of SoA, prospective factors are sufficient for a
SoA when they are reliable. When prospective factors are unreliable, SoA may rely more on
retrospective factors such as whether the action resulted in a positive or rewarding outcome.
In the present study, the evidence favoured no effect of choice on SoA. This does not support
previous research showing that SoA is greater for free compared with forced choice (Borhani
et al., 2017; Caspar et al., 2016). However, the nature of the choice and the outcome may
explain the difference in effect of choice. The study by Borhani, Beck, & Haggard (2017)
showed an effect of choice when the outcome was a painful heat or electro-tactile stimulation
which differed from the sound indicating a point gained or lossed in the present study. The
study by Caspar et al (2016), used financial penalty or painful shock to another person as the
outcome. Previous research, using a similar outcome variable as the present study,
demonstrated that increasing the number of choices can influence SoA judgements (Barlas &
Obhi, 2013b). Although the results from the present study do not support this effect, it should
be noted that the evidence for a null effect of choice was inconclusive.
Participants were presented with a choice on certain trials, but the outcome remained random.
Therefore, the task may have induced a sense of learned helplessness that may have affected
SoA. Previous research has shown that deprivation of personal control can lead to learned
helplessness and remove a SoA (Soral et al., 2021). Future research employing more
meaningful choices and alternate outcome measures are required in order to fully understand
the effect of choice on SoA. For example, retrospective cue integration processes also
contribute to intentional binding (Lau et al., 2007; Moore & Fletcher, 2012; Synofzik et al.,
2013; Wolpe et al., 2013). According to optimal cue integration theory, the brain integrates
related sensory signals as a weighted average according to their reliability or precision, with
more reliable signals given higher weighting in the resulting percept. For example, Ernst and
Banks (2002) showed that haptic cues contribute more to object size perception when visual
perception of the object is degraded. Similarly, using an intentional binding paradigm, Wolpe
and colleagues (2013) showed that outcome binding increases when the sound is embedded in
a background of noise, indicating that the more reliable action cue is driving the perceived time
of the action-sound event. Prospective cues to SoA can also be accommodated within a cue
integration account through a Bayesian cue integration framework that also considers the
influence of prior information (predictions) on perception (Moore & Fletcher, 2012).
Therefore, the fact that choice had no main effect or interaction with outcome valence in the
present study, may be due to the lack of meaningful choice or predictability that a specific
choice would increase the chance of a certain outcome.
The current study was limited to outcome binding to assess implicit SoA. Although intentional
binding is often considered a unitary construct, some studies have questioned whether action
and outcome binding may reflect unique processes (Borhani et al., 2017; Di Costa et al., 2018;
Wolpe et al., 2013). Therefore, future research is required to assess the association between
action-binding and mental health traits as well as assess the effects of choice and outcome
valence manipulations. In the present study we control for simple binding between temporally
related events by including a prompt to move and the subsequent outcome, without any need
for the participant to press a button. Future studies could go further to control for simple
causality effects on temporal binding. For example, a study using virtual and augmented reality
demonstrated that a virtual hand that precisely tracked the participant’s movements and a fake
hand that did not require any movement from the participant resulted in the same magnitude of
temporal binding following a button press (Suzuki et al., 2019). Observing a fake hand,
especially as it was modelled on the participant’s own movements, may engage sensorimotor
processes similar to those when actually performing an action. In Suzuki et al (2019) they used
an explicit rating of ownership to show that subjective feelings of agency were not comparable
between the two conditions and thus could not explain the lack or a difference in intentional
binding. However, explicit measures of agency do not correlate with implicit measures (Dewey
& Knoblich, 2014) making the results difficult to interpret. Future research is required to assess
whether intentionality increases binding over and above those observed due to causality. It
should also be of note that the current project was conducted online during a global pandemic
which may have influenced the results. Although the conditions of the online task were adhered
to extremely well, with only a few cases excluded through the attention checks, future
laboratory based experiements are required to confirm the results in more controlled conditions.
For example, questionnaires administered before the cognitive task may have influenced the
results and the order could be counterbalanced in future experiements. Although course credits
are a valued reward for undergraduate psychology students, greater incentives, in the form of
monetary rewards, may influence the results. More generally, the use of undergraduate
psychology students attending a Western university will bias results due to being
predominantly female and highly educated. Although participants with a diagnosis of
depression (and other psychiatric conditions) were excluded, several of the participants
reported depressive traits that may be clinically relevant. Although the BDI-II should not be
used as a diagnostic tool, some participants may be clinically depressed without a formal
diagnosis. Future research should extend the continuum approach to clinical samples to assess
the effects of SoA across the entire continuum of depressive traits and explore whether a linear
model remains the best fit.
In sum, we identified a strong effect of valence outcome on implicit SoA, supporting a strong
influence of retrospective factors on SoA when a prospective factor is unreliable. The evidence
favoured no effect of freedom of choice on average, but this was influenced by inter-individual
differences. Individuals reporting more depressive traits had less of a difference in intentional
binding between free and forced choice conditions.
Appendix A. Supplementary Material
Supplemtary data for this article can be found online at [link to tables].
Author Contributions: NJS, MG, & AKM designed the study; NJS, MG analyzed the
data; NJS, MG, BB, & AKM all wrote and edited the manuscript.
Funding
None to report
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge all participants for their time and effort. We would like to thank Frank
Gasking for assistance with coding the task.
Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests