ANTICIPATED FOOD SCARCITY AND
FOOD PREFERENCES
Michal(cid:32) Folwarczny
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy
Department of Business Administration
Reykjavik University
September 2021
ISBN: 978-9935-9620-7-2 ORCID: 0000-0002-1686-4933
ii
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the Ph.D. Thesis Committee—Valdimar Sigurdsson, Asle Fagerstrøm
and Jacob Lund Orquin—as well as the two external reviewers—Gareth J. Hollands and
Sarah Xiao—for reviewing my work, many valuable comments, and highlighting changes
that made this thesis stronger.
Valdimar, thank you for the time you have invested in teaching me critical thinking
that is a cornerstone in academia. I will remember the numerous extended lunch breaks
that we used to take—especially during my first semester—when we discussed many im-
portant matters that helped me successfully progress as a Ph.D. candidate. In addition,
you have helped me develop competencies that I will use outside academia, with calculat-
ing opportunity costs being likely the most important of them. As my journey with this
thesis is coming to an end, I value these skills even more. Although at the beginning of
my Ph.D. I was craving for additional projects and opportunities to learn, now I struggle
with their numbers, and hence I have to weigh the costs and benefits of participating in
projects carefully. Finally, I have to thank you for your non-directive supervision style,
which resulted in me developing a strong inner motivation to pursue my own research
ideas and additional projects that I found worthwhile and interesting. Although it is yet
too early to say where this journey with academia will lead me to, I am confident that
your supervision style considerably increased my chances of being a prolific researcher.
Asle, although our collaboration has been relatively minor due to your role as a co-
supervisor and different research interests, I thank you for cheering me up and providing
many valuable suggestions after my failures in conducting the first experiments. Thanks
to that, I realized that there was a long way ahead of me until I learn to design and
iii
conduct empirical research properly.
Jacob, a big thank you for reminding me many times that academia is not a sprint;
instead, it is a life-long marathon. Indeed, I have an innate tendency to take in too
much and too early, which hinders researchers who aim to publish in the most prestigious
journals. Also, thank you for supervising my 3-month research stay at Aarhus University.
Although I have developed many skills vital for adjusting to a competitive academic
environment during this stay, I firmly believe that you have taught me something more
critical—doing things better and then starting over again, as “better” is never enough in
this business.
Whereas all the supervisors played a crucial role throughout my Ph.D., more people
positively impacted my academic performance.
Tobias Otterbring—although you have formally never belonged to my Thesis Com-
mittee, working with you has tripled, if not quadrupled, my publication potential during
these years. We have written over a dozen papers together in two years, and there are
many more to come in the nearest future. Thank you for sharing your valuable time and
helping me develop a much more expansive publication portfolio.
Finally, I would also like to thank my key collaborators—Agata Gasiorowska, Lynn
K. L. Tan, and Norman P. Li. All of you had a considerable and positive impact on my
research.
With my deepest gratitude,
iv
Abstract
In the recent decade, marketing literature has acknowledged the advantages of applying
an evolutionary lens to understand consumer behavior in different domains. Food choice
context is one such domain, having implications for societal well-being, especially for
public health and addressing environmental issues. In this thesis, I investigate how mech-
anisms that have emerged as adaptations to food scarcity—frequent throughout human
history—affect modern consumers’ food preferences, potentially leading to maladaptive
outcomes.
In Paper I, we highlight that selection pressures adjusted humans to forage in ancestral,
hostile environments when they were wandering between periods of food scarcity and food
sufficiency. Consequently, consumers often fail to choose foods appropriate to their current
needs in contemporary retail contexts. Rather than attempting to override these hard-
wired and evolutionarily outdated food preferences, we recommend policymakers leverage
them in such a way that facilitates healthier food choices.
A series of studies reported in Paper II show that exposing people to climate change-
induced food scarcity distant in time and space shifts their current food preferences.
Specifically, people exposed to such video content exhibit a stronger preference toward
energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods than their peers exposed to a control video.
In Paper III, we aimed to account for potential confounds stemming from the con-
trol video used in studies reported in Paper II. Additionally, we strived to conceptually
replicate these earlier findings by exposing participants to subtle cues to food scarcity—a
winter forest walk. Although not all studies yielded significant results at conventional
levels, this empirical package—when taken together—corroborated the earlier findings.
Despite that studies described in Papers II–III provided a shred of empirical evidence
showing a potency of food scarcity cues in increasing preferences toward energy-dense (vs.
low-calorie) products, it was still unclear what drove such a shift in food liking. Thus,
in Paper IV, we have developed and psychometrically validated the Anticipated Food
Scarcity Scale (AFSS), measuring the degree to which people perceive food resources as
becoming less available in the future. Aside from being a candidate mechanism partially
explaining findings reported in Papers II–III, anticipated food scarcity (AFS) is also re-
lated to some aspects of prosociality.
Studies presented in this thesis suggest that when environmental cues to food scarcity
are present, people show a stronger preference toward energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods
than their peers unexposed to such cues. Policymakers should consider these results when
designing climate change and other similar campaigns, as such communication often de-
picts food scarcity. Additional research may explore the possibility that exposure to food
scarcity cues affects food choices. Considering that we found AFS correlated with certain
prosocial attitudes, it is a new psychological construct that warrants future investigation
through multidisciplinary research.
vi
Contents
Acknowledgements ii
Abstract iv
1 Introduction and overview of Academic Papers 1
1.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Overview of the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3 The current research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.4 Overview of Academic Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.5 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2 Old minds, new marketplaces: How evolved psychological mechanisms
trigger mismatched food preferences 25
2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.2 The law of law’s leverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.3 Adaptations to ancestral foraging environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.4 Mismatches between ancestral and modern foraging . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
2.5 Policy recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.6 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
vii
2.7 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3 Crisis communication, anticipated food scarcity, and food preferences:
Preregistered evidence of the insurance hypothesis 49
3.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.2 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
3.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
3.5 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4 Seasonal cues to food scarcity and calorie cravings: Winter cues elicit
preferences for energy-dense foods 67
4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
4.2 General method and overview of studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
4.3 Study 1a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
4.4 Study 1b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
4.5 Study 2a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
4.6 Study 2b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
4.7 Study 2c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
4.8 General discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
4.9 Supplementary online materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
4.10 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5 Development and psychometric evaluation of the Anticipated Food Scarcity
Scale (AFSS) 117
viii
5.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
5.2 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
5.3 General discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
5.4 Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
5.5 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
6 Concluding discussion 166
6.1 Summary of the findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
6.2 Contribution to the academic literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
6.3 Managerial implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
6.4 Limitations and future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
6.5 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
ix
Chapter 1
Introduction and overview of Academic Papers
Micha(cid:32)l Folwarczny
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
1.1 Introduction
Each year, billions of people fight against their growing waists, with almost 50% of the
world population currently trying to become slimmer (IPSOS, 2021). Yet, despite these
attempts, “most of the world’s population live in countries where overweight and obesity
kills more people than underweight” (WHO, 2021). Experts, academic literature, and
public campaigns warn people against consuming excessive calories contributing to weight
gain and its associated health ailments. However, this public health crisis is prevalent
across the globe. Despite many health hazards linked to high adiposity (WHO, 2021),
current marketing activities aggressively promote foods that are culprits of gaining weight
quickly (Kessler, 2009). Eons of evolution created consumers who are predisposed to value
convenient, cheap, tasty, and safe foods; hence, many marketers sell a myriad of such
products (Folwarczny et al., 2021; Griskevicius et al., 2012).
Consumers’ food preferences may also shift temporarily as a response to, for instance,
cues to threats found in ancestral environments (Li et al., 2018; Tooby & Cosmides, 1990).
This research focuses on one set of such cues associated with food scarcity. Responding to
food scarcity cues with—as Papers II–III suggest—an increased preference toward energy-
dense (vs. low-calorie) foods is maladaptive nowadays in many cases, potentially leading
to harmful health outcomes. Thus, it is vital to explore how food scarcity cues affect
food choices and preferences and how to ameliorate their potentially harmful effect on
selecting healthy, low-calorie products. Notably, lowering consumption of energy-dense
foods belongs to critical steps in addressing not only public health challenges but also
environmental issues such as climate change, because these foods are associated with
a relatively high carbon footprint as compared to low-calorie products such as beans,
legumes, fruits, and most vegetables (Willett et al., 2019; Wynes & Nicholas, 2017).
1.2 Overview of the literature
This chapter is organized as follows. I first outline the basic tenets of evolutionary psy-
chology and explain how evolutionarily-informed theories may complement traditional
approaches dominant in marketing literature. In the subsequent section, I delineate an-
ticipated food scarcity (AFS), which is a construct of interest in this thesis. I also explain
how AFS differs from food insecurity, understood as a physical experience of food un-
availability in the current food science and public health literature. Next, I explain why
food preferences, shaped by eons of food scarcity experienced by early Homo sapiens, are
mismatched against present-day needs. Finally, I highlight the key contributions of this
research to the theory. This introductory chapter concludes with an overview of Academic
Papers included in the thesis.
1.2.1 Evolutionary psychology in marketing research
Marketing literature has established numerous state and trait predictors of consumer
behavior (Belk, 1975; Haugtvedt et al., 1992; Vinson et al., 1977). With respect to
healthy (vs. unhealthy) food choices, the mainstream literature focuses on proximate ex-
planations such as quality expectations, nutrition information, and certification (Grunert,
2002; Nikolova & Inman, 2015; Sigurdsson et al., 2020; Thøgersen et al., 2019), but also in-
store product placement (Sigurdsson et al., 2011, 2014), individual differences (Otterbring,
2019; Rojas-Rivas et al., 2020), and message framing (Ares et al., 2020; Ares et al., 2021),
as well as shopping habits (Mach´ın et al., 2020), visual imagery (Banovic & Otterbring,
2021; Otterbring & Shams, 2019), and visual attention to food products (Folwarczny et
al., 2019; Gidlo¨f et al., 2021; W¨astlund et al., 2018). However, to fully understand human
decision-making, it is crucial to also consider ultimate explanations. Whereas proximate
explanations are concerned with how specific mechanisms operate, ultimate explanations
focus on answering why such behaviors exist in the first place (Bateson & Laland, 2013;
Nesse, 2019; Scott-Phillips et al., 2011). In other words, investigating ultimate expla-
nations of consumer behavior eventually leads to seeking the adaptive function of these
behaviors throughout human history. The evolutionary approach encompasses both these
explanations, thus complementing traditional approaches to consumer behavior.
When considering the ultimate causes of consumer behavior, researchers can draw
hypotheses that would not have been developed otherwise. For instance, Durante et al.
(2008) predicted and found that women dress sexier at peak fertility when attracting
mates is most likely to yield reproductive benefits—the ultimate cause of their actions.
Further, female consumers at peak fertility are more variety-seeking (Durante & Arsena,
2015). Importantly, asking female consumers why they choose a skimpier dress at that
time would likely be futile, even if they attempted to answer such a question honestly, as
they are probably unaware of all motives underlying their choices (cf. Otterbring, 2021).
Similarly, shoppers, marketers, and policymakers are frequently unaware of the motives
shaping their decisions in the food domain. For example, when in a mating state of mind,
women want to eat healthier, whereas men want to spend more on expensive foods and
extra-large burgers, with these male consumption patterns being mediated by a desire
to display status—a key asset for men in the mating market (Chan & Zlatevska, 2019;
Otterbring, 2018).
Given that many (ultimate) motives that guide people’s decision-making are universal
rather than culture-specific (e.g., Anderson et al., 2015; Hepper et al., 2013), findings
stemming from evolutionarily informed theorizing can be more generalizable than those
stemming from theorizing accounting only for proximate explanations of consumer be-
havior. For example, in the food choice context, studies have found that people living
in developed countries show similar preferences toward sweet and energy-dense foods as
Hadza foragers in Tanzania, who still lead non-commercialized lifestyles (Berbesque &
Marlowe, 2009). Although the consumer behavior literature often disregards ultimate
causes of behavior and instead focuses only on proximate explanations, consumer behav-
ior carries with it extensive, broad psychological implications. Accordingly, applying an
evolutionary lens seems vital to advance consumer behavior as a discipline (Durante &
Griskevicius, 2018; Otterbring et al., 2020; Saad, 2017, 2020).
1.2.2 Anticipated food scarcity vs. food insecurity
Throughout this thesis, I focus on how perceivable—but not actual—scarcity of food re-
sources impacts food preferences. Notably, this construct, also referred to as anticipated
food scarcity (AFS) in Paper IV, and defined as “the perception of future food resources
becoming insufficient in terms of availability and accessibility” therein, does not entail
physical experience of food unavailability (i.e., hunger). Food availability refers to per-
ceiving food resources as existing in sufficient quantities (e.g., high and stable agricultural
production). Food accessibility denotes an individual’s perceived ability to obtain food
(e.g., living close to grocery stores or having stable employment providing income high
enough to buy desired food products).
As such, food scarcity/AFS as treated herein is a perception; therefore, it should
be influenced by various external cues and top-down processes (e.g., past knowledge,
experience, expectations). It is plausible that people, who have experienced poverty in
the past, will deem food resources as scarcer than their peers who have never experienced
such hurdles. Further, Brexit, trade wars, climate change, and other similar worldly events
potentially threatening global food chains’ security may be inferred as cues to upcoming
food scarcity. Additionally, even relatively short exposure to food scarcity cues through
text or videos increases AFS levels among people (see Paper IV, Study 4).
Anticipated food scarcity studied herein differs from food insecurity —which has been
extensively investigated in food science literature—in that it is a perception, whereas food
insecurity denotes emotions such as anxiety or fear (Merriam-Webster, 2021). Further-
more, high levels of household food insecurity are positively related to poverty and happen
more frequently in low-income countries (Webb et al., 2006). Thus, food insecurity is a
problem pervasive primarily across specific populations. However, all people, regardless
of their socioeconomic status, may perceive food resources as becoming scarcer; therefore,
findings from the empirical package presented herein should be broadly generalizable.
1.2.3 Mismatched food preferences
The human cognitive system has evolved through millennia to solve challenges found in
ancestral environments that have been vastly different from many challenges found in the
contemporary world (Tooby & Cosmides, 1990). For example, car accidents associated
with countless premature deaths each year are more dangerous for modern consumers
than snakes or spiders; however, the former has not been a pervasive threat in ances-
tral environments (cars are relatively novel stimuli when considered human evolutionary
history). As a result, modern humans usually do not fear cars and often drive too fast
even without realizing dangers associates with such behaviors. Still, they are terrified by
snakes and spiders, with many phobias preventing them from approaching these animals
(Ornstein & Ehrlich, 2000).
By the same token, overweight and obesity resulting from overconsumption of calories
have not been a pervasive challenge during most human evolutionary history. Famine, in
contrast, has been a critical threat for thousands of years, with many episodes of global
food shortages happening even in recent centuries (Fagan, 2001). As a consequence of
going from short periods of food availability to periods of food scarcity, humans have
developed mechanisms protecting them against the latter (Neel, 1962; Prentice et al.,
2005; Rozin, 1996). Some of these mechanisms, as described in the insurance hypothesis
(Nettle et al., 2017), trigger an increased energy consumption once environmental cues
signal scarcity of food.
Although many people suffer from acute hunger in the least developed countries, most
people in the world have already stored more fat than they will ever need during their
relatively rare and short fasts, especially given that consumers in developing and devel-
oped countries usually enjoy stable access to food resources. Thus, responding to cues to
food scarcity with increased energy intake is maladaptive in their cases, potentially caus-
ing unnecessary weight gain. However, the human cognitive system cannot differentiate
between cues to threats found in ancestral environments and similar cues found in the
contemporary world (that are not actual threats), triggering evolutionary mismatch—a
situation when mechanisms that emerged in ancestral times are activated by evolution-
arily novel stimuli, leading to negative consequences (Li et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020). For
example, Schaller et al. (2010) exposed participants to photographs of people looking like
if they were carrying infectious diseases. Such exposure activated their immune systems
in a similar way to contact with actual pathogens. However, this effect was not observed
among people exposed to the control stimuli, that is, healthy-looking people with guns
(Schaller et al., 2010). Notably, photographs of sick-looking people are evolutionarily
novel cues to ancestral threats that have continuously accompanied humans—pathogens.
Still, increased activity of an immune system is unnecessary in this case—possibly even
maladaptive because such immune functions drain energy—as photographs of infected
people are not actual pathogens that an immune system has to address. In this thesis, I
focus on evolutionary mismatches in food selection domains.
1.3 The current research
The insurance hypothesis has been developed to explain a higher prevalence of obesity
and overweight among food-insecure populations rather than among people where food
insecurity is rare (Nettle et al., 2017; Nettle et al., 2019). Although Nettle et al. (2017)
provided a theoretical account supported by a meta-analysis, the authors have not empir-
ically tested the potential influence of cues to food scarcity on shaping food preferences.
Instead, this theoretical account explains how environmental cues signaling food shortages
trigger increased overall energy intake. However, throughout their evolutionary history,
humans had to address yet another set of adaptive challenges occurring during relatively
rare times of food abundance—selecting products that are the best buffers against periods
of food shortages; hence, they had to develop mechanisms not only adjusting how much
to eat but also what to eat (Neel, 1962; Prentice et al., 2005; Rozin, 1996). Furthermore,
by focusing primarily on food-insecure populations, the insurance hypothesis neglects the
role of such cues in shaping food preferences among the general population.
I aim to expand this theoretical account by investigating how food scarcity cues af-
fect food preferences qualitatively among populations where food insecurity is unlikely.
Specifically, studies reported in Papers II–III tested the hypothesis that people exposed
to food scarcity cues prefer foods deemed as higher in calories more than their peers un-
exposed to such cues. Finally, in Paper IV, I have delineated a potential psychological
mechanism that may partially explain the effects reported across studies in Papers II–III.
The second overarching goal of this research is to shed light on whether public commu-
nication of events such as Brexit, trade wars, and climate change—as well as marketing
communication—does not bear “side effects” in the form of changing food preferences in
such a way that may hinder attempts to develop sustainable and healthy food systems
(Willett et al., 2019).
1.4 Overview of Academic Papers
In this section, I provide an overview of the four Academic Papers included in the thesis
and conclusions of each paper. Taken together, these papers show how food scarcity cues
affect food preferences as a function of their estimated calorie content and delineate a
new psychological construct—anticipated food scarcity (AFS)—that can be used in the
multidisciplinary study of consumer behavior.
Paper Title Participants Aims Status
I Old minds, new marketplaces: N/A (1) Outline how eons of evolution- Conditional
How evolved psychological ary history have affected modern con- acceptance in
mechanisms trigger mis- sumers’ food preferences Evolutionary Be-
matched food preferences (2) Propose strategies based on evo- havioral Sciences
lutionarily informed theories that
may facilitate healthier food choices
II Crisis communication, antici- Experts panel = 9 (1) Investigate how exposure to food Published in
pated food scarcity, and food Pretest Study 1 = 54 scarcity distant in time and space af- Food Quality and
preferences: Preregistered evi- Pretest Study 2 = 56 fects food preferences Preference
dence of the insurance hypoth- Study 1 = 98 (2) Conduct a preliminary empirical
esis Study 2 = 110 examination of the insurance hypoth-
Study 3 = 100 esis
III Seasonal cues to food scarcity Pretest = 140 (1) Conceptually replicate and ex- Published in
and calorie cravings: Win- Study 1a = 106 tend the results reported in Paper II Food Quality and
ter cues elicit preferences for Study 1b = 105 (2) Rule out several potential alter- Preference
energy-dense foods Study 2a = 119 native explanations and confounds
Study 2b = 120 that emerged in Paper II
Study 2c = 420 (3) Propose a candidate psychologi-
cal mechanism that may partially ex-
plain the findings
IV Development and psychome- Study 1a = 10 (1) Develop and psychometrically Published in
tric evaluation of the An- Study 1b = 26 validate a scale measuring antici- Appetite
ticipated Food Scarcity Scale Study 1c = 52 pated food scarcity (AFS)—a con-
(AFSS) Study 2 = 303 struct that may be a mediator or a
Study 3a = 212 moderator of the effects found in Pa-
Study 3b 140 pers II–III
Study 4 = 175 (2) Highlight how AFS may be ex-
Ancillary Study = 415 trapolated to other disciplines
1.4.1 Paper I
Aims
In Paper I, we aimed to briefly show how selection pressures have impacted food prefer-
ences among modern consumers. Then, we strived to propose several ways through which
policymakers may increase the cost-effectiveness of campaigns promoting healthy eating.
Methods
In this paper, we reviewed relevant literature that concluded with drawing implications
for policymakers.
Conclusions
We highlighted how the human food acquisition system evolved to cope with threats
and opportunities found in ancestral environments, making healthy and low-calorie food
promotion arduous, as such foods have had a relatively little adaptive function in the past.
Finally, we draw recommendations for policymakers based on the law of law’s leverage
(Jones, 2001) that account for the degree to which behaviors have been adaptive during
the long, evolutionary history of Homo sapiens. These proposed solutions were developed
for the relatively high cost-effectiveness of campaigns designed to promote healthier food
choices. Notably, to make our solutions feasible, we acknowledged the importance of
considering all three main stakeholders in the food industry: retailers, policymakers, and
consumers.
1.4.2 Paper II
Aims
The central aim of the studies reported in Paper II was to provide the first empirical
evidence behind the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017). Specifically, we tested if
mechanisms highlighted therein yield a higher preference toward energy-dense (vs. low-
calorie) foods in response to food scarcity cues. The second aim of Paper II was to test
if this effect differed across sexes. Finally, by recruiting samples from the two countries,
we strived to test the generalizability of the findings.
Methods
In the main studies, participants were exposed to either a video showing climate change-
induced food scarcity (i.e., famine in distant parts of the world or drought leading to crop
failures that may be more prevalent in the future) or a video showing food abundance
(i.e., the rise of obesity in the world). Next, participants had to estimate the calorie
content of 30 foods and stated their preferences toward these foods.
Conclusions
Watching climate change-induced food scarcity distant in time and space increases pref-
erences toward foods deemed as higher in calories. This effect—replicated in all three
studies, including a preregistered study—was found across online US samples recruited
through MTurk and among Danish university students in a laboratory setting. The stud-
ies also provide preliminary evidence behind the sex-specificity of the effects, with females
showing a stronger preference toward energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods than males after
exposure to food scarcity cues. In sum, the findings suggest that the insurance hypothesis
(Nettle et al., 2017) is applicable not only to food-insecure populations. Instead, food
scarcity cues may impact food preferences across the general population in developed
countries.
1.4.3 Paper III
Aims
Although the effects reported in Paper II appeared generalizable among WEIRD samples
(Henrich et al., 2010), replicable, and we found no significant differences in the control
measures across conditions, the control video depicted obese individuals. Viewing such
body types may alter food preferences, potentially leading to lower preferences toward
energy-dense dishes (Banovic & Otterbring, 2021; Campbell & Mohr, 2011; Otterbring &
Shams, 2019). Aside from this confounding variable that could have driven the effects,
there was little evidence that our experimental manipulation successfully elicited desired
thoughts related to scarcity, survival, and energy-dense foods.
Thus, in Paper III, we aimed to test whether the effects were generalizable to stimuli
that do not show humans and stimuli with low emotional load (i.e., nonexplicit cues to
food scarcity). Additionally, we investigated if subtle cues to food scarcity increase the
accessibility of concepts linked to survival, scarcity, and energy-dense (but not low-calorie)
foods.
This acronym stands for overrepresented participants in psychological research who are White, Ed-
ucated, and come from Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic countries (Henrich et al., 2010).
Methods
After being exposed to the experimental (a winter forest walk) or the control video stimuli
(a summer forest walk), participants filled out the word fragment completion tasks (for
details, see Gasiorowska et al., 2018; Nelson et al., 1989; Roediger et al., 1992; Tulving et
al., 1982). Specifically, they had to complete 15-word fragments that could be completed
in several ways. Here, we tested whether exposure to food scarcity cues increases the
number of created words related to survival, scarcity, and energy-dense foods, but not
those related to low-calorie foods.
Procedure in Studies 2a–2c mirrored that reported in Paper II, with one exception—we
used different experimental and control stimuli, as described in Studies 1a–1b.
Conclusions
Cues to food scarcity increase accessibility to concepts related to survival and energy-dense
foods, but not to concepts related to scarcity and low-calorie foods. Additionally, watching
videos depicting subtle cues to food scarcity (a winter forest walk) increases preferences
toward energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods, with this effect likely being stronger for males
than females.
1.4.4 Paper IV
Aims
Papers II–III provide empirical evidence behind the generalizability of the insurance hy-
pothesis (Nettle, 2017) across samples and food scarcity cues of varying intensity, at least
in developed countries. However, mechanisms through which cues to food scarcity affect
food preferences still remain unexplored. Therefore, in Paper IV, we intended to delineate
a potential psychological construct—anticipated food scarcity (AFS), with a psychometric
scale capturing it—that could partially predict response patterns in the earlier research.
An additional goal of research conducted in Paper IV was to test whether AFS is a
construct that can be applied to other disciplines studying social behavior.
Methods
We have applied the six-step psychometric protocol by Dima (2018), focusing primarily
on the Mokken scale analysis (MSA) to test the scale’s hypothesized unidimensionality
and whether its set of items meets the criteria for the double monotonicity model (Van der
Ark, 2007, 2012). We established its convergent and divergent validity by correlating the
8-item Anticipated Food Insecurity Scale (AFSS) with existing food insecurity measures,
prosocial attitudes, and several other scales, primarily capturing affect. Moreover, we
tested the scale’s sensitivity to food scarcity cues by exposing participants to textual and
video stimuli depicting food scarcity or by exposing them to control stimuli.
Conclusions
The 8-item AFSS forms a strong, unidimensional scale that can be used to measure
people’s perceptions of food resources as becoming scarcer. The scale showed significant,
albeit low correlations with the existing measures of food insecurity; it is sensitive to food
scarcity cues and related to aspects of prosociality. Notably, AFS captured by the scale is
a candidate psychological mechanism that may partially explain a shift in food preferences
after exposure to food scarcity cues. In sum, AFSS may foster novel experimental research
in sustainability, food waste, prosociality, and other related topic areas.
1.5 References
Anderson, C., Hildreth, J. A. D., & Howland, L. (2015). Is the desire for status a funda-
mental human motive? A review of the empirical literature. Psychological Bulletin,
Ares, G., Machı´en, L., Vidal, L., Otterbring, T., Aschemann-Witzel, J., Curutchet, M. R.,
& Bove, I. (2020). Uruguayan citizens’ perception of messages to promote healthy
eating through the use of nutritional warnings. Journal of Nutrition Education and
Ares, G., Vidal, L., Otterbring, T., Aschemann-Witzel, J., Curutchet, M. R., Gim´enez,
A., & Bove, I. (2021). Communication campaigns to support the use of nutritional
warnings: Different messages for different people? Health Education & Behavior.
Banovic, M., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Athletic abs or big bellies: The impact of imagery,
arousal levels, and health consciousness on consumers’ attitudes towards plant-
10.1016/j.foodqual.2020.104067
Bateson, P., & Laland, K. N. (2013). Tinbergen’s four questions: An appreciation and an
j.tree.2013.09.013
Belk, R. W. (1975). Situational variables and consumer behavior. Journal of Consumer
Berbesque, J. C., & Marlowe, F. W. (2009). Sex differences in food preferences of Hadza
hunter-gatherers. Evolutionary Psychology, 7 (4), 147470490900700409. https : / /
doi.org/10.1177/147470490900700409
Campbell, M. C., & Mohr, G. S. (2011). Seeing is eating: How and when activation of a
negative stereotype increases stereotype-conducive behavior. Journal of Consumer
Chan, E. Y., & Zlatevska, N. (2019). Is meat sexy? Meat preference as a function of the
org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2019.01.008
Dima, A. L. (2018). Scale validation in applied health research: Tutorial for a 6-step R-
based psychometrics protocol. Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine, 6 (1),
Durante, K. M., & Arsena, A. R. (2015). Playing the field: The effect of fertility on
women’s desire for variety. Journal of Consumer Research, 41 (6), 1372–1391. https:
//doi.org/10.1086/679652
Durante, K. M., & Griskevicius, V. (2018). Evolution and consumer psychology. Consumer
Durante, K. M., Li, N. P., & Haselton, M. G. (2008). Changes in women’s choice of
dress across the ovulatory cycle: Naturalistic and laboratory task-based evidence.
10.1177/0146167208323103
Fagan, B. (2001). The Little Ice Age: how climate made history 1300-1850. Basic Books.
Folwarczny, M., Otterbring, T., Sigurdsson, V., Tan, L. K., & Li, N. P. (2021). Old minds,
new marketplaces: How evolved psychological mechanisms trigger mismatched con-
Folwarczny, M., Pawar, S., Sigurdsson, V., & Fagerstrøm, A. (2019). Using neuro-is/consumer
neuroscience tools to study healthy food choices: A review. Procedia Computer Sci-
Gasiorowska, A., Zaleskiewicz, T., & Kesebir, P. (2018). Money as an existential anxiety
buffer: Exposure to money prevents mortality reminders from leading to increased
death thoughts. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 79, 394–409. https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2018.09.004
Gidlo¨f, K., Ares, G., Aschemann-Witzel, J., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Give us today our
daily bread: The effect of hunger on consumers’ visual attention towards bread
and the role of time orientation. Food Quality and Preference, 88, 104079. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2020.104079
Griskevicius, V., Cantu´, S. M., & Van Vugt, M. (2012). The evolutionary bases for sus-
tainable behavior: Implications for marketing, policy, and social entrepreneurship.
jppm.11.040
Grunert, K. G. (2002). Current issues in the understanding of consumer food choice.
S0924-2244(02)00137-1
Haugtvedt, C. P., Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1992). Need for cognition and ad-
vertising: Understanding the role of personality variables in consumer behavior.
7408(08)80038-1
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). Most people are not WEIRD. Nature,
Hepper, E. G., Sedikides, C., & Cai, H. (2013). Self-enhancement and self-protection
strategies in China: Cultural expressions of a fundamental human motive. Journal
ipsos.com/en/global-weight-and-actions
Jones, O. D. (2001). Time-shifted rationality and the law of law’s leverage: Behavioral
economics meets behavioral biology. Northwestern University Law Review, 95 (4),
Kessler, D. A. (2009). The end of overeating: Taking control of the insatiable American
appetite. Rodale.
Li, N. P., van Vugt, M., & Colarelli, S. M. (2018). The evolutionary mismatch hypothesis:
Implications for psychological science. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
Li, N. P., Yong, J. C., & Van Vugt, M. (2020). Evolutionary psychology’s next challenge:
Solving modern problems using a mismatch perspective. Evolutionary Behavioral
Mach´ın, L., Curutchet, M. R., Gugliucci, V., Vitola, A., Otterbring, T., de Alcantara,
M., & Ares, G. (2020). The habitual nature of food purchases at the supermarket:
appet.2020.104844
Merriam-Webster. (2021). Insecurity. Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Retrieved Febru-
Neel, J. V. (1962). Diabetes mellitus: A “thrifty” genotype rendered detrimental by
“progress”? American Journal of Human Genetics, 14 (4), 353–362.
Nelson, D. L., Keelean, P. D., & Negrao, M. (1989). Word-fragment cuing: The lexical
search hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Nesse, R. M. (2019). Tinbergen’s four questions: Two proximate, two evolutionary. Evo-
eoy035
Nettle, D. (2017). Does hunger contribute to socioeconomic gradients in behavior? Fron-
Nettle, D., Andrews, C., & Bateson, M. (2017). Food insecurity as a driver of obesity
in humans: The insurance hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X16000947
Nettle, D., Joly, M., Broadbent, E., Smith, C., Tittle, E., & Bateson, M. (2019). Oppor-
tunistic food consumption in relation to childhood and adult food insecurity: An
j.appet.2018.07.018
Nikolova, H. D., & Inman, J. J. (2015). Healthy choice: The effect of simplified point-of-sale
nutritional information on consumer food choice behavior. Journal of Marketing
Ornstein, R. E., & Ehrlich, P. R. (2000). New world new mind: Moving toward conscious
evolution. ISHK.
Otterbring, T. (2018). Healthy or wealthy? Attractive individuals induce sex-specific food
foodqual.2017.02.014
Otterbring, T. (2019). Time orientation mediates the link between hunger and hedonic
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2019.02.032
Otterbring, T. (2021). Evolutionary psychology in marketing: Deep, debated, but fancier
mar.21453
Otterbring, T., & Shams, P. (2019). Mirror, mirror, on the menu: Visual reminders of
overweight stimulate healthier meal choices. Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Otterbring, T., Sundie, J., Li, Y. J., & Hill, S. (2020). Evolutionary psychological consumer
research: Bold, bright, but better with behavior. Journal of Business Research, 120,
Prentice, A. M., Rayco-Solon, P., & Moore, S. E. (2005). Insights from the developing
world: Thrifty genotypes and thrifty phenotypes. Proceedings of the Nutrition So-
Roediger, H. L., Weldon, M. S., Stadler, M. L., & Riegler, G. L. (1992). Direct comparison
of two implicit memory tests: Word fragment and word stem completion. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18 (6), 1251–1269.
Rojas-Rivas, E., Antu´nez, L., Cuffia, F., Otterbring, T., Aschemann-Witzel, J., Gim´enez,
A., & Ares, G. (2020). Time orientation and risk perception moderate the influence
of sodium warnings on food choice: Implications for the design of communication
Rozin, P. (1996). Towards a psychology of food and eating: From motivation to mod-
ule to model to marker, morality, meaning, and metaphor. Current Directions in
Saad, G. (2017). On the method of evolutionary psychology and its applicability to con-
10.1509/jmr.14.0645
Saad, G. (2020). Building a global database of nomological networks of cumulative evi-
Schaller, M., Miller, G. E., Gervais, W. M., Yager, S., & Chen, E. (2010). Mere visual
perception of other people’s disease symptoms facilitates a more aggressive im-
Scott-Phillips, T. C., Dickins, T. E., & West, S. A. (2011). Evolutionary theory and the
ultimate–proximate distinction in the human behavioral sciences. Perspectives on
Sigurdsson, V., Larsen, N. M., Alemu, M. H., Gallogly, J. K., Menon, R. V., & Fager-
strøm, A. (2020). Assisting sustainable food consumption: The effects of quality
signals stemming from consumers and stores in online and physical grocery re-
jbusres.2019.11.029
Sigurdsson, V., Larsen, N. M., & Gunnarsson, D. (2011). An in-store experimental analysis
of consumers’ selection of fruits and vegetables. The Service Industries Journal,
Sigurdsson, V., Larsen, N. M., & Gunnarsson, D. (2014). Healthy food products at the
point of purchase: An in-store experimental analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior
Thøgersen, J., Pedersen, S., & Aschemann-Witzel, J. (2019). The impact of organic certi-
fication and country of origin on consumer food choice in developed and emerging
foodqual.2018.09.003
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past explains the present: Emotional adaptations
and the structure of ancestral environments. Ethology and Sociobiology, 11 (4-5),
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., & Stark, H. A. (1982). Priming effects in word-fragment
completion are independent of recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8 (4), 336–342. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1037/0278-7393.8.4.336
Van der Ark, L. A. (2007). Mokken scale analysis in R. Journal of Statistical Software,
Van der Ark, L. A. (2012). New developments in mokken scale analysis in R. Journal of
Vinson, D. E., Scott, J. E., & Lamont, L. M. (1977). The role of personal values in
marketing and consumer behavior. Journal of Marketing, 41 (2), 44–50. https :
//doi.org/10.1177/002224297704100215
Wa¨stlund, E., Shams, P., & Otterbring, T. (2018). Unsold is unseen. . . or is it? Examining
the role of peripheral vision in the consumer choice process using eye-tracking
Webb, P., Coates, J., Frongillo, E. A., Rogers, B. L., Swindale, A., & Bilinsky, P. (2006).
Measuring household food insecurity: Why it’s so important and yet so difficult to
136.5.1404S
detail/obesity-and-overweight
Willett, W., Rockstro¨m, J., Loken, B., Springmann, M., Lang, T., Vermeulen, S., Garnett,
T., Tilman, D., DeClerck, F., Wood, A., et al. (2019). Food in the Anthropocene:
the EAT–Lancet Commission on healthy diets from sustainable food systems. The
Wynes, S., & Nicholas, K. A. (2017). The climate mitigation gap: Education and govern-
ment recommendations miss the most effective individual actions. Environmental
Chapter 2
Old minds, new marketplaces: How evolved psychological
mechanisms trigger mismatched food preferences
Conditional acceptance in Evolutionary Behavioral Sciences
Micha(cid:32)l Folwarczny
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Tobias Otterbring
Department of Management, University of Agder,
Institute of Retail Economics
Valdimar Sigurdsson
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Lynn K. L. Tan and Norman P. Li
School of Social Sciences, Singapore Management University
Abstract
Principally due to unhealthy food choices, almost half of adults worldwide are overweight
or obese. Current food retail practices bear some responsibility for such public health is-
sues. We argue that numerous attempts to promote healthy eating have been unsuccessful
due to the failure to account for our outdated evolved food selection mechanisms. Build-
ing on the evolutionary mismatch hypothesis and contrasting ancestral versus present-day
foraging environments, we discuss how marketing activities exploit evolutionarily old food
preferences and elicit unhealthy food choices for profit maximization at the expense of
public health in terms of food consumption. We conclude by explaining how to mitigate
this harmful trend by applying the law of law’s leverage to facilitate effective strategies to
increase healthy food choices. Notably, we show how evolutionary psychology principles
can be used to reconcile competing interests between consumers, retailers, and decision-
makers responsible for public health policies.
Keywords: consumer behavior, evolutionary mismatch, food preferences, food market-
ing
Public Significance Statement
Consumers often make unhealthy food choices, partially because of mismatches between
their food preferences that have evolved due to frequent food scarcity in ancestral environ-
ments and the ample availability of food products in the current consumption landscape.
Marketers often exploit these evolutionarily old food preferences to increase sales of foods
and beverages, including unhealthy ones. Accordingly, understanding how evolutionary
mismatches operate can inform more efficient policymaking, improve public health, and
boost consumer well-being.
2.1 Introduction
During the past few decades, the obesity rate has tripled worldwide, with 40% of adults
now being overweight or obese (Perkovic et al., 2021; WHO, 2020). Overconsumption
of unhealthy and energy-dense foods is a pivotal contributor to this public health crisis,
which begs for urgent development of healthy food systems (Willett et al., 2019). Con-
sidering that consumers acquire foods mainly in retail environments, marketers bear a
certain degree of responsibility for these public health issues. However, many retailers are
concerned with maximizing profits rather than focusing on consumer well-being. On the
other hand, governmental agencies have a high interest in developing effective campaigns
that promote healthy eating habits—all 193 United Nations member states have agreed
to work toward universal healthcare coverage by 2030 (UN, n.d.), which will increase
government expenditures related to treating excessive bodyweight consequences such as
cardiovascular diseases and certain forms of cancer (WHO, 2020). In this article, we
argue that applying an evolutionary perspective to understand consumer behavior—the
evolutionary mismatch framework (Li et al., 2018) and the law of law’s leverage (Jones,
2001)—is essential to balancing the competing interests between consumers, retailers,
and policymakers, such that retailers can profit sustainably from providing available food
options that do not compromise consumers’ health.
2.2 The law of law’s leverage
In line with the law of law’s leverage (Jones, 2001), the amount of resources needed
to achieve desired behavioral changes is an inverse function of the extent to which the
cilitating behaviors that had little adaptive benefits throughout human history is difficult
and costly, whereas behaviors that led to solving adaptive challenges need minimal, if any,
incentives to occur. In contrast, behaviors that had a high adaptive value in the past are
difficult to discourage, whereas even minor deterrents sufficiently prevent behaviors that
had a marginal adaptive value. Governmental agencies may increase the cost-effectiveness
of their policies by leveraging fundamental motives that emerged as a response to adaptive
challenges (Griskevicius & Kenrick, 2013). For example, publishing names of pickpock-
eters may be cheaper and provide a stronger deterrent than keeping them in custody that
ends with a fine, as people are generally more driven to defend their status in groups than
to avoid being in custody (Jones, 2001).
Consuming energy-dense foods has been critical for survival in the past when calories
were scarce, and average energy expenditure was relatively high compared to that in
modern, sedentary lifestyles. Thus, governments do not have to incentivize consuming
chocolate bars, burgers, and pizzas that resemble the taste of foods found in nature that
had a high value for promoting survival. In contrast, consuming low-calorie foods has
been less critical, especially given that an average lifespan was shorter before the advent
of modern medicine. Thus, it is more challenging to promote low-calorie, healthier options
such as vegetables, berries, and meats that are close to their natural forms over tastier,
high-calorie foods that are processed, sweetened, and genetically modified. Policies that
governments may offer to promote substituting unhealthy foods with healthier alternatives
should, therefore, leverage these evolved food preferences that influence consumers while
shopping. An example of applying such strategies can be to offer foods that taste similar
and provide the convenience of junk foods like vegan burgers that are lower in sodium and
fat than their traditional alternatives. Governmental institutions may further increase the
effectiveness of such solutions by creating and publicizing rankings of companies offering
the healthiest options, thus rewarding companies and their management with heightened
social status. On the other hand, these institutions may create lists of manufacturers
adding most sugar, salt, and other unhealthy ingredients to create a “blacklist,” with no
manufacturers arguably wanting to be located at the bottom of this list.
Mate seeking
Using plastic cutlery
Adaptive value in the past
roivaheb
tneverp
ot
secruoseR
2.3 Adaptations to ancestral foraging environments
To understand what drives a modern consumer to select specific foods from a plethora of
alternatives found among the supermarket shelves, we need to understand the ancestral
environments in which our predecessors foraged. Modern homo sapiens emerged approxi-
mately 300,000 years ago in Southern Africa (Schlebusch et al., 2017). Ancestral humans
lived close to nature in tribes usually not exceeding 150 members (Aiello & Dunbar, 1993;
Dunbar, 1993). Ancient foragers did not enjoy stable access to food resources. Instead,
they faced environments that fluctuated between—often lethal—periods of famine and
food availability; thus, they had to develop adaptations against times of food scarcity
(Rozin, 1996). Even after farming replaced hunting and gathering, humans experienced
famine. For instance, “The Year Without Summer” brought massive crop failures that
led to worldwide starvation in 1816 (Fagan, 2001).
As a result of an ancestral lineage that largely lived in hostile habitats, modern-day
humans still carry food acquisition and bodyweight regulation mechanisms specialized
in protecting them against food shortages (but not against food abundance). Thrifty
genotype is an example of such adaptation (Neel, 1962; Prentice et al., 2005). This
“thriftiness” takes several forms: (1) the metabolism that favors energy-saving; (2) a ten-
dency to gain weight quickly; (3) an ability to limit physiological processes to a minimum;
(4) a predisposition to consume large amounts of food whenever availability allows; (5)
a preference toward physical inactivity to conserve energy; and (6) behaviors aimed at
maximizing access to food resources such as food hoarding (Prentice et al., 2005).
According to the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017), humans possess adaptive
mechanisms that respond to environmental cues to food unavailability. These mechanisms
increase energy intake over maintenance levels, contributing to higher energy storage in
the form of body fat. However, this adaptation appears to be sex-specific, with food-
insecure females more likely than males to be overweight and obese in developed countries
(Nettle et al., 2017). This account has received recent empirical support in a series of
studies, including preregistered scientific work (Folwarczny, Li, et al., 2021; Folwarczny,
Christensen, et al., 2021), where exposure to content showing food scarcity distant in
time and space prompted participants to immediately prefer higher calorie foods. These
findings indicate that humans may react not only to actual food scarcity (cf. Nettle et al.,
2017), but also to anticipated food scarcity and perceivable cues linked to such scarcity
by shifting their food preferences toward products deemed higher in calories (Folwarczny,
Li, et al., 2021).
Unlike specialists eating only one type of food, such as carnivores, humans can consume
a wide array of different food options. Thus, when feasting, ancient humans had to
select the most nutritious and diverse menus that maximized the chances of surviving
an impending famine while minimizing risks associated with consumption—some foods
could have been poisonous (Breslin, 2013). Consequently, humans developed a preference
toward sweet, salty, and energy-dense foods rich in proteins that provided high doses
of nutrients needed for prolonged fasts, but formed an aversion toward sour and bitter
tastes, as these flavors may signal that the food contains toxins (Beauchamp et al., 1986;
Krebs, 2009; Otterbring, 2021). Although human food preferences have historically been
adaptive, these evolved preferences may now lead consumers to indulge in innutritious
food products that are available in abundance. Consequently, the nutritional profile
of modern-day diets vastly differs from that of ancient diets, leading to adverse health
outcomes (Eaton & Konner, 1985). Indeed, consumers tend to prefer high-fat, high-
sodium, and high-caloric beef burgers rather than dressing-free salads.
Hunter-gatherers share many similarities in their food preferences with the abovemen-
tioned consumers. For instance, the Hadza of Tanzania are hunter-gatherers inhabiting
areas where early hominins resided millions of years ago (Berbesque & Marlowe, 2009).
They are opportunistic foragers, usually not seeking specific items. The foods they eat
consist of five main categories: honey, meat, berries, baobab, and tubers. High-sugar
and energy-dense honey is their preferred food option, whereas tubers rich in complex
carbohydrates that are more difficult to digest and lower in energy density are the least
preferred food items. Interestingly, the Hadza males prefer honey to a larger extent than
do females, who instead value berries more (Berbesque & Marlowe, 2009). However, due
to traditional lifestyles, these hunter-gatherers consume primarily unprocessed foods and
moderate amounts of calories; thus, their food preferences remain adaptive.
2.4 Mismatches between ancestral and modern for-
aging
In contrast to ancestral humans who frequently experienced food scarcity and had to
invest a considerable amount of time and energy in finding something to eat, modern con-
sumers “forage” conveniently in supermarkets and usually maintain a substantial amount
of food in their refrigerators and pantries. In fact, food has become even more accessible,
as the retail sector is shifting to online platforms (Sigurdsson et al., 2017), with this trend
accelerating due to the current COVID-19 pandemic (Chang & Meyerhoefer, 2021). More-
over, the number of products offered by an average supermarket has increased from 9,000
to almost 50,000 between 1975 and 2008, with many products offered in dozens of flavors
(Consumer Reports, 2014). On top of that, an average person is exposed to thousands of
appetite-inducing ads daily (Story, 2007). Additionally, retailers offer products mimicking
supernormal versions of the best-tasting foods found in ancestral environments: over half
of the calories Americans consume are ultra-processed, high in sodium, and sugar-laden
(Steele et al., 2016).
Given the striking differences between ancestral and modern foraging environments,
it becomes evident that the rapid change in which food alternatives that typically occupy
most consumers’ minds (and most supermarket shelves) has outpaced the changes in the
specific psychological mechanisms that evolved throughout our evolutionary past (Tooby
& Cosmides, 1990). Consequently, consumers may fail to cope well with various aspects
of modern-day food selection challenges. Such a divergence between evolutionary mecha-
nisms specialized to respond to threats and opportunities found in ancestral environments
and modern-day stimuli activating these mechanisms frequently leads to maladaptive out-
comes or evolutionary mismatches (Li et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020; Van Vugt et al., 2020).
Mismatches occur when psychological and physiological mechanisms, which originated to
produce adaptive responses to cues and other inputs found in ancestral environments, en-
counter evolutionarily novel stimuli (Gidlo¨f et al., 2021). Mismatched psychological mech-
anisms then produce cognitive, affective, and behavioral responses that may no longer be
adaptive and, sometimes, may even be maladaptive, although evolutionarily novel stimuli
do not always yield undesired consequences (cf. Kanazawa, 2010).
2.5 Policy recommendations
We argue that applying evolutionarily informed theories may help reconcile the inter-
ests of three key stakeholders in the food industry: governmental agencies, retailers, and
consumers. The primary interest of governments is to facilitate healthy eating habits to
improve public health. Indeed, most countries in the world have agreed to work toward
universal health coverage (UN, n.d.), and unhealthy eating results in diseases that are
typically extremely expensive to treat at population and national levels (WHO, 2020).
Food retailers, like retailers in other industries, strive to maximize their profits. Finally,
most consumers express a desire to eat healthier and agree that people tend to eat too
much and too unhealthily (Pew Research Center, 2016). Unfortunately, consumers’ at-
tempts to change their eating habits usually fail. For example, weight-loss diets typically
lead to higher body weight subsequently than before starting the program (Mann et al.,
2007) and consumers often select cheap, convenient, and tasty foods instead of focusing
on healthy nutrition (Wansink & Huckabee, 2005). These seemingly strange behaviors are
understandable if we consider the fact that modern consumers’ decision-making machinery
has been shaped by thousands of generations of struggle against food unavailability.
2.5.1 Make healthy foods appealing to evolutionarily-shaped
taste buds
Inspired by the evolutionary mismatch framework (Li et al., 2018) and the law of law’s
leverage (Jones, 2001), we posit that the most promising form of promoting healthy
foods consumption is to make them taste as good as or even better than unhealthy
options, which usually mimic the taste of sweet, protein-rich, and energy-dense foods
found in ancestral environments. Studies show that consumers are only modestly aware
of unhealthy snacks being substituted with healthier products at the point of purchase
(Winkler et al., 2016). Such interventions increase sales of healthy foods, given that
(healthy) product alternatives closely mimick (unhealthy) goods that consumers used to
buy before interventions (Hoek et al., 2017; Sigurdsson et al., 2014). Some governments
have already introduced policies that facilitate substituting animal-based and unhealthy
foods with plant-based and healthier alternatives that closely resemble foods that modern
consumers—similar to their ancestors—prefer. For example, Singapore strives to become
a global leader in plant-based (cholesterol-free) protein production and consumption—the
country’s state-owned venture has recently invested significant funds into companies pro-
ducing plant-based animal meat substitutes (Ramli, 2021). Although the future profitabil-
ity of companies offering meat alternatives is currently uncertain, the value of Impossible
Foods and Beyond Meat that belong to leaders in this industry has already surpassed
expectations (Sen & Franklin, 2021). However, in contrast to Singapore, many countries
have merely limited consumers’ access to certain products without offering any alterna-
tives. We believe that such attempts will be politically unpopular, as consumers’ food
preferences which have developed through thousands of generations, cannot be wiped out
by merely increasing the cost and/or limiting the availability of some products. In fact,
higher prices of specific food products may paradoxically make them even more desir-
able due to the scarcity principle, whereby items that are difficult to access or afford are
viewed as more desirable (Lynn, 1991; Otterbring, 2016; Otterbring & Rolschau, 2021).
In the worst case, this may create a rebound effect, where people are more inclined to buy
these foods. Additionally, unlike promoting healthy food consumption, imposing taxes
on unhealthy foods may hurt the interests of retailers, making them oppose the changes.
Retailers can be incentivized to offer more nutritious products, such as snacks made of
low-calorie root vegetables seasoned with low-sodium salt instead of omnipresent and un-
healthy potato chips. To help retailers stay profitable while phasing out unhealthy foods,
governments may financially support them by, for example, offering tax deductions on
revenues from healthy foods.
2.5.2 Make healthy food choices convenient
As our ancestors had to conserve energy (Prentice et al., 2005), they could not direct much
attention to foods that were especially challenging to obtain. This may partially explain
the worldwide success of fast-food chains such as McDonald’s, offering low prices and con-
venience. These low-cost chain restaurants are often the only options for consumers who
frequently live in “food deserts” where healthier alternatives are unavailable or difficult to
find, making healthy eating inconvenient. Still, the cost of healthy diets rich in fruits and
vegetables is only marginally higher per calorie than the cost of diets filled with unhealthy,
“cheap” calories (Rao et al., 2013). Therefore, with adequate governmental incentives,
fast-food chains may consider introducing more unprocessed, healthier, and plant-based
dishes that are as tasty and convenient as their existing offerings without imposing a
higher financial burden on consumers. Additionally, it is crucial to make healthy food
more prominent (in terms of attention) and easy to buy (in terms of behavioral and cog-
nitive effort and time). The store layout should make it as easy as possible for consumers
to select healthy products. For instance, Sigurdsson et al. (2014) conducted experiments
in two grocery stores in Norway. The authors substituted sugary snacks in the most con-
venient places in grocery stores (i.e., check-out counters) with healthier alternatives like
dried fruits and dried fish. They found a substantial increase in sales of healthier products
and a decrease in sales of sugary snacks. Policymakers may therefore prohibit the sales of
foods high in fat and sugar in these locations in grocery stores without lowering overall
sales that would harm retailers. In many countries, it is illegal to sell alcohol in grocery
stores; thus, similar policies are already applied.
2.5.3 Minimize the impact of food scarcity cues
Ancestral humans have developed mechanisms sensitive to food scarcity cues (Nettle et al.,
2017). Thus, instead of featuring public campaigns that bombard consumers with food
scarcity cues, governments can reassure people that shelves will remain full during events
such as Brexit or the COVID-19 pandemic. Environmental cues may similarly signal food
scarcity and elicit calorie cravings among consumers (Folwarczny et al., 2022). On the
other hand, moving people from poor to more affluent neighborhoods is associated with
decreasing obesity rates (Ludwig et al., 2011). Therefore, policies aimed at minimizing
economic inequalities may contribute to addressing obesity in societies. Indeed, income
inequality and economic insecurity increase the risk of obesity across countries (Nettle
et al., 2017).
2.5.4 Limit excessive collaborative consumption of food
Humans, like many other social living species, usually care for their kin, with many goods
and services appealing to this fundamental motive (Griskevicius & Kenrick, 2013). For
example, Dopperlerz—a German health tonic—is often advertised as a gift for family
members boosting their vitality. Collaborative consumption with consumers contributing
to and eating from a shared pool of food (Parker et al., 2019), is a chance for consumers
to show their kin care motivation. However, these generosity displays lead people to buy
and consume more foods on average than in private settings, potentially contributing to
weight gain and food waste (Parker et al., 2019). Nevertheless, kin care motives may be
leveraged to lower consumption of unhealthy foods. For example, healthy food sets that
will be consumed with others during parties may be advertised similarly to the famous
German health tonic, potentially making collaborative consumption a “healthier” event.
2.5.5 Make existing products healthier
Manufacturers often optimize the amount of sugar, fat, and salt as well as aromas, ap-
pearance, and texture of food in a way that maximizes a hedonic pleasure from food
consumption, making it more difficult for consumers to stop eating when they are full,
mainly because consumers are often unaware of what they are ingesting (Kessler, 2009,
p. 140). Therefore, policymakers should help consumers notice the ingredients they in-
gest. Field experiments have demonstrated that providing calorie information and making
healthy foods more convenient to order than unhealthy alternatives reduces overall calo-
rie intake; yet, the effect of convenience is present only when unhealthy options are more
challenging to order than healthier alternatives (Wisdom et al., 2010). Thus, such policies
may not be feasible and raise ethical concerns regarding consumers’ rights. Moreover, it
is unlikely that eating healthy belongs to important, adaptive goals that inform a myriad
of consumer behaviors. Therefore, a more plausible intervention is selling healthier foods
“in disguise.” For instance, in Finland, some of Kellogg’s cereals have 10% less sugar
and sodium than their US alternatives, with few countries using only 20% of sodium in
Kellogg’s Honey Snacks that is used in the US (The Center for Science in the Public
Interest, 2016).
2.5.6 Educate the public
Consumers are generally not aware of evolutionary mechanisms driving their food choices;
hence, making them aware of these mechanisms can facilitate healthier eating (Ares et
al., 2021; Kessler, 2009, p. 247). Four strategies that policymakers can embrace to help
consumers make informed food choices are as follows: (1) listing calories of all items in
the restaurant menus; (2) labeling foods in such a way that makes information about
unhealthy ingredients salient; (3) conducting public education campaigns highlighting
health risks associated with eating unhealthy foods; and (4) demarketing companies that
promote unhealthy products by publicly exposing their business practices (Kessler, 2009,
pp. 247–248).
Human behavior is largely driven by self-protection (e.g., avoiding pathogens) motives
(Griskevicius & Kenrick, 2013), which may be used as a way to increase the effectiveness
of campaigns aimed at curbing unhealthy eating. For instance, Palomo-V´elez et al. (2018)
compared the effectiveness of various messages aimed at discouraging meat consumption.
The authors found disgust-oriented messages (e.g., informing consumers that meat has
contact with faces in slaughterhouses) more potent in making attitudes toward meat con-
sumption more negative than appeals showing the negative impact of meat consumption
on the environment, animal welfare, and health. Disgust-eliciting messages are currently
used worldwide in anti-smoking campaigns. Thus, policymakers may use disgust-eliciting
messages that show the consequences of eating unhealthy foods, such as showing images
of stomach cancer developed due to eating high-sodium products.
2.5.7 If everything fails—use strong incentives
In some cases—especially when behaviors had a considerable adaptive value in the past—
solid governmental interventions are vital for behavioral change (Jones, 2001). Strong
interventions have been successful in reducing undesired behaviors in the past. For in-
stance, workplace smoking bans reduced smoking prevalence and the average number of
cigarettes consumed daily among smokers (Evans et al., 1999). Regarding food choices,
one strategy could be to tax unhealthy ingredients. The UK soft drinks industry levy—a
tax imposed on manufacturers, importers, and bottlers of soft drinks, with higher rates
for drinks high in sugar and lower rates on less sugary products—reduced an average
sugar intake from these drinks by 10% per household, without impacting overall sales of
soft drinks, thus not harming the industry (Pell et al., 2021). Similar policies may be
implemented to reduce calories, saturated fat, and salt in other product categories. Man-
ufacturers may be incentivized through grants covered by such taxes to produce healthier
products appealing to human evolutionarily old taste buds by, for instance, substituting
some sugar with stevia.
2.6 Conclusion
Ancestral foragers had to select foods promoting survival in times of frequent food scarcity.
As a result, modern consumers inherited these outdated food preferences, which are mis-
matched against their current needs, with almost half of adults now being overweight or
obese. As modern consumers carry food acquisition mechanisms specialized in coping with
ancestral challenges, they often fail to perceive threats posed by unhealthy diets, even if
these threats are communicated (e.g., nutrition facts labels). Still, retailers—incentivized
by governments—can facilitate healthier food choices by applying evolutionarily informed
solutions into their marketing mix.
2.7 References
Aiello, L. C., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Neocortex size, group size, and the evolution of
language. Current Anthropology, 34 (2), 184–193.
Ares, G., Vidal, L., Otterbring, T., Aschemann-Witzel, J., Curutchet, M. R., Gim´enez,
A., & Bove, I. (2021). Communication campaigns to support the use of nutritional
warnings: Different messages for different people? Health Education & Behavior.
Beauchamp, G. K., Cowart, B. J., & Moran, M. (1986). Developmental changes in salt
acceptability in human infants. Developmental Psychobiology: The Journal of the
org/10.1002/dev.420190103
Berbesque, J. C., & Marlowe, F. W. (2009). Sex differences in food preferences of Hadza
hunter-gatherers. Evolutionary Psychology, 7 (4), 147470490900700409. https : / /
doi.org/10.1177/147470490900700409
Breslin, P. A. (2013). An evolutionary perspective on food and human taste. Current
Chang, H.-H., & Meyerhoefer, C. D. (2021). COVID-19 and the demand for online food
shopping services: Empirical evidence from Taiwan. American Journal of Agricul-
Consumer Reports. (2014). What to do when there are too many product choices on the
many- product- choices- in- supermarkets/index.htm#:∼:text=We%20eyeballed%
2053%20varieties.,Marketing%20Institute%2C%20a%20trade%20group
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Coevolution of neocortical size, group size and language in
S0140525X00032325
Eaton, S. B., & Konner, M. (1985). Paleolithic nutrition: A consideration of its nature and
current implications. New England Journal of Medicine, 312 (5), 283–289. https:
//doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198501313120505
Evans, W. N., Farrelly, M. C., & Montgomery, E. (1999). Do workplace smoking bans
1257/aer.89.4.728
Fagan, B. (2001). The Little Ice Age: how climate made history 1300-1850. Basic Books.
Folwarczny, M., Li, N. P., Sigurdsson, V., Tan, L. K., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Develop-
ment and psychometric evaluation of the Anticipated Food Scarcity Scale (AFSS).
Folwarczny, M., Otterbring, T., Sigurdsson, V., & Gasiorowska, A. (2022). Seasonal cues
to food scarcity and calorie cravings: Winter cues elicit preferences for energy-
foodqual.2021.104379
Folwarczny, M., Christensen, J. D., Li, N. P., Sigurdsson, V., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Cri-
sis communication, anticipated food scarcity, and food preferences: Preregistered
evidence of the insurance hypothesis. Food Quality and Preference, 91, 104213.
Gidlo¨f, K., Ares, G., Aschemann-Witzel, J., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Give us today our
daily bread: The effect of hunger on consumers’ visual attention towards bread
and the role of time orientation. Food Quality and Preference, 88, 104079. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2020.104079
Griskevicius, V., & Kenrick, D. T. (2013). Fundamental motives: How evolutionary needs
influence consumer behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 23 (3), 372–386.
Hoek, A., Pearson, D., James, S., Lawrence, M., & Friel, S. (2017). Healthy and en-
vironmentally sustainable food choices: Consumer responses to point-of-purchase
actions. Food Quality and Preference, 58, 94–106. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
foodqual.2016.12.008
Jones, O. D. (2001). Time-shifted rationality and the law of law’s leverage: Behavioral
economics meets behavioral biology. Northwestern University Law Review, 95 (4),
Kanazawa, S. (2010). Evolutionary psychology and intelligence research. American Psy-
Kessler, D. A. (2009). The end of overeating: Taking control of the insatiable American
appetite. Rodale.
Krebs, J. R. (2009). The gourmet ape: Evolution and human food preferences. The Amer-
ajcn.2009.27462B
Li, N. P., van Vugt, M., & Colarelli, S. M. (2018). The evolutionary mismatch hypothesis:
Implications for psychological science. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
Li, N. P., Yong, J. C., & Van Vugt, M. (2020). Evolutionary psychology’s next challenge:
Solving modern problems using a mismatch perspective. Evolutionary Behavioral
Ludwig, J., Sanbonmatsu, L., Gennetian, L., Adam, E., Duncan, G. J., Katz, L. F.,
Kessler, R. C., Kling, J. R., Lindau, S. T., Whitaker, R. C., et al. (2011). Neighbor-
hoods, obesity, and diabetes—a randomized social experiment. New England Jour-
Lynn, M. (1991). Scarcity effects on value: A quantitative review of the commodity theory
Mann, T., Tomiyama, A. J., Westling, E., Lew, A.-M., Samuels, B., & Chatman, J. (2007).
Medicare’s search for effective obesity treatments: Diets are not the answer. Amer-
Neel, J. V. (1962). Diabetes mellitus: A “thrifty” genotype rendered detrimental by
“progress”? American Journal of Human Genetics, 14 (4), 353–362.
Nettle, D., Andrews, C., & Bateson, M. (2017). Food insecurity as a driver of obesity
in humans: The insurance hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X16000947
Otterbring, T. (2016). Touch forbidden, consumption allowed: Counter-intuitive effects of
touch restrictions on customers’ purchase behavior. Food Quality and Preference,
Otterbring, T. (2021). Evolutionary psychology in marketing: Deep, debated, but fancier
mar.21453
Otterbring, T., & Rolschau, K. (2021). Beauty is in the eye of the beer holder but rarely
because of the beer. Personality and Individual Differences, 179, 110921. https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2021.110921
Palomo-V´elez, G., Tybur, J. M., & Van Vugt, M. (2018). Unsustainable, unhealthy, or
disgusting? comparing different persuasive messages against meat consumption.
2018.08.002
Parker, J. R., Umashankar, N., & Schleicher, M. G. (2019). How and why the collabo-
rative consumption of food leads to overpurchasing, overconsumption, and waste.
Pell, D., Mytton, O., Penney, T. L., Briggs, A., Cummins, S., Penn-Jones, C., Rayner,
M., Rutter, H., Scarborough, P., Sharp, S. J., et al. (2021). Changes in soft drinks
purchased by British households associated with the UK soft drinks industry levy:
bmj.n254
Perkovic, S., Otterbring, T., Sch¨arli, C., & Pachur, T. (2021). The perception of food
products in adolescents, lay adults, and experts: A psychometric approach. Journal
Pew Research Center. (2016). The new food fights: U.S. public divides over food science.
Prentice, A. M., Rayco-Solon, P., & Moore, S. E. (2005). Insights from the developing
world: Thrifty genotypes and thrifty phenotypes. Proceedings of the Nutrition So-
Ramli, D. (2021). Temasek makes rare seed investment in plant-based chicken maker.
seed-investment-in-plant-based-chicken-maker
Rao, M., Afshin, A., Singh, G., & Mozaffarian, D. (2013). Do healthier foods and diet pat-
terns cost more than less healthy options? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Rozin, P. (1996). Towards a psychology of food and eating: From motivation to mod-
ule to model to marker, morality, meaning, and metaphor. Current Directions in
Schlebusch, C. M., Malmstro¨m, H., Gu¨nther, T., Sjo¨din, P., Coutinho, A., Edlund, H.,
Munters, A. R., Vicente, M., Steyn, M., Soodyall, H., et al. (2017). Southern
African ancient genomes estimate modern human divergence to 350,000 to 260,000
Sen, A., & Franklin, J. (2021, April 8). Exclusive: Impossible Foods in talks to list on the
a-exclusive-idUSKBN2BV2SF
Sigurdsson, V., Larsen, N. M., & Gunnarsson, D. (2014). Healthy food products at the
point of purchase: An in-store experimental analysis. Journal of Applied Behavior
Sigurdsson, V., Menon, R. V., & Fagerstrøm, A. (2017). Online healthy food experiments:
Capturing complexity by using choice-based conjoint analysis. The Behavior An-
Steele, E. M., Baraldi, L. G., da Costa Louzada, M. L., Moubarac, J.-C., Mozaffarian, D.,
& Monteiro, C. A. (2016). Ultra-processed foods and added sugars in the us diet:
Evidence from a nationally representative cross-sectional study. BMJ Open, 6 (3).
com/2007/01/15/business/media/15everywhere.html
The Center for Science in the Public Interest. (2016, November 29). U.S. cereals higher
cereals-higher-sugar-and-sodium-certain-other-countries-20161129
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past explains the present: Emotional adaptations
and the structure of ancestral environments. Ethology and Sociobiology, 11 (4-5),
disabilities/envision2030-goal3.html
Van Vugt, M., De Vries, L. P., & Li, N. P. (2020). Nudging evolutionary mismatched
behaviors: Implications for social psychology and public policy. In J. P. Forgas,
W. D. Crano, & K. Fiedler (Eds.), Applications of social psychology: How social
psychology can contribute to the solution of real world problems (pp. 40–57). Taylor
Wansink, B., & Huckabee, M. (2005). De-marketing obesity. California Management Re-
detail/obesity-and-overweight
Willett, W., Rockstro¨m, J., Loken, B., Springmann, M., Lang, T., Vermeulen, S., Garnett,
T., Tilman, D., DeClerck, F., Wood, A., et al. (2019). Food in the Anthropocene:
the EAT–Lancet Commission on healthy diets from sustainable food systems. The
Winkler, L. L., Christensen, U., Glu¨mer, C., Bloch, P., Mikkelsen, B. E., Wansink, B., &
Toft, U. (2016). Substituting sugar confectionery with fruit and healthy snacks at
checkout—a win-win strategy for consumers and food stores? A study on consumer
attitudes and sales effects of a healthy supermarket intervention. BMC Public
Wisdom, J., Downs, J. S., & Loewenstein, G. (2010). Promoting healthy choices: Informa-
tion versus convenience. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2 (2),
Chapter 3
Crisis communication, anticipated food scarcity, and food
preferences: Preregistered evidence of the insurance hypothesis
Published in Food Quality and Preference
Micha(cid:32)l Folwarczny
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Jacob D. Christensen
Department of Economics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Norman P. Li
School of Social Sciences, Singapore Management University
Valdimar Sigurdsson
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Tobias Otterbring
Department of Management, University of Agder,
Institute of Retail Economics
Abstract
Whereas large-scale consumption of energy-dense foods contributes to climate change,
we investigated whether exposure to climate change-induced food scarcity affects pref-
erences toward these foods. Humans’ current psychological mechanisms have developed
in their ancestral evolutionary past to respond to immediate threats and opportunities.
Consequently, these mechanisms may not distinguish between cues to actual food scarcity
and cues to food scarcity distant in time and space. Drawing on the insurance hypothe-
sis, which postulates that humans should respond to environmental cues to food scarcity
through increased energy consumption, we predicted that exposing participants to cli-
mate change-induced food scarcity content increases their preferences toward energy-dense
foods, with this effect being particularly pronounced in women. Three experiments—
including one preregistered laboratory study—confirm this notion. Our findings jointly
demonstrate that receiving information about food shortages distant in time and space
can influence current food preferences.
Keywords: climate change, media exposure, the insurance hypothesis, food prefer-
ences, food scarcity
3.1 Introduction
The current literature points at energy-dense foods—often derived from animal sources—
as some of the most significant climate change culprits. Accordingly, avoiding such prod-
ucts is an essential step toward developing sustainable and healthy food systems (Willett
et al., 2019). However, it is unlikely that the current media appeals and experts’ recom-
mendations to eat more low-calorie fruits and vegetables instead of energy-dense foods
are effective in encouraging pro-environmental food choices: the number of overweight
and obese people has been rising for decades, and energy-dense foods are the prime con-
tributors to this trend (WHO, 2020).
Numerous barriers affect sustainable and healthy food choices, such as personal values,
product familiarity, or lack of knowledge (De Boer et al., 2007; Hoek et al., 2017; Lau-
reati et al., 2013; Siegrist et al., 2015). Recent research has shown that communication
efforts can influence attitudes toward sustainable foods (Aschemann-Witzel & Peschel,
2019). However, no studies have investigated if climate change communication that often
highlights the negative impact on food security worldwide can affect food preferences. We
explore this possibility, questioning the effectiveness of omnipresent climate change cam-
paigns that vividly emphasize the consequences for food security worldwide. For instance,
a public campaign by Greenpeace International aimed to promote biodiversity in farming
and extensively highlighted the negative impact of weather anomalies on crop yields and
food production (Cotter & Tirado, 2008).
Climate change has been extensively argued to harm the food supply (Schmidhuber
& Tubiello, 2007; Wheeler & Von Braun, 2013); yet, the harm comes in the future,
perhaps as far away as a generation or two later (Battisti & Naylor, 2009). However,
mass media already inform societies about these threats, and over 60% of Americans and
Australians have declared themselves to be somewhat or very concerned about climate
change (Clayton, 2019).
According to the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017), humans and other verte-
brates possess evolutionary mechanisms protecting them against food shortages. In their
distant evolutionary past, humans rarely experienced times of food abundance; rather,
they wandered between periods of food sufficiency and food scarcity. Thus, they have
likely developed decision-making mechanisms that facilitate the consumption of foods
that maximized their odds of survival (Rozin, 1996). Consistent with this notion, the
insurance hypothesis postulates that environmental cues linked to food insecurity prompt
people to eat and store more fat as a buffer against impending caloric deficits. Indeed,
studies conducted in different countries link actual food insecurity to choosing energy-
dense foods instead of fruits and vegetables (Gulliford et al., 2003; Robaina & Martin,
2013).
Notably, the current psychological mechanisms, which were developed in our distant
evolutionary past, have been primarily designed to respond to immediate threats and
opportunities and cannot differentiate between cues that have consequences for an in-
dividual in the coming days or weeks from similar cues that have—like in the case of
climate change-induced food scarcity—consequences in the distant future (Ornstein &
Ehrlich, 2000). However, cues to climate change-induced food scarcity occurring in dis-
tant parts of the world may activate the same psychological mechanisms as cues to actual
food scarcity in one’s neighborhood. Therefore, drawing on the insurance hypothesis that
has been developed primarily to explain responses to impending food shortages (Nettle
et al., 2017), we contend that perceivable cues to food scarcity may also induce people to
prefer energy-dense foods over low-calorie alternatives, despite the apparent absence of
an adaptive function of such preferences today.
Because the energetic value of food is conventionally expressed in calories, and these
play a role in food choices (Gerend, 2009; Wisdom et al., 2010), our main hypothesis is
that people exposed to climate change-induced food scarcity content prefer foods they
deem to be higher in calories. Moreover, carrying extra fat reserves poses survival-related
costs, and these costs have been presumably higher for men than women in the past
due to sex-specific roles in society. In particular, men, being responsible for hunting and
fighting, could not afford as much extra weight as women in ancestral times (Nettle et al.,
2017; Silverman & Eals, 1992). Therefore, our secondary hypothesis states that women
exposed to food scarcity content prefer higher-calorie foods more than men.
3.2 Method
Study 1 provided initial support of our two key predictions and confirmed that the sample
size estimated a priori was sufficient. Study 2 replicated the results from our first study
while simultaneously ruling out a potential confound from Study 1, thereby strengthening
the confidence in our findings. Because both initial studies were run online on Amazon
conducted in a laboratory facility, to test the robustness, generalizability, and replicability
of our findings.
Raw data, analysis code, and materials are publicly available at the Open Science
proach as the preregistered Study 3. Coefficients, standard errors, and confidence inter-
vals reported in Studies 1–3 were multiplied by 100 for readability (see the Supplementary
Information available on OSF for additional results and raw coefficients). We did not mea-
sure anticipated food scarcity after watching the videos in Studies 1–3, as these measures
could prompt participants to think extensively about food scarcity and therefore alter
subsequent responses.
3.2.1 Stimuli development
Nine experts (four certified nutritionists and five athletes who measured the calorie content
of foods daily evaluated the calorie content and healthfulness of 60 food pictures. The
results suggested moderate to good reliability between raters (ICC = 0.82, CI = [0.73,
0.88]). We then divided standard deviations by means to obtain coefficients of variations
in calorie estimates for each food item. We chose 30 foods below the median coefficient
of variation for Studies 1–3. That yielded a final set of food images ranging from 166 to
We composed two 100-second-long videos depicting either climate change-induced food
scarcity (experimental condition) or the rise of obesity in the world (control condition;
links available through OSF). Each video consisted of three short clips that were played
continuously. We extensively pretested the stimuli videos to ensure that they differed
on the desired key dimension—anticipated food scarcity—while producing comparable
results on a set of potentially confounding variables. In the main pretest study, we
measured anticipated food scarcity, as well as positive and negative affect, as elicited
by the videos. Participants from the United States recruited via MTurk (N = 54) stated
their anticipated food scarcity on a randomized-order scale (1 = strongly disagree, 7 =
strongly agree). The scale consisted of six items (“The availability of my favorite foods will
decrease next decade”; “The beverages I drink will be less affordable by 2030”; “I will see
less food variety in grocery stores in the future”; “Certain foods I eat now will disappear
at some stage of my life”; “My future diet will be more monotonous”; “I will have to eat
less protein-rich dishes for some time”) that we averaged (α = 0.92). Participants who
watched the experimental (climate change-induced food scarcity) video considered future
food resources to be more insecure (experimental condition: M = 4.59, SD = 1.48; control
condition: M = 3.75, SD = 1.35), t(52) = -2.03, p = .047, d = 0.58. We used the Positive
and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) to evaluate positive and negative affect elicited
by either video on a five-point scale (Watson et al., 1988). We randomized the order of all
items: 10 for positive (α = 0.93) and 10 for negative (α = 0.94) affect and averaged each
subscale’s items. The groups did not differ in terms of negative (experimental condition:
M = 1.82, SD = 0.84; control condition: M = 1.55, SD = 0.85), t(52) = -1.15, p = .257,
or positive affect (experimental condition: M = 2.69, SD = 0.95; control condition: M =
2.79, SD = 1.06), t(52) = 0.39, p = .701. We supported these findings with an ancillary
pretest study that revealed no differences in the measures of emotions, anxiety, stress,
and hunger (details available through Supplementary Information File available on OSF).
3.2.2 Measures
The experts’ ratings yielded foods ranging from 166 to 711 calories (M = 367, SD = 122);
hence we created a response slider scale from 0 to 1000 calories with one-point intervals.
Participants in Studies 1–3 responded on this sliding scale as we wanted to capture their
subjective perceptions of the caloric content of foods to test the hypothesis that they will
prefer foods they deem to be higher in calories in the experimental conditions (climate
change-induced food scarcity). Participants stated preferences by answering the question,
“Would you eat this food now?” on a similar sliding scale ranging from definitely not
(-1) to definitely yes (1) with 0.01 intervals. Hunger plays a vital role in food-related
decision-making (Orquin & Kurzban, 2016). Thus, we measured hunger on a four-item
scale (1 = disagree strongly, 7 = agree strongly; Otterbring & Sela, 2020). These items
3.2.3 Participants
We ran a stochastic power simulation in R to estimate the required sample size to detect
the main effect of treatment. We found that at least 82 participants were necessary to
achieve 0.95 power, assuming Cohen’s d of 0.35.
The Cognition and Behavior Lab’s Human Subjects Committee at Aarhus University
approved the data collection (approval no. ID276). We recruited 98 and 110 participants
from the United States for Studies 1 (48 women, M = 31.9 years, SD = 9.5, range =
age
18–69 years), and 2 (49 women, M = 36.8 years, SD = 10.8, range = 22–74 years)
age
on Amazon MTurk. The preregistered laboratory Study 3 employed 100 participants
(44 women, M = 23.6 years, SD = 5.3, range = 18–64 years) from the campus and
age
participant pool at a Danish university, most of whom were students.
3.2.4 Procedure
Participants first read and accepted the online consent form. Upon pressing the “start”
button, they were randomly assigned to watch either the experimental (climate change-
induced food scarcity) or control video. After seeing their assigned video, they estimated
the calorie content and stated their preferences for 30 foods. The order of each block
(calories or preferences) and the order of foods within the blocks were both randomized.
Lastly, participants provided demographic data and rated their levels of hunger. In Study
2, one more control group was added that did not watch any video to ensure that the
experimental manipulation drives the potential effects rather than confounds from the
control video. Such a design allowed testing whether the two control groups differed in
any of the critical measures.
3.3 Results
We performed a linear mixed-effects analysis of the relationship between calorie estimates
estimates was significant in all three studies. These results mean that climate change
videos showing food scarcity increased preferences toward foods that participants deemed
to be higher in calories. Further, Studies 1–2 revealed a three-way interaction between
treatment, calorie estimates, and participants’ sex. These findings imply that women
preferred foods they thought to be higher in calories more than men did after watching
interaction at conventional levels of statistical significance (p = .152), comparisons in
taken together, confirm both hypotheses.
As Study 2 sought to rule out potential confounds associated with the control video,
we performed a similar analysis comparing the two control groups in this study (one
exposed to the video showing obesity, and the other one proceeding directly to evaluating
the food pictures). The main effects of treatment (p = .650), calorie estimates (p = .206),
and their interaction (p = .997) on food preferences were consistently nonsignificant.
Moreover, these two control groups had similar hunger levels (p > .38), with hunger used
as a covariate across all studies. Thus, the potential confound from the control video is
unlikely to have been the main driver of the results, and both control groups were merged
for further analysis.
ment) and the secondary hypothesis (interaction: calories × treatment × sex).
Fixed effects b (SE) t p 95% CI
Calories × Treatment
Study 1 0.029 (0.011) t(2815.52) = 2.74 .006 [0.008, 0.049]
Study 2 0.022 (0.009) t(2905.42) = 2.31 .021 [0.003, 0.040]
Study 3 0.027 (0.011) t(2968.19) = 2.35 .019 [0.005, 0.049]
Calories × Treatment
× Sex (men)
Study 1 -0.063 (0.021) t(2821.52) = -3.00 .003 [-0.103, -0.021]
Study 2 -0.069 (0.019) t(2916.47) = -3.62 < .001 [-0.106, -0.032]
Study 3 -0.033 (0.023) t(2968.58) = -1.43 .152 [-0.078, 0.012]
Importantly, our manipulation did not impact calorie judgments in any study (all ps >
.47), and the effects reported above applied despite that the experimental group reported
higher hunger scores in Study 1 (experimental condition: M = 5.23, SD = 1.37; control
condition: M = 4.48, SD = 1.75), t(96) = -2.37, p = .020. Studies 2 and 3 did not reveal
any differences in hunger between groups (F < 1 and t < 1, respectively).
ticipants in Studies 1 through 3 (N = 308). This plot suggests that women depreciate
low-calorie foods and prefer high-calorie foods to a larger extent than men after exposure
to food scarcity content.
3.4 Discussion
Building on the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017), we predicted that watching
climate change-induced food scarcity content will make people prefer energy-dense foods.
Three experiments confirm this notion by showing that such content makes people prefer
high-calorie foods and that this effect is stronger for women.
Earlier research indicates that viewing specific body types may shift food preferences
(Campbell & Mohr, 2011; Otterbring & Shams, 2019). We attempted to mitigate this
potential confounding effect as the control video depicted obese individuals. The exten-
sive pretesting revealed no differences between control and experimental groups in key
measures except for anticipated food scarcity. Further, comparisons between the two con-
trol groups in Study 2, where participants in the first control group were exposed to the
video depicting obese individuals while participants in the second control group were not
exposed to any video, indicate that these groups did not differ in any measure. Thus, it
is unlikely that the confounding effects from the control video are the main driver of the
results reported herein.
Seen through the lens of the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017), humans have
evolved mechanisms that are activated as a response to environmental cues associated
with food scarcity. Consequently, people prefer high-calorie foods that are a better buffer
against the upcoming food unavailability than their low-calorie alternatives. These find-
ings broaden the applicability of the insurance hypothesis by showing that it applies not
only to actual but also to anticipated food scarcity. As such, mere exposure to distant
food shortages—as in the case of climate change videos—seems to be a sufficient condition
to increase the desire to acquire energy-dense foods.
Our findings also reveal that women prefer energy-dense over lowcalorie foods to a
larger extent than men when exposed to food scarcity content. One plausible account
explaining these differences can be sex-specific roles held in the past when women were
responsible for foraging/gathering, and men were primarily concerned with hunting (Sil-
verman & Eals, 1992). Thus, the cost of carrying extra weight could have been higher
for men than for women, and evolution likely fashioned different weight management
strategies for both sexes during periods when access to food was uncertain.
The case of food scarcity communication also supports the evolutionary mismatch hy-
pothesis (Li et al., 2018), which highlights that when evolved psychological mechanisms
take in evolutionarily novel input or when the adaptive consequences have changed, the
mechanisms may instead produce maladaptive responses. Whereas ancestral cues to food
scarcity were associated with impending scarcity, climate change-induced scarcity occurs
much later and does not pose a direct risk for all people; thus, it does not necessitate an
immediate response to promote survival. As such, modern food scarcity cues highlighted
in media may induce the favoring and overconsumption of high-calorie foods among pop-
ulations who are not at risk of famine, thereby contributing to aversive health outcomes.
Several questions warrant future exploration. First, research should investigate whether
other events threatening food availability, such as Brexit or trade wars, may produce sim-
ilar results. Second, the role of anticipated food scarcity in shaping food choices and
its potential contribution to obesity should be scrutinized. Third, studies may examine
whether anticipated food scarcity affects decision-making in other contexts. Fourth, it is
worth investigating if the effects reported here also apply to audio or textual information
about food scarcity. Finally, it is vital to investigate whether anticipated food scarcity was
indeed the key driver of the effects reported herein. Therefore, developing and validating
a tool measuring this construct will be a fruitful avenue for future research.
Taken together, the present research shows that receiving information about food
shortages distant in time and space can influence current food preferences that are impor-
tant factors in the climate change debate. These findings contribute to the host of largely
overlooked effects of climate change and its associated food scarcity communication on
human psychology. Given that the majority of people in several countries are concerned
about climate change (e.g., Clayton, 2019), our results warrant further evaluation of the
consequences of climate change campaigns. These campaigns—when highlighting the is-
sue of rising food scarcity—can increase preference for energy-dense foods. Notably, such
foods are among the prime culprits of climate change (Wynes & Nicholas, 2017), suggest-
ing that climate change communication may have to be revised and potentially abstain
from mentioning food scarcity issues.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Icelandic Research Fund (Doctoral Student Grant to
Michal Folwarczny number 206880-051), the AUFF Visiting Researcher Grant to Micha(cid:32)l
Folwarczny, and the AUFF Starting Grant to Tobias Otterbring. We would like to thank
Jacob Lund Orquin for his indispensable contribution to the project.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
3.5 References
Aschemann-Witzel, J., & Peschel, A. O. (2019). How circular will you eat? The sus-
tainability challenge in food and consumer reaction to either waste-to-value or
yet underused novel ingredients in food. Food Quality and Preference, 77, 15–20.
Battisti, D. S., & Naylor, R. L. (2009). Historical warnings of future food insecurity with
unprecedented seasonal heat. Science, 323 (5911), 240–244. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1126/science.1164363
Campbell, M. C., & Mohr, G. S. (2011). Seeing is eating: How and when activation of a
negative stereotype increases stereotype-conducive behavior. Journal of Consumer
Clayton, S. (2019). Psychology and climate change. Current Biology, 29 (19), R992–R995.
Cotter, J., & Tirado, R. (2008). Food security and climate change: The answer is biodiver-
sity. A review of scientific publications on climate change adaptation in agriculture.
Exeter: Greenpeace.
De Boer, J., Hoogland, C. T., & Boersema, J. J. (2007). Towards more sustainable food
choices: Value priorities and motivational orientations. Food Quality and Prefer-
Gerend, M. A. (2009). Does calorie information promote lower calorie fast food choices
org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2008.06.014
Gulliford, M. C., Mahabir, D., & Rocke, B. (2003). Food insecurity, food choices, and body
mass index in adults: Nutrition transition in Trinidad and Tobago. International
Hoek, A., Pearson, D., James, S., Lawrence, M., & Friel, S. (2017). Healthy and en-
vironmentally sustainable food choices: Consumer responses to point-of-purchase
actions. Food Quality and Preference, 58, 94–106. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
foodqual.2016.12.008
Laureati, M., Jabes, D., Russo, V., & Pagliarini, E. (2013). Sustainability and organic
production: How information influences consumer’s expectation and preference for
yogurt. Food Quality and Preference, 30 (1), 1–8. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
foodqual.2013.04.002
Li, N. P., van Vugt, M., & Colarelli, S. M. (2018). The evolutionary mismatch hypothesis:
Implications for psychological science. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
Nettle, D., Andrews, C., & Bateson, M. (2017). Food insecurity as a driver of obesity
in humans: The insurance hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X16000947
Ornstein, R. E., & Ehrlich, P. R. (2000). New world new mind: Moving toward conscious
evolution. ISHK.
Orquin, J. L., & Kurzban, R. (2016). A meta-analysis of blood glucose effects on human
decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 142 (5), 546–567. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1037/bul0000035
Otterbring, T., & Sela, Y. (2020). Sexually arousing ads induce sex-specific financial de-
cisions in hungry individuals. Personality and Individual Differences, 152, 109576.
Otterbring, T., & Shams, P. (2019). Mirror, mirror, on the menu: Visual reminders of
overweight stimulate healthier meal choices. Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Robaina, K. A., & Martin, K. S. (2013). Food insecurity, poor diet quality, and obesity
among food pantry participants in Hartford, CT. Journal of Nutrition Education
Rozin, P. (1996). Towards a psychology of food and eating: From motivation to mod-
ule to model to marker, morality, meaning, and metaphor. Current Directions in
Schmidhuber, J., & Tubiello, F. N. (2007). Global food security under climate change.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104 (50), 19703–19708. https :
//doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0701976104
Siegrist, M., Visschers, V. H., & Hartmann, C. (2015). Factors influencing changes in
sustainability perception of various food behaviors: Results of a longitudinal study.
07.006
Silverman, I., & Eals, M. (1992). Sex differences in spatial abilities: Evolutionary theory
and data. In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind:
Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 533–549).
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief
measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 54 (6), 1063–1070.
Wheeler, T., & Von Braun, J. (2013). Climate change impacts on global food security.
detail/obesity-and-overweight
Willett, W., Rockstro¨m, J., Loken, B., Springmann, M., Lang, T., Vermeulen, S., Garnett,
T., Tilman, D., DeClerck, F., Wood, A., et al. (2019). Food in the Anthropocene:
the EAT–Lancet Commission on healthy diets from sustainable food systems. The
Wisdom, J., Downs, J. S., & Loewenstein, G. (2010). Promoting healthy choices: Informa-
tion versus convenience. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2 (2),
Wynes, S., & Nicholas, K. A. (2017). The climate mitigation gap: Education and govern-
ment recommendations miss the most effective individual actions. Environmental
Chapter 4
Seasonal cues to food scarcity and calorie cravings: Winter cues
elicit preferences for energy-dense foods
Another version of this paper published in Food Quality and Preference
Micha(cid:32)l Folwarczny
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Tobias Otterbring
Department of Management, University of Agder,
Institute of Retail Economics
Valdimar Sigurdsson
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Agata Gasiorowska
Faculty of Psychology in Wroclaw, SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities
Abstract
Winter cues signal a scarcity of food. Birds and mammals respond to such environmental
cues by consuming more energy. They convert this surplus into body fat that serves
as a buffer against impending food shortages. Similarly, humans exhibit higher obesity
rates among food-insecure populations. However, to date, it has been unclear whether
winter cues qualitatively affect consumers’ food preferences. Results from five studies (N
= 865), with one of them preregistered, show that watching videos depicting winter cues
elicits thoughts about energy-dense foods and survival. Such cues elicit higher preferences
for energy-dense than low-calorie foods, with this effect likely differing between women
and men. Taken together, our results support an evolutionary account postulating that
humans have developed sex-specific responses to perceivable cues of food scarcity. As a
result, winter cues induce people to favor products they deem higher in calories. Given
the importance of limiting energy-dense food consumption for addressing environmental
and public health issues, policymakers and marketers should be aware of this phenomenon
when designing public communication campaigns.
Keywords: winter cues, food scarcity, food shortages, the insurance hypothesis, food
preferences
4.1 Introduction
Numerous mammals and birds consume excessive amounts of energy to build fat reserves
before the winter and limit their physical activity over these dark and cold months (Blix,
2016). Humans appear to have developed similar mechanisms that protect them against
periods of lower food availability in the environment (Humphries et al., 2017; Neel, 1962;
Prentice et al., 2005). Indeed, according to Gallup, Americans consume fewer low-calorie
products and exercise less in the winter than in warmer seasons, thus leading to fat gain
(Mendes, 2011). Eating contexts and environmental cues—including those elicited in
virtual environments—influence food choices and preferences (e.g., Ammann et al., 2020;
Cardello et al., 2000; Cherulnik, 1991; Jaeger & Rose, 2008; King et al., 2004; Pennanen et
al., 2020). Their role in developing overweight and obesity has been acknowledged (Wells
et al., 2007). Still, no studies have investigated if exposing people to environmental cues
to winter facilitates energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) food preferences. This paper tests
this possibility and conveys implications for public health, sustainability research, and
policymaking because avoiding animal-source, energy-dense food is vital for addressing
climate change and public health issues (Willett et al., 2019; Wynes & Nicholas, 2017).
4.1.1 Winter as a food scarcity cue
Winter is an environmental cue to reduced food supply. In some regions of the world, cold
temperatures, coupled with a lack of sunlight, stop most vegetation forms, leading to a
lack of food resources across species inhabiting these lands (Blix, 2016). Such food scarcity
forces animals to migrate to other places or adjust their foraging strategies (Humphries
et al., 2017). Humans, too, have experienced food scarcity resulting from cold periods.
The Little Ice Age—climate cooling between 1300 and 1850 resulted in numerous extreme
food shortages. For instance, the Great Famine killed tens of thousands of people between
1315 and 1319, whereas the Year Without a Summer led to crop failures and pervasive
famine worldwide in 1816 (Fagan, 2001). In fact, our ancestors rarely enjoyed easy access
to food resources. Instead, they wandered between food availability and food scarcity,
which led them to develop mechanisms protecting against the latter periods (Otterbring,
2020; Rozin, 1996). An example of how such adaptations operate is the case of the
Dutch Hunger Winter that happened in 1944–1945 in the occupied Netherlands, which
resulted in extreme malnutrition at a national level. Babies exposed to malnutrition in
early gestation due to this famine were more likely to be obese in later life (Schulz, 2010).
In sum, throughout evolutionary history, cues to winter have signaled periods of lower
food availability among humans and other species. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that
humans have developed food intake mechanisms protecting them against food scarcity.
4.1.2 Adaptations to winter-induced food scarcity among hu-
mans and other species
Across the globe, plants and animals possess adaptations that allow them to endure
seasonal temperature changes (Humphries et al., 2017). For instance, Arctic and Antarctic
mammals and birds prepare for food scarcity during winter by depositing large amounts of
fat during autumn and developing a considerable amount of brown adipose tissue vital for
nonshivering thermogenesis (Blix, 2016). Adult humans, likewise, develop brown adipose
tissue faster in the winter than in the summer, and its growth depends more on sunlight
than on temperature, with this effect being particularly pronounced among women (Au-
Yong et al., 2009). Mirroring other species’ behaviors, people consume more calories in
the colder months, but also report being hungrier after meals (De Castro, 1991). In the
fall, humans’ diet composition changes—they consume more fat, which likely explains
their 0.5 kg higher weight, on average, in the winter than in the summer (Ma et al.,
2006). These calorie cravings may be partially due to increased heat production in the
winter when humans are exposed to cold air (Van Ooijen et al., 2004).
4.1.3 Evolutionary roots of human food preferences: The insur-
ance hypothesis
Thorough evolutionary history, humans have developed mechanisms guiding their food
choices to promote survival. For instance, people have evolved to effectively detect con-
taminated foods, which elicit strong disgust reactions (Egolf et al., 2018; Siegrist et al.,
2020). Likewise, the human body reacts to too low protein consumption by increased
intake of fat and carbohydrates (Simpson & Raubenheimer, 2005). Similarities in relative
food preferences across cultures support the evolutionary account explaining food pref-
erences in modern societies. For example, the Hadza foragers living in Tanzania show a
bias toward energy-dense foods akin to the typically preferred foods in developed countries
(Berbesque & Marlowe, 2009).
According to the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017), humans and other verte-
brates have developed mechanisms protecting them against periods of food unavailability
that work through an increased energy consumption above the maintenance level, thus
favoring fat storage. A meta-analysis of epidemiological studies provides evidence for
this evolutionary account and suggests that food insecurity is positively related to the
prevalence of overweight and obesity in developed countries; however, this relationship
is found only among women (Nettle et al., 2017). These differences could have arisen
due to past, sex-specific roles in the society wherein men were primarily concerned with
hunting and fighting. In contrast, women were preoccupied with foraging and offspring
activities (Silverman & Eals, 1992). Thus, given the importance of mobility, an excessive
bodyweight would have had more devastating consequences for men than women. Such a
weight-management pattern is observed among small birds that maintain less fat reserves
in the winter whenever there are many predators in their environments; however, when
predators are absent, these birds increase fat reserves, thereby boosting survival rates
during this period (Gosler et al., 1995).
Although the literature implies that people experiencing food scarcity eat more (hence
their weight gain), it remains unclear whether they make qualitatively different food
choices and whether the mere exposure to winter cues is sufficient to alter their food
preferences. Some studies indicate that people’s fat intake increases in the fall—as op-
posed to the intake of other macronutrients (Ma et al., 2006); thus, they likely do not
merely eat more when preparing for colder months; instead, their food preferences may
shift.
Whereas winter cues signal lower food availability, advancements economically and
technologically have provided a more stable and sufficient food supply during the modern
era of human history, at least in developed countries. Therefore, people living in these
countries may be insensitive to such cues, as a threat of famine is unlikely in their case.
However, such relative prosperity is still a new phenomenon. Yet, our cognitive system
has evolved slowly, through thousands of years, implying that this system is adjusted
to cope with challenges found in ancestral rather than current environments (Tooby &
Cosmides, 1990). Consequently, people often fail to distinguish between actual threats
and cues associated with threats found in the distant past. For example, although snakes
and spiders pose little danger in modern cities, people tend to be afraid of them more
than cars and other more recent phenomena (cf. Griskevicius et al., 2012; Ohman et al.,
2001; Ohman & Mineka, 2001; Ornstein & Ehrlich, 2000). Therefore, cues to food scarcity
may activate mechanisms responsible for coping with past challenges, causing a mismatch
between evolutionarily old mechanisms and our current needs (Li et al., 2018).
The mismatch account has received recent empirical support (Folwarczny, Christensen,
et al., 2021). The authors exposed participants—primarily from Denmark and the United
States—to videos depicting climate change-induced food scarcity (e.g., famine, drought,
crop failures) happening in distant parts of the world, such as southern Africa. Crucially,
this scarcity was depicted as distant in time, with the video clips mentioning future rather
than current threats. Although the videos displayed food scarcity not threatening partic-
ipants directly, their food preferences shifted toward higher-calorie foods, with this effect
being more pronounced among women (Folwarczny, Christensen, et al., 2021). Hill et al.
(2013) conducted a series of studies that further support the thesis that cues to environ-
mental harshness (e.g., food scarcity) may yield sex-specific effects on food preferences.
The authors found that women who grew up in harsh environments by means of receiving
less parental investment and living in lower socioeconomic status (SES) households were
more strongly influenced by cues of environmental harshness than men, who were rela-
tively insensitive to such cues. In the case of women—but not men—the authors found
that women exposed to environmental harshness drew larger (vs. smaller) cookies when
their childhood SES was lower (vs. higher); an effect that did not emerge after exposure
to control stimuli. Additionally, conditions of environmental harshness resulted in low
childhood SES women taking more snacks when leaving a laboratory, expressing more
negative attitudes toward dieting, and reporting a weaker desire to prevent weight gain
(Hill et al., 2013).
4.1.4 Research aims
In the present research, we explore the possibility that exposing people to winter (vs.
summer) cues makes them more inclined to think about energy-dense foods, survival, and
scarcity, but not about low-calorie products. We also test if winter cues affect people’s
food preferences as a function of the calorie content of different food options and whether
this potential effect is sex-specific.
Drawing from the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017), we contend that winter
cues that used to signal food scarcity in the past may activate the same food acquiring
mechanisms among people as actual food scarcity does. Consequently, consumers’ pref-
erences may shift under such circumstances, with a stronger emphasis directed toward
energy-dense foods that increase overall energy intake above maintenance levels.
The energetic density of various food items is usually expressed in calories and the
literature suggests that information about calorie content plays a vital role in food choices,
reducing overall calorie intake (Wisdom et al., 2010). However, on average, only women
lower their calorie intake when they know the calorie content of dishes they consume
(Gerend, 2009). Challenging this earlier literature, we hypothesize that exposure to winter
cues will trigger preferences for higher-calorie foods among women but not men, even when
the calorie content of different food options is highly salient (cf. Nettle et al., 2017).
4.2 General method and overview of studies
We conducted a pretest to ensure that both experimental videos yielded similar affective
responses (see Supplementary Online Materials for details). The results of Studies 1a and
1b confirmed that our experimental manipulation was successful. Here, we investigated
whether exposure to winter cues makes people think about energy-dense (vs. low-calorie)
foods, scarcity, and survival. In Studies 2a–2c, we tested our central hypotheses and
demonstrated that exposing participants to videos depicting winter cues increases their
preferences toward energy-dense foods, with this effect being different for women and
men.
Data, materials, PsyToolkit scripts (Stoet, 2010, 2017), and analysis code are publicly
available under this project’s Open Science Framework (OSF) webpage. Studies 2a and 2b
followed the same analytic protocol as the preregistered Study 2c; the preregistration can
be accessed through this link. Regression coefficients and standard errors were multiplied
by 100 across Studies 2a–2c when we report them for kilocalorie estimates. We did so for
readability purposes and to make coefficients more meaningful—people measure hundreds
of kilocalories rather than every single kilocalorie in complex meals.
This project adheres to ethical guidelines specified in the APA Code of Conduct and
has been approved by the Ethics Committee for Human Research of SWPS University
of Social Sciences and Humanities, Faculty of Psychology in Wroclaw. We recruited
all participants through Prolific.co. To ensure high data quality, we recruited different
participants for each experiment whose submission acceptance rate was 99% or higher.
4.3 Study 1a
Study 1a was conducted to test whether our experimental manipulation (winter cues
vs. summer cues) influences people’s propensity to think about energy-dense foods and
scarcity-related concepts. Here, we used the word fragment completion task. This proce-
dure is widely applied in experimental research and can be used to investigate if primes
increase the accessibility of prime-related thoughts (Gasiorowska et al., 2018; Nelson et
al., 1989; Roediger et al., 1992; Tulving et al., 1982).
4.3.1 Method
Participants. We recruited 106 U.S. participants on Prolific Academic (48 females,
M = 36.37 years, SD = 13.26) to take part in a study in exchange for 0.50. The
age
word fragment completion tasks that we employ in Studies 1a–1b yield middle-to-large
effect sizes (e.g., Gasiorowska et al., 2018). We performed a stochastic power simulation
in R (Bolker, 2007), which revealed that this sample size provided .90 power to detect
a significant effect of this magnitude; that is, equal to Cohen’s d = 0.65. We used Pro-
lific’s prescreening features to ensure that only people without dietary restrictions (e.g.,
veganism, gluten-free diets) participated in the study.
Procedure. After accepting an informed consent form, participants were randomly as-
signed to one of the two conditions. They watched either a video showing a forest walk
in the winter or in the summer.
Next, they performed the word fragment completion task. Participants had to com-
plete 15 different word fragments. For example, the word S P S E could be completed
as sparse or spouse. Seven of these word fragments could be completed in a way related
to scarcity (scarce, poor, sparse, restrict, short, scanty, and skimpy). Four words could
be completed in a way related to energy-dense foods (burger, steak, fries, and taco), and
the remaining four words (sponge, door, change, phone) served as filler tasks to prevent
participants from guessing the study-specific hypothesis.
We used conditional statements in R to find whether participants created words of a
correct length (they could complete a word fragment in two ways: by typing the whole
word or typing missing letters only; hence, there were two valid alternatives), and the
“grepl” function served to find whether participants answered questions according to the
predefined key (e.g., “arc” in the word “scarce,” shown as S C E). We calculated
(1) the number of words related to scarcity, (2) the number of words related to energy-
dense foods, and (3) the overall number of correct words provided by participants. The
word was counted as correct when it was found in one of several online dictionaries
used for predefining correct responses, and was not counted when a participant failed to
respond, created words of incorrect length, or created a word that was not found in online
dictionaries. We calculated a proportion of words related to scarcity and energy-dense
foods, respectively, by dividing the number of words related to scarcity and energy-dense
foods by the total number of correct words and used them as dependent variables. The
study concluded by participants providing demographic details.
4.3.2 Results and discussion
Scarcity-related words. An independent samples t -test on the proportion of words
related to scarcity found no difference between conditions (M = .17, SD = .14;
winter
M = .17, SD = .13), t(104) = 0.08, p = .933, d = 0.02.
summer
Words related to energy-dense foods. A similar analysis performed on the pro-
portion of words denoting energy-dense foods revealed that participants who watched
a video depicting winter (vs. summer) cues created more words denoting energy-dense
foods (M = .25, SD = .16; M = .16, SD = .12), t(104) = -3.32, p = .001, d
winter summer
= 0.65.
Discussion. Findings from Study 1a suggest that the video depicting winter cues made
participants think about energy-dense foods to a more considerable extent than the video
depicting summer cues. However, neither video prompted participants to think more
about scarcity.
4.4 Study 1b
The results from Study 1a revealed that participants viewing winter forest walks were
more inclined to think about energy-dense foods than participants viewing summer for-
est walks, whereas our experimental manipulation did not influence the accessibility of
scarcity-related concepts. In Study 1b, we tested whether winter (vs. summer) cues
may also activate survival-related concepts while simultaneously examining whether our
experimental manipulation affects the accessibility of thoughts about low-calorie foods.
4.4.1 Method
Participants. We recruited 105 U.S. participants on Prolific Academic (48 females,
M = 35.16 years, SD = 11.43) to take part in a study in exchange for 0.50. Following
age
the approach used in Study 1a, this sample size should be sufficient to detect the effect
size of interest. We applied the same prescreening criteria as those described in Study 1a.
Procedure. After accepting an informed consent form, participants were randomly as-
signed to one of the two conditions. They watched either a video showing a forest walk
in the winter or in the summer. Similar to Study 1a, participants then completed 15
different word fragments. Seven of these word fragments could be completed in a way
related to survival (survive, endure, resist, persist, sustain, withstand, fight), four words
could be completed in a way related to low-calorie foods (salad, apple, milk, peach), and
the remaining four words (sponge, door, change, phone) served as filler tasks to prevent
participants from hypothesis guessing. We applied the same procedure to calculate de-
pendent variables and detect keyed responses as in Study 1a. The study concluded by
participants providing demographic details.
4.4.2 Results and discussion
Survival-related words. An independent samples t -test on the proportion of words
related to survival found that participants who watched a video showing winter (vs.
summer) cues created more words related to survival (M = .26, SD = .14; M
winter summer
= .17, SD = .13), t(103) = -3.22, p = .002, d = 0.65.
Words related to low-calorie foods. Aa similar analysis performed on the proportion
of words denoting low-calorie foods revealed no significant difference between conditions
(M = .18, SD = .12; M = .20, SD = .13), t(103) = 0.58, p = .566, d = 0.18.
winter summer
Discussion. Findings from Study 1b indicate that participants exposed to winter cues
have higher accessibility to thoughts related to survival, but not to low-calorie foods.
Combined with the results from Study 1a, which found that watching winter cues made
people think more about energy-dense foods, it is plausible that people link high-calorie
foods to survival in harsh winter environments.
4.5 Study 2a
We conducted Study 2a to estimate the desired sample size before commencing the pre-
registration (Study 2c). We hypothesized that (1) exposing participants to winter (vs.
summer) cues would increase their preferences toward energy-dense foods, and that (2)
this effect should be more pronounced among women than men.
4.5.1 Method
Participants. We recruited 119 U.S. participants on Prolific Academic (59 females,
M = 36.40 years, SD = 13.74) to take part in a study in exchange for 0.64.
age
Procedure. After accepting an informed consent form, participants were randomly as-
signed to one of the two conditions. They watched either a video showing a forest walk
in the winter or in the summer.
After watching their given video, they estimated the caloric content and stated their
preferences for 30 foods. We used food images from Folwarczny, Christensen, et al.
(2021). This set of 30 simple foods and complex dishes has been pretested among certified
nutritionists and athletes who daily measure the caloric content of foods. The set covers
a broad spectrum in calorie estimates (M = 367, SD = 122, range = 166–711) and
calories
has been applied in experimental research (Folwarczny, Christensen, et al., 2021). To
evaluate the calorie content of foods (“How many calories does this food contain? [the
serving you see]”), participants used a sliding scale ranging from 0 to 1000 kilocalories. We
considered certified nutritionists’ estimation of the calorie content of foods when creating
this response format. Participants answered questions regarding their preferences toward
foods (“Would you eat this food now?”) on a sliding scale ranging from -1 = Definitely not
to 1 = Definitely yes, with .01 point intervals. The order of these two tasks (estimating
calories and stating preferences) was randomized. Likewise, the order of the 30 food
images within each task was randomized. The study concluded by participants providing
demographic details.
4.5.2 Results and discussion
Primary hypothesis tests. Due to the nested data structure, we performed a mixed-
effects analysis of the relationship between the two independent variables (treated as fixed
effects; calorie estimates, and experimental condition) with interactions between them
and the dependent variable (food preferences) using the “lme4” package for R (Bates
et al., 2015). As random effects, we used intercepts for participants and foods. The
visual inspection of residual plots suggested no apparent deviations from homoscedasticity
or normality. We estimated significance with Satterthwaite’s method applied by the
“lmerTest” package for R (Kuznetsova et al., 2017).
This analyses revealed no main effects of experimental condition (b = -7.863, SE =
7.117, t = -1.10, p = .270) or calorie estimates (b = 0.010, SE = 0.009, t = 1.14, p =
.254) on food preferences. However, we found a marginally significant interaction between
condition and calorie estimates (b = 0.020, SE = 0.011, t = 1.89, p = .059). Further simple
slope analysis found that the relation between calories estimate and food preference was
non-significant for participants exposed to videos featuring summer cues (b = 0.010, SE
= 0.009, t = 1.14, p = .254), but it was significant and positive for participants exposed
to videos depicting winter cues (b = 0.030, SE = 0.008, t = 3.53, p < .001). This pattern
of results suggests that participants who watched videos depicting winter cues showed
a stronger preference toward energy-dense foods than toward foods low in energy, while
their peers exposed to videos depicting summer cues preferred foods to the same extent,
Secondary hypothesis tests. We added participants’ biological sex as a moderator to
test the hypothesis about sex differences in responses to the experimental manipulation.
The results from this model (see Supplementary Online Materials for details), along with
and calorie estimates on food preferences was different for women compared to men (b =
0.065, SE = 0.021, t = 3.07, p = .002). Thus, we decomposed this three-way interaction
by investigating the effects of calories, experimental manipulation, and their interaction
on food preference separately for men and women. For men, we found a significant main
effect of calories (b = 0.030, SE = 0.012, t = 2.54, p = .011), but the interaction between
condition and calorie estimates was non-significant (b = -0.011, SE = 0.014, t = -0.77, p =
.443). For women, however, in line with our predictions, we found a significant interaction
between condition and calorie estimates (b = 0.053, SE = 0.016, t = 3.26, p = .001). We
performed a simple slope analysis separately for both experimental conditions to further
quantify this interaction. For women exposed to winter cues, the relation between calorie
estimates and food preferences was significant (b = 0.038, SE = 0.014, t = 2.80, p =
.005), but for women exposed to summer cues this relationship was non-significant (b =
-0.015, SE = 0.013, t = -1.13, p = .259). These results indicate that women watching
videos depicting winter cues show a stronger preference toward energy-dense foods than
toward low-calorie foods, whereas women watching videos featuring summer cues do not
exhibit this response pattern.
Discussion. Results from Study 2a provide preliminary evidence for both our hypothe-
ses. We found people exposed to winter cues, but not summer cues, to exhibit a stronger
preference toward energy-dense foods than toward low-calorie foods. Furthermore, this
effect was different for men and women. Men preferred foods they deemed higher in calo-
ries, regardless of whether they were exposed to winter or summer cues, whereas women
showed a “craving for calories” only after exposure to winter cues.
4.6 Study 2b
The results from Study 2a provided initial evidence for our theorizing. However, based
on these findings, we cannot rule out that the effects observed in Study 2a emerged as a
function of summer rather than winter cues. Therefore, we conducted Study 2b with a
third condition, where participants did not watch any video before evaluating the foods.
We hypothesized that exposing participants to summer cues would not alter their food
preferences compared to participants who were not exposed to any visual stimuli. In
contrast, exposing participants to winter cues should increase their preferences toward
higher-calorie foods.
4.6.1 Method
Participants. We recruited 120 U.S. participants on Prolific Academic (74 females,
M = 34.52 years, SD = 11.54) to take part in a study in exchange for 0.64.
age
Procedure. After accepting an informed consent form, participants were randomly as-
signed to one of the three conditions. They watched a video showing a forest walk in the
winter, in the summer, or no video at all. The remaining procedure was the same as that
of Study 2a.
4.6.2 Results and discussion
Primary hypothesis tests. Again, we performed a mixed-effects analysis of the re-
lationship between the two independent variables: calorie estimates and experimental
condition (watching a summer forest walk, winter forest walk, or no video) with inter-
actions between them and the dependent variable—food preferences. As random effects,
we used intercepts for participants and foods. The visual inspection of residual plots
suggested no apparent deviations from homoscedasticity or normality.
As a reference condition, we used a group that was not exposed to any video. The
analysis indicated no main effect of calorie estimates (b = 0.008, SE = 0.009, t = 0.96, p
= .339). We found no main effect of the summer video (b = -0.512, SE = 8.575, t = -0.06,
p = .952), but a significant main effect of the winter video (b = -23.847, SE = 9.481, t
= -2.52, p = .012), suggesting that this video may decrease food preferences compared
to not watching any video. The interaction between condition and calorie estimates was
non-significant for participants exposed to the video showing summer cues (b = -0.010, SE
= 0.011, t = -0.91, p = .364), but significant for participants exposed to the video showing
winter cues (b = 0.037, SE = 0.013, t = 2.94, p = .003). To further understand the nature
of this interaction, we performed a simple slope analysis for each experimental condition.
For participants who did not watch any video (b = 0.008, SE = 0.009, t = 0.96, p = .339),
and their counterparts who watched the video depicting summer cues (b = -0.002, SE =
0.009, t = -0.18, p = .856), the slope of calories was non-significant. However, this slope
was positive and significant for participants exposed to the video showing winter cues (b
= 0.046, SE = 0.011, t = 4.25, p < .001), suggesting a stronger preference for energy-
dense foods than toward low-calorie foods. Given no major differences in key measures
between the conditions in which participants either watched a video depicting summer
cues or those who did not watch any video, we merged these two conditions to facilitate
parsimonious analysis (cf. Griskevicius et al., 2009; Griskevicius et al., 2010; Otterbring,
Gidlo¨f, et al., 2020).
Next, we conducted the same analysis as in Study 2a. The main effect of calories was
non-significant (b = 0.003, SE = 0.007, t = 0.50, p = .620). We found a main effect of
experimental condition (b = -23.458, SE = 8.397, t = -2.79, p = .006), implying that
participants exposed to winter videos showed lower overall preferences toward foods than
participants in the other conditions. Crucially, and mirroring the findings from Study
2a, we found a significant interaction between calorie estimates and condition (b = 0.042,
SE = 0.011, t = 3.72, p < .001). Hence, we performed a simple slope analysis across
conditions. For participants who did not watch any video or who watched a video featuring
summer cues, the slope of calories was non-significant (b = 0.003, SE = 0.007, t = 0.50,
p = .620), but it was significant for those exposed to winter cues (b = 0.046, SE = 0.011
, t = 4.25, < .001), thus replicating the results from Study 2a—participants exposed to
winter cues showed a stronger preference for energy-dense foods than low-calorie foods.
Secondary hypothesis tests. We added participants’ biological sex as a moderator to
test the hypothesis about sex differences in responses to the experimental manipulation.
In contrast to the findings from Study 2a, the interactional effect between condition and
calorie estimates on food preferences did not differ across sexes (b = -0.002, SE = 0.023,
t = -0.10, p = .923).
Discussion. The results from Study 2b provide more substantive evidence for the no-
tion that winter cues rather than summer cues alter consumers’ food preferences and
their cravings for calories. Specifically, exposure to winter cues increased participants’
preferences for energy-dense foods. This effect did not occur for participants exposed to
summer cues or who were not exposed to any visual stimuli before indicating their food
preferences. However, unlike Study 2a, we did not find this effect to vary between men
and women.
4.7 Study 2c
The results from Study 2a confirmed both our hypotheses, and the findings from Study
2b confirmed our primary but not secondary hypothesis. In Study 2c, we preregistered
both these focal hypotheses in a well-powered final study, where we specified our design
and data analysis plan.
4.7.1 Method
Participants. Based on the observed power of Study 2a, as computed through the
“simr” package for R (Green & MacLeod, 2016), we plotted a power curve to estimate
the number of participants needed to achieve .95 power to detect the significant interaction
between condition and calorie estimates on food preferences. This procedure suggested
that 420 participants were needed to achieve .95 power to detect the effect size of interest.
Thus, we recruited 420 U.S. participants on Prolific Academic to take part in the study
in exchange for 0.75, of whom 415 completed the tasks and were included in the analysis
(204 females, M = 36.90 years, SD = 13.03).
age
Procedure. After accepting an informed consent form, participants were randomly as-
signed to one of the two conditions. They watched either a video showing a forest walk in
the winter or in the summer. The remaining procedure mirrored that applied in Studies
2a–2b.
4.7.2 Results and discussion
Primary hypothesis tests. We followed the preregistered data analysis protocol,
which is identical to that of Studies 2a–2b. We found no obvious deviations from ho-
moscedasticity or normality. The analyses revealed a marginally significant main effect of
condition (b = 7.027, SE = 3.689, t = 1.91, p = .057), implying that participants exposed
to winter cues showed higher overall preferences toward foods. The main effect of calories
was significant (b = 0.034, SE = 0.004, t = 8.00, p < .001), meaning that participants
preferred foods they deemed higher in calories. However, in contrast to Studies 2a–2b,
the results from Study 2c revealed no significant interaction between calorie estimates and
condition (b = -0.008, SE = 0.005, t = -1.57, p = .117).
Secondary hypothesis tests. Next, in line with the preregistered protocol, we added
participants’ biological sex as a moderator to test the hypothesis about sex differences
in responses to the experimental manipulation. The results from this model (see Supple-
mentary Online Materials for details) indicated that the effect of condition and calorie
estimates on food preferences was different for women compared to men (b = 0.035, SE
= 0.010, t = 3.50, p < .001). Thus, we decomposed this interaction by investigating the
effects of calories, experimental manipulation, and their interaction on food preference
separately for men and women. For men, we found a significant main effect of calories (b
= 0.048, SE = 0.005, t = 8.70, p < .001), indicating a higher preference for foods deemed
to contain more calories. We also found a significant main effect of condition (b = 12.940,
SE = 5.153, t = 2.51, p = .012), implying a higher overall preference toward foods among
men exposed to winter than to summer cues. Finally, the interaction between experimen-
tal condition and calorie estimates was significant for men (b = -0.024, SE = 0.007, t =
-3.66, p < .001). Further simple slope analysis revealed that men exposed to winter (b =
0.023, SE = 0.006, t = 4.24, p < .001) and summer (b = 0.048, SE = 0.005, t = 8.70, p
< .001) cues showed a higher preference for energy-dense foods than low-calorie foods.
For women, we found a significant main effect of calorie estimates (b = 0.020, SE =
0.007, t = 3.01, p = .003), indicating a higher preference for foods deemed to contain more
calories. However, the effect of condition was non-significant (b = 0.710, SE = 5.265, t
= 0.14, p = .893), as was the interaction between condition and calorie estimates (b =
0.009, SE = 0.007, t = 1.28, p = .202).
Discussion. Results from Study 2c did not support our primary hypothesis, as the
interaction between experimental condition and calorie estimates did not emerge. As per
our secondary hypothesis tests—we found the predicted three-way interaction. However,
decomposing this interaction did not reveal the hypothesized pattern of results, as the
interaction between calorie estimates and condition was non-significant for women, but it
was significant for men. Still, for women, we observed a trend in the same direction as in
Study 2a.
4.8 General discussion
Across five studies, we investigated if exposure to winter cues increases preferences toward
energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods and whether this effect differs between men and
women. Studies 1a–1b indicated that watching videos depicting winter (vs. summer) cues
increased the accessibility of concepts linked to survival and energy-dense foods. Winter
cues, however, did not prompt people to think about low-calorie foods or scarcity to a
larger extent than did summer cues. Studies 2a–2c jointly demonstrated that exposure
to winter (vs. summer) cues elicited preferences for energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods.
Additionally, this effect may be more substantial for women, but the current findings are
not conclusive and beg for additional experiments exploring sex-specific effects.
Our work extends the earlier research by Folwarczny, Christensen, et al. (2021).
Whereas the authors used vivid and explicit food scarcity manipulations, we expose par-
ticipants to subtle, unemotional food scarcity cues—videos showing a winter forest walk.
Further, Folwarczny, Christensen, et al. (2021) used videos depicting obese individuals
in their control condition. We purposely avoided videos showing humans in the control
condition, as such stimuli also alter food preferences (Banovic & Otterbring, 2021; Otter-
bring & Shams, 2019). We further extend these earlier findings by showing that winter
cues elicit thoughts associated with survival and energy-dense foods.
Our results provide empirical support for the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017),
postulating that humans and other vertebrates—through their evolutionary histories—
have developed adaptations protecting them against periods of food scarcity, which facil-
itate energy consumption over the maintenance levels, thus contributing to weight gain.
Indeed, food insecurity is linked to obesity in developed countries, but this effect is only
found among women (Nettle et al., 2017). The current findings, too, indicate that ex-
posing participants to winter cues—a proxy for food scarcity across species—directionally
shifts food preferences toward energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) products mainly among
women. To our knowledge, existing literature does not provide a well-supported account
explaining these potential sex differences.
Over a third of adults worldwide are overweight and obese, and this public health
issue becomes prevalent also among children (Perkovic et al., 2021; WHO, 2020). Ex-
cessive body weight—associated with numerous illnesses such as cardiovascular disease
or diabetes mellitus—leads to millions of premature deaths globally each year and be-
came an imminent problem in developing countries, despite being traditionally present
exclusively in affluent societies (GBD 2015 Obesity Collaborators, 2017). Aside from
health hazards, overweight and obesity causes a significant economic burden for individ-
uals and public healthcare systems, as direct and indirect costs of excessive bodyweight
over lifetime exceed 150,000 per person (Hamilton et al., 2018). Consequently, the re-
cent Lancet Commission called for urgent development of healthy and sustainable food
systems (Willett et al., 2019). Whereas our findings do not provide insights into how
environmental cues can be used to facilitate healthier eating habits, we provide evidence
that winter cues and likely other similar cues to food scarcity may prompt consumers to
prefer energy-dense foods over low-calorie alternatives, with the former being key culprits
of excessive bodyweight (WHO, 2020).
Effective pro-environmental campaigns need to encourage choosing products and ser-
vices that have the most negligible impact on the environment. However, such campaigns
are often filled with cues that may attenuate their effectiveness. For example, an emo-
tional campaign by Greenpeace International highlighting the issue of melting Arctic ice
is filled with winter cues (Morgan, 2016). Because our studies found such cues to increase
preferences toward energy-dense foods, which contribute to climate change (Wynes &
Nicholas, 2017), environmental organizations and policymakers may have to reevaluate
their communication strategies. Likewise, marketing communication should be carefully
designed, as it is often filled with winter cues, with the well-known Coca-Cola winter ads
just constituting one salient example.
4.8.1 Limitations and future research
Winter has been associated with food scarcity for centuries among humans (Fagan, 2001).
Thus, it is plausible that exposure to winter cues makes people think about scarcity in
general. Interestingly, the current studies show that videos depicting winter cues trigger
thoughts about survival and energy-dense foods, but not about scarcity. Future studies
should further explore the underlying mechanisms of such diverging findings. Ideally, a
psychometrically validated tool measuring anticipated food scarcity would provide evi-
dence behind the proposed mechanisms activated as a response to exposure to winter
cues (for example, see Folwarczny, Li, et al., 2021).
Notably, the current work focused solely on stated food preferences that may not nec-
essarily be predictive of actual food choices; hence, our findings should be treated with
caution until field studies employing behavioral measures have verified the replicability,
generalizability, and real-world impact of our theorizing (cf. Mach´ın et al., 2020; Otter-
bring, 2021; Otterbring, Sundie, et al., 2020). At a minimum, laboratory studies where
participants can choose snacks with different calorie content as a part of their reward for
taking part in a study should be commenced.
To minimize the burden associated with lengthy survey elements, we collected minimal
data needed to test our predictions, omitting variables such as body mass index (BMI),
which is a common variable to include in the food choice literature (e.g., Gidl¨of et al.,
2021). Although research including BMI as a predictor of food preferences is inconclusive,
with a possibility that overweight and obese individuals prefer high-fat foods rather than
vegetables (e.g., Czyzewska & Graham, 2008; Drewnowski et al., 1992; Wardle et al.,
2001), additional studies should include BMI indicators, potentially treating this variable
as a moderator of the effects reported herein. Also, it is plausible that overweight and
obese participants are dieting more often than their peers within the healthy weight range.
As being on a diet is linked to a higher likelihood of failures in food intake control, such
participants may be particularly prone to indulging in high-calorie foods (Wardle, 1988).
Thus, participants in future studies should be asked whether they are on a diet.
Another possible limitation of our research is that we did not collect data regarding
participants’ socioeconomic status (SES). Earlier research suggests that women—but not
men—who experienced lower levels of parental investment and grew up in poorer envi-
ronments respond to cues to environmental harshness with an increased desire for calories
compared to their counterparts who grew up in higher SES families (Hill et al., 2013).
Hence, future research should investigate whether effects reported across Studies 1a–2c
are moderated by participants’ current and childhood SES.
4.8.2 Concluding remarks
Five studies jointly suggest that exposure to winter cues may increase consumers’ pref-
erences for energy-dense foods. Due to the importance of limiting consumption of such
foods to tackle environmental and public health issues, the present findings offer potential
implications for environmental organizations and policymakers.
4.9 Supplementary online materials
Pretest
Various affective states—predominantly negative emotions—can influence food prefer-
ences and induce people to favor high-calorie products (Macht, 2008; Van Strien et al.,
2013). Therefore, we conducted a pretest to rule out this potential confound and ensure
that both experimental videos yielded similar levels of anxiety as well as positive and
negative affect.
Method
Participants
We recruited 140 U.S. participants on Prolific Academic (68 females, M = 34.98 years,
age
SD = 12.80) to take part in a pretest in exchange for 0.50.
Procedure
After accepting an informed consent form, participants were randomly assigned to one of
the two conditions. They watched either a video showing a forest walk in the winter or
in the summer. Both videos lasted 50 seconds. No humans or animals appeared in any
scene. The video entitled “Summer forest walk” showed trees covered with leaves and
other vegetation typical for the summer. The video entitled “Winter forest walk” showed
trees and vegetation covered by snow, typical for the winter.
After watching their assigned video, participants filled out the six-item short-form of
the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (α = .85), with responses ranging from 1
= Not at all to 4 = Very much (Marteau & Bekker, 1992). We also measured positive
(α = .92) and negative (α = .93) affect elicited by the videos using the short version of
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (Watson et al., 1988). The positive and negative
affect scales consisted of 10 items each, and were anchored at 1 = very slightly or not at
all, and 5 = extremely. The pretest concluded with participants providing demographic
details.
Results and discussion
Anxiety
An independent samples t -test on the anxiety measure index revealed that the videos
elicited similar levels of state anxiety (M = 1.89, SD = 0.72; M = 1.97, SD
winter summer
= 0.62), t(138) = 0.61, p = .542, d = 0.10.
Positive and negative affect
A comparable analysis performed on the positive affect index indicated no significant
differences between conditions (M = 2.73, SD = 0.83; M = 2.95, SD = 1.00),
winter summer
t(138) = 1.44, p = .153, d = 0.25. Likewise, comparing negative affect across conditions
revealed no differences between them (M = 1.53, SD = 0.68; M = 1.61, SD
winter summer
= 0.82), t(138) = 0.62, p = .537, d = 0.11.
Discussion
Results from the pretest provide evidence for the adequacy of our stimuli—we found no
significant differences between conditions in anxiety, positive, or negative affect. There-
fore, the potential confounds associated with affective states are unlikely to act as the
main drivers of the results in our subsequent main studies.
The total number of completed words
Study 1a
An independent samples t -test on the sum of the total number of words completed re-
vealed a marginally significant difference between conditions (M = 8.41, SD = 2.30;
winter
M = 9.09, SD = 1.61), t(104) = 1.78, p = .078, d = 0.35, indicating that partici-
summer
pants exposed to winter cues created fewer words than those exposed to summer cues.
Study 1b
An independent samples t -test with the sum of the total number of correct words com-
pleted as the dependent variable revealed no significant difference between conditions
(M = 9.15, SD = 1.91; M = 8.70, SD = 2.44), t(103) = -1.00, p = .319, d =
winter summer
0.20.
Supplementary tables with full model outputs across
Studies 2a–2c
In the main text, we report coefficients multiplied by 100 for readability. Below, we
report raw coefficients, that is, before multiplication and additional results that were not
reported in the main text for brevity.
Preference
Intercept −0.02086
[-0.13984, 0.09812]
Condition (winter) −0.07863
[-0.21812, 0.06085]
Calories 0.00010
[-0.00007, 0.00027]
Condition (winter) × Calories 0.00020
[-0.00001, 0.00040]
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.1; p<0.05; p<0.01
Brackets show 95% CIs
Preference
Intercept −0.14072
[-0.30287, 0.02144]
Condition (winter) 0.00560
[-0.19491, 0.20611]
∗∗∗
Calories 0.00041
[0.00018, 0.00064]
∗∗
Sex (woman) 0.24809
[0.04874, 0.44745]
Condition (winter) × Calories −0.00012
[-0.00040, 0.00017]
Condition (winter) × Sex (woman) −0.16464
[-0.44661, 0.11732]
∗∗∗
Calories × Sex (woman) −0.00066
[-0.00096, -0.00036]
∗∗∗
Condition (winter) × Calories × Sex (woman) 0.00065
[0.00024, 0.00107]
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.1; p<0.05; p<0.01
Brackets show 95% CIs
Preference
∗∗
Intercept 0.12099
[0.01219, 0.22978]
∗∗∗
Condition (winter) −0.23458
[-0.39916, -0.06999]
Calories 0.00003
[-0.00010, 0.00017]
∗∗∗
Condition (winter) × Calories 0.00042
[0.00020, 0.00065]
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.1; p<0.05; p<0.01
Brackets show 95% CIs
Preference
Intercept −0.07249
[-0.23692, 0.09195]
Condition (winter) −0.08337
[-0.33160, 0.16486]
∗∗∗
Calories 0.00047
[0.00026, 0.00067]
∗∗∗
Sex (woman) 0.29626
[0.11476, 0.47776]
Condition (winter) × Calories 0.00030
[-0.00004, 0.00063]
Condition (winter) × Sex (woman) −0.18747
[-0.52204, 0.14711]
∗∗∗
Calories × Sex (woman) −0.00064
[-0.00088, -0.00041]
Condition (winter) × Calories × Sex (woman) −0.00002
[-0.00048, 0.00043]
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.1; p<0.05; p<0.01
Brackets show 95% CIs
Preference
Intercept 0.03408
[-0.04613, 0.11429]
Condition (winter) 0.07027
[-0.00204, 0.14258]
∗∗∗
Calories 0.00034
[0.00026, 0.00043]
Condition (winter) × Calories −0.00008
[-0.00018, 0.00002]
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.1; p<0.05; p<0.01
Brackets show 95% CIs
Preference
Intercept −0.03283
[-0.12620, 0.06054]
∗∗
Condition (winter) 0.12633
[0.02513, 0.22753]
∗∗∗
Calories 0.00057
[0.00047, 0.00068]
∗∗∗
Sex (woman) 0.15178
[0.05053, 0.25304]
∗∗∗
Condition (winter) × Calories −0.00024
[-0.00038, -0.00010]
Condition (winter) × Sex (woman) −0.12720
[-0.27154, 0.01714]
∗∗∗
Calories × Sex (woman) −0.00049
[-0.00063, -0.00035]
∗∗∗
Condition (winter) × Calories × Sex (woman) 0.00035
[0.00015, 0.00054]
∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Note: p<0.1; p<0.05; p<0.01
Brackets show 95% CIs



4.10 References
Ammann, J., Hartmann, C., Peterhans, V., Ropelato, S., & Siegrist, M. (2020). The
relationship between disgust sensitivity and behaviour: A virtual reality study on
foodqual.2019.103833
Au-Yong, I. T., Thorn, N., Ganatra, R., Perkins, A. C., & Symonds, M. E. (2009). Brown
adipose tissue and seasonal variation in humans. Diabetes, 58 (11), 2583–2587.
Banovic, M., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Athletic abs or big bellies: The impact of imagery,
arousal levels, and health consciousness on consumers’ attitudes towards plant-
10.1016/j.foodqual.2020.104067
Bates, D., Ma¨chler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects
10.18637/jss.v067.i01
Berbesque, J. C., & Marlowe, F. W. (2009). Sex differences in food preferences of Hadza
hunter-gatherers. Evolutionary Psychology, 7 (4), 147470490900700409. https : / /
doi.org/10.1177/147470490900700409
Blix, A. S. (2016). Adaptations to polar life in mammals and birds. Journal of Experi-
∼bolker/emdbook/chap5A.pdf
Cardello, A. V., Schutz, H., Snow, C., & Lesher, L. (2000). Predictors of food accep-
tance, consumption and satisfaction in specific eating situations. Food Quality and
Cherulnik, P. D. (1991). Reading restaurant facades: Environmental inference in finding
org/10.1177/0013916591232002
Czyzewska, M., & Graham, R. (2008). Implicit and explicit attitudes to high-and low-
calorie food in females with different BMI status. Eating Behaviors, 9 (3), 303–312.
De Castro, J. M. (1991). Seasonal rhythms of human nutrient intake and meal pattern.
90527-u
Drewnowski, A., Kurth, C., Holden-Wiltse, J., & Saari, J. (1992). Food preferences in
org/10.1016/0195-6663(92)90198-F
Egolf, A., Siegrist, M., & Hartmann, C. (2018). How people’s food disgust sensitivity
1016/j.appet.2018.04.014
Fagan, B. (2001). The Little Ice Age: how climate made history 1300-1850. Basic Books.
Folwarczny, M., Li, N. P., Sigurdsson, V., Tan, L. K., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Develop-
ment and psychometric evaluation of the Anticipated Food Scarcity Scale (AFSS).
Folwarczny, M., Christensen, J. D., Li, N. P., Sigurdsson, V., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Cri-
sis communication, anticipated food scarcity, and food preferences: Preregistered
evidence of the insurance hypothesis. Food Quality and Preference, 91, 104213.
Gasiorowska, A., Zaleskiewicz, T., & Kesebir, P. (2018). Money as an existential anxiety
buffer: Exposure to money prevents mortality reminders from leading to increased
death thoughts. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 79, 394–409. https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2018.09.004
GBD 2015 Obesity Collaborators. (2017). Health effects of overweight and obesity in
195 countries over 25 years. New England Journal of Medicine, 377 (1), 13–27.
Gerend, M. A. (2009). Does calorie information promote lower calorie fast food choices
org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2008.06.014
Gidlo¨f, K., Ares, G., Aschemann-Witzel, J., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Give us today our
daily bread: The effect of hunger on consumers’ visual attention towards bread
and the role of time orientation. Food Quality and Preference, 88, 104079. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2020.104079
Gosler, A. G., Greenwood, J. J., & Perrins, C. (1995). Predation risk and the cost of being
Green, P., & MacLeod, C. J. (2016). SIMR: An R package for power analysis of generalized
linear mixed models by simulation. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7 (4), 493–
Griskevicius, V., Cantu´, S. M., & Van Vugt, M. (2012). The evolutionary bases for sus-
tainable behavior: Implications for marketing, policy, and social entrepreneurship.
jppm.11.040
Griskevicius, V., Goldstein, N. J., Mortensen, C. R., Sundie, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., &
Kenrick, D. T. (2009). Fear and loving in Las Vegas: Evolution, emotion, and
1509/jmkr.46.3.384
Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J. M., & Van den Bergh, B. (2010). Going green to be seen: Sta-
tus, reputation, and conspicuous conservation. Journal of Personality and Social
Hamilton, D., Dee, A., & Perry, I. (2018). The lifetime costs of overweight and obesity in
childhood and adolescence: A systematic review. Obesity Reviews, 19 (4), 452–463.
Hill, S. E., Rodeheffer, C. D., DelPriore, D. J., & Butterfield, M. E. (2013). Ecological
contingencies in women’s calorie regulation psychology: A life history approach.
1016/j.jesp.2013.03.016
Humphries, M. M., Studd, E. K., Menzies, A. K., & Boutin, S. (2017). To everything
there is a season: Summer-to-winter food webs and the functional traits of keystone
1093/icb/icx119
Jaeger, S. R., & Rose, J. M. (2008). Stated choice experimentation, contextual influences
and food choice: A case study. Food Quality and Preference, 19 (6), 539–564. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2008.02.005
King, S. C., Weber, A. J., Meiselman, H. L., & Lv, N. (2004). The effect of meal situation,
social interaction, physical environment and choice on food acceptability. Food
2004.04.010
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., Christensen, R. H., et al. (2017). lmerTest package:
Tests in linear mixed effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82 (13), 1–26.
Li, N. P., van Vugt, M., & Colarelli, S. M. (2018). The evolutionary mismatch hypothesis:
Implications for psychological science. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
Ma, Y., Olendzki, B. C., Li, W., Hafner, A. R., Chiriboga, D., Hebert, J. R., Campbell,
M., Sarnie, M., & Ockene, I. S. (2006). Seasonal variation in food intake, physical
activity, and body weight in a predominantly overweight population. European
Mach´ın, L., Curutchet, M. R., Gugliucci, V., Vitola, A., Otterbring, T., de Alcantara,
M., & Ares, G. (2020). The habitual nature of food purchases at the supermarket:
appet.2020.104844
Macht, M. (2008). How emotions affect eating: A five-way model. Appetite, 50 (1), 1–11.
Marteau, T. M., & Bekker, H. (1992). The development of a six-item short-form of the
state scale of the Spielberger State—Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). British Jour-
nal of Clinical Psychology, 31 (3), 301–306. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 -
8260.1992.tb00997.x
com/poll/151424/health-habits-continue-steep-winter-decline.aspx
Morgan, J. (2016). The melting Arctic ice calls for protecting what I love. https : / /
www . greenpeace . org / international / story / 7028 / the - melting - arctic - ice - calls -
for-protecting-what-i-love/
Neel, J. V. (1962). Diabetes mellitus: A “thrifty” genotype rendered detrimental by
“progress”? American Journal of Human Genetics, 14 (4), 353–362.
Nelson, D. L., Keelean, P. D., & Negrao, M. (1989). Word-fragment cuing: The lexical
search hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Nettle, D., Andrews, C., & Bateson, M. (2017). Food insecurity as a driver of obesity
in humans: The insurance hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X16000947
Ohman, A., Flykt, A., & Esteves, F. (2001). Emotion drives attention: Detecting the
snake in the grass. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130 (3), 466–478.
Ohman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and preparedness: Toward an evolved
module of fear and fear learning. Psychological Review, 108 (3), 483–522. https :
//doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.108.3.483
Ornstein, R. E., & Ehrlich, P. R. (2000). New world new mind: Moving toward conscious
evolution. ISHK.
Otterbring, T. (2020). Appetite for destruction: Counterintuitive effects of attractive faces
org/10.1002/mar.21257
Otterbring, T. (2021). Evolutionary psychology in marketing: Deep, debated, but fancier
mar.21453
Otterbring, T., Gidlo¨f, K., Rolschau, K., & Shams, P. (2020). Cereal deal: How the physical
appearance of others affects attention to healthy foods. Perspectives on Behavior
Otterbring, T., & Shams, P. (2019). Mirror, mirror, on the menu: Visual reminders of
overweight stimulate healthier meal choices. Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Otterbring, T., Sundie, J., Li, Y. J., & Hill, S. (2020). Evolutionary psychological consumer
research: Bold, bright, but better with behavior. Journal of Business Research, 120,
Pennanen, K., Na¨rv¨ainen, J., Vanhatalo, S., Raisamo, R., & Sozer, N. (2020). Effect of
virtual eating environment on consumers’ evaluations of healthy and unhealthy
snacks. Food Quality and Preference, 82, 103871. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
foodqual.2020.103871
Perkovic, S., Otterbring, T., Sch¨arli, C., & Pachur, T. (2021). The perception of food
products in adolescents, lay adults, and experts: A psychometric approach. Journal
Prentice, A. M., Rayco-Solon, P., & Moore, S. E. (2005). Insights from the developing
world: Thrifty genotypes and thrifty phenotypes. Proceedings of the Nutrition So-
Roediger, H. L., Weldon, M. S., Stadler, M. L., & Riegler, G. L. (1992). Direct comparison
of two implicit memory tests: Word fragment and word stem completion. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18 (6), 1251–1269.
Rozin, P. (1996). Towards a psychology of food and eating: From motivation to mod-
ule to model to marker, morality, meaning, and metaphor. Current Directions in
Schulz, L. C. (2010). The Dutch Hunger Winter and the developmental origins of health
and disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107 (39), 16757–
Siegrist, M., Bearth, A., & Hartmann, C. (2020). Food disgust sensitivity influences the
perception of food hazards: Results from longitudinal and cross-cultural studies.
Silverman, I., & Eals, M. (1992). Sex differences in spatial abilities: Evolutionary theory
and data. In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind:
Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 533–549).
Simpson, S. J., & Raubenheimer, D. (2005). Obesity: The protein leverage hypothesis.
Stoet, G. (2010). PsyToolkit: A software package for programming psychological exper-
org/10.3758/BRM.42.4.1096
Stoet, G. (2017). PsyToolkit: A novel web-based method for running online questionnaires
org/10.1177/0098628316677643
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past explains the present: Emotional adaptations
and the structure of ancestral environments. Ethology and Sociobiology, 11 (4-5),
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., & Stark, H. A. (1982). Priming effects in word-fragment
completion are independent of recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8 (4), 336–342. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1037/0278-7393.8.4.336
Van Ooijen, A., van Marken Lichtenbelt, W., Van Steenhoven, A., & Westerterp, K.
(2004). Seasonal changes in metabolic and temperature responses to cold air in
humans. Physiology & Behavior, 82 (2-3), 545–553. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
physbeh.2004.05.001
Van Strien, T., Cebolla, A., Etchemendy, E., Gutierrez-Maldonado, J., Ferrer-Garcia, M.,
Botella, C., & Ban˜os, R. (2013). Emotional eating and food intake after sadness
Wardle, J. (1988). Cognitive control of eating. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 32 (6),
Wardle, J., Guthrie, C., Sanderson, S., Birch, L., & Plomin, R. (2001). Food and activity
preferences in children of lean and obese parents. International Journal of Obesity,
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief
measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 54 (6), 1063–1070.
Wells, N. M., Ashdown, S. P., Davies, E. H., Cowett, F. D., & Yang, Y. (2007). En-
vironment, design, and obesity: Opportunities for interdisciplinary collaborative
research. Environment and Behavior, 39 (1), 6–33. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
detail/obesity-and-overweight
Willett, W., Rockstro¨m, J., Loken, B., Springmann, M., Lang, T., Vermeulen, S., Garnett,
T., Tilman, D., DeClerck, F., Wood, A., et al. (2019). Food in the Anthropocene:
the EAT–Lancet Commission on healthy diets from sustainable food systems. The
Wisdom, J., Downs, J. S., & Loewenstein, G. (2010). Promoting healthy choices: Informa-
tion versus convenience. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2 (2),
Wynes, S., & Nicholas, K. A. (2017). The climate mitigation gap: Education and govern-
ment recommendations miss the most effective individual actions. Environmental
Chapter 5
Development and psychometric evaluation of the Anticipated
Food Scarcity Scale (AFSS)
Published in Appetite
Micha(cid:32)l Folwarczny
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Norman P. Li
School of Social Sciences, Singapore Management University
Valdimar Sigurdsson
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
Lynn K. L. Tan
School of Social Sciences, Singapore Management University
Tobias Otterbring
Department of Management, University of Agder,
Institute of Retail Economics
Abstract
Mass media extensively inform societies about events threatening the global food sup-
ply (e.g., pandemics or Brexit). Consumers exposed to such communication may per-
ceive food resources as becoming scarcer. In line with an evolutionary account, these
perceptions can shift decision-making in domains such as food preferences or prosocial-
ity. However, existing literature has solely focused on actual and past food insecurity
experiences threatening mostly low-income families, thus neglecting the future-oriented
perceptions among the general population. This paper broadens the food insecurity re-
search scope by developing a new construct—anticipated food scarcity (AFS)—which is
defined as the perception that food resources are becoming less available (in the future).
We have developed and psychometrically validated the 8-item Anticipated Food Scarcity
Scale (AFSS) in eight studies (N = 1333). The 8-item AFSS is unidimensional and has
good psychometric qualities. The scale is sensitive to food scarcity cues and, therefore,
can be used in experimental research. Moreover, its relatively narrow set of items makes
it an exceptionally potent tool for use in online surveys, field settings, and lab studies.
Taken together, the AFSS presents an alternative approach to food scarcity measurement
in affluent societies and, consequently, can foster novel research on food waste, prosocial
behaviors, and other similar topic areas.
Keywords: food scarcity, food shortages, food insecurity, the insurance hypothesis,
evolutionary mismatch
5.1 Introduction
Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, people around the world have been panic-buying food
(Benker, 2021). According to a BBC report (Lufkin, 2020), in Singapore, consumers
grabbed up lots of rice and instant noodles, leading to shortages of these products in
supermarkets. In Auckland, shoppers spent 40% more on groceries than they did a year
ago. Similar behaviors have been observed in the past, such as during the 1962 Cuban
missile crisis and in preparation for Y2K, when Americans stockpiled canned foods in
their basements (Lufkin, 2020). Experts have warned that Brexit may trigger even more
intense panic buying among consumers (Casalicchio, 2020). These shopping sprees often
result in excessive food waste. Crucially, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP, 2020) points at limiting unnecessary consumption as one of the foremost steps
in achieving sustainable development.
Although such events usually do not cause actual food shortages in developed coun-
tries, it is plausible that receiving information about such turmoil may induce consumers
to anticipate food scarcity. As a result, consumers may purchase, consume, or waste more
food than usual due to unjustified food stockpiling (see Nettle et al., 2017, for an overview
of the role that cues to food scarcity play in food decision-making) and consumption (Fol-
warczny et al., 2021). To investigate this possibility, a scale measuring anticipated food
scarcity (AFS) is vital. Existing tools used in affluent countries are typically retrospective
and focus on the actual insufficiency of food resources (e.g., Ashby et al., 2016; Nettle
et al., 2019). For example, an established tool for measuring food insecurity—HFIAS—
focuses on the frequency of experiencing food unavailability in the past (Coates et al.,
2007). In other words, these tools focus on the actual experience of food shortages in
specific populations. What is missing is a tool to measure expectations of impending
food shortage. Accordingly, we developed the Anticipated Food Scarcity Scale (AFSS)
to capture perceptions of food resources becoming less available in the future among the
general population.
Our focal construct differs from the existing literature (cf. Ashby et al., 2016) in that it
focuses on an increasing scarcity of food resources rather than on food insecurity, which
tends to denote emotions such as fear and anxiety (Merriam-Webster, 2021). Indeed,
related.
5.1.1 Anticipated food scarcity (AFS)
Major global concerns such as climate change, water scarcity, or resource depletion will
have more severe consequences for food resources in the future that what is currently the
case (Hanjra & Qureshi, 2010). Hence, our construct of interest is future-oriented. When
defining the construct, we draw from work on past experiences of food insecurity by Coates
et al. (2007). As such, in the remainder of this article, we define AFS as “the perception
of future food resources becoming insufficient in terms of availability and accessibility
(e.g., certain foods might disappear or become less affordable).” Availability refers to the
physical existence of food resources (e.g., food production), whereas accessibility refers to
individuals’ ability to obtain food (e.g., having enough money for groceries). Webb et al.
(2006) discuss how these dimensions are understood in the literature on food insecurity.
The perception of future food scarcity relies on past experiences of food unavailabil-
ity, beliefs concerning the influence of various worldly events and factors, and beliefs in
wielding power over others. As AFS is a perception, its magnitude can vary over time. In
sum, whereas AFS is informed by top-down processes such as present knowledge about
future food production or beliefs that one can control what happens in politics, it is also
informed by bottom-up processes such as exposure to cues related to food scarcity. Im-
portantly, food scarcity cues may influence our immediate reactions regardless of whether
they suggest food scarcity that is distant in time and space or more proximate in nature
(e.g., neighbors who have to rely on food stamps).
5.1.2 Perceivable cues related to food scarcity
The basic principles of evolutionary mismatch shed light on why perceivable cues to
food scarcity may trigger the same response mechanisms as an actual experience of food
scarcity (Li et al., 2018; Tooby & Cosmides, 1990). These mechanisms likely evolved so
that humans would be prepared to cope with immediate threats and opportunities (e.g.,
a lion approaching, a drought that leads to famine, an attractive person who appears
available). Because our ancestors did not routinely face technology-induced processes
such as global warming that have far-reaching future-focused consequences, our threat-
handling mechanisms did not evolve to differentiate cues that indicate immediate dangers
from cues that suggest more distant dangers (Griskevicius et al., 2012; Ornstein & Ehrlich,
2000). Hence, human psychological mechanisms respond to most threat cues as if they
were indicating an impending danger. Accordingly, cues related to evolutionarily novel
threats that are distant in time (e.g., food scarcity occurring this year vs. food scarcity
occurring in three decades) or space (e.g., one’s local neighborhood vs. a country in
another continent) may activate the same mechanisms that produce immediate responses
to mitigate those threats in the current environment (cf. Li et al., 2018).
Crucially, whereas actual food unavailability always entails the physical experience
of food insufficiency such as hunger, anticipated food scarcity induced by, for instance,
reports about Brexit does not necessitate physical experiences. As such, AFS is distinct
from food insecurity as it is defined in the current literature. According to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), “Food security exists when all
people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious
food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life” (FAO,
1996). This definition does not encompass any form of anticipation and perceptions about
future food availability.
Notably, a recent study has suggested that exposing participants to videos showing
food scarcity induced by climate change occurring in distant parts of the world increases
their current preferences toward energy-dense foods while decreasing their preferences
toward low-calorie alternatives (Folwarczny et al., 2021). These results support the view
that psychological mechanisms have not evolved to differentiate between current and
distant threats; rather, they imply that exposure to any cues related to food scarcity may
shift food preferences toward energy-dense products. However, tools measuring related
constructs, such as the United States Department of Agriculture’s Food Security Survey
Module (FSSM), are typically retrospective and primarily capture food insecurity defined
as the physical unavailability of food resources (Ashby et al., 2016). Thus, these tools
cannot predict a shift in food preferences resulting from exposure to food scarcity cues,
especially if these cues are related to scarcity distant in time (e.g., happening in two
decades) and space (e.g., happening on another continent).
5.1.3 Media exposure and AFS
Many events can serve as perceivable cues to upcoming food scarcity, especially when
mass media vividly feature such cues. For example, people across the globe have been
extensively informed about lockdowns imposed as a response measure to control the spread
of the COVID-19 pandemic. These lockdowns have triggered labor deficiencies and thus
insufficient food production (Galanakis, 2020). Climate change—another issue causing
heated debates in media—threatens the global food supply chain, but its effects are much
slower than the effects of pandemics (Wheeler & Von Braun, 2013). Brexit is yet another
prominent event that can make consumers perceive future food resources as scarcer, at
least in the United Kingdom (Lang & McKee, 2018). In short, numerous events pose a
risk of upcoming food scarcity over time. Notably, people who are not at risk of direct
exposure to such events may overestimate related threats (in particular, their immediacy)
due to, for instance, media communication with photographs depicting large crowds or
diminishing food supplies (e.g., Garfin et al., 2020).
5.1.4 Research aims and overview of the studies
Thus far, no scale has been developed to capture the perception that future food re-
sources are becoming scarcer. We address this critical shortcoming by developing and
psychometrically validating the 8-item AFSS.
Studies 1a–1c aimed to develop a preliminary item pool for subsequent psychometric
evaluation. Study 2 was conducted to shorten the scale to a desirable length and to assess
its psychometric properties. Studies 3a and 3b confirmed the scale’s unidimensionality
and examined its convergent and discriminant validity to rule out the possibility that
AFS is a ramification of general anxiety or other emotional states. In line with an evolu-
tionary account, Study 3b revealed that AFS might be linked to prosociality. Although
scarcity of food resources, analyses reported in Studies 2–3a clearly show that the scale is
unidimensional; hence these items capture the same construct. Finally, as the scale was
developed primarily for experimental research, Study 4 showed that the AFSS is sensitive
to experimentally manipulated food scarcity.
5.2 Method
5.2.1 Analytic approach
We applied nonparametric item response theory to evaluate the psychometric properties
of the AFSS. The advantage of nonparametric item response theory over parametric item
response theory is that nonparametric item response theory makes fewer assumptions
about the distribution of latent variables and requires smaller sample sizes (Sijtsma &
Molenaar, 2002). Parametric models assume that latent variables are continuous, and
this may not always be the case in the social sciences.
For nonparametric item response theory, we performed a Mokken scale analysis (MSA;
Van der Ark, 2007, 2012). A Mokken scale analysis investigates whether responses to scale
items correspond to an increasing level of the latent variable of interest (Van Schuur, 2003).
Specifically, we tested the scale’s unidimensionality, monotonicity, local independence,
and invariant item ordering. If the first three criteria are met, then a tested set of items
meets the requirements for a monotone homogeneity model and can be considered a
scale, whereas meeting the invariant item ordering criterion (nonintersecting item response
functions) is required for the double monotonicity model to hold (Mokken, 1971; Van
der Ark, 2007, 2012). We investigated unidimensionality—which is the quality of a set
of items that enables them to be located on a continuum of the hypothesized latent
variable according to the probability of obtaining high total scores (Van Schuur, 2003)—
by evaluating the coefficients of homogeneity H that range from 0 to 1. The former number
suggests no association between the items, whereas the latter number suggests a perfect
association (Van der Ark, 2007). We also applied the automated item selection procedure
(AISP) to further explore scale unidimensionality. This algorithm positions items into
scales at increasing homogeneity thresholds (Hemker et al., 1995). If several items start
forming another scale at a particular homogeneity threshold, this suggests that a scale
may have more than one dimension (Dima, 2018). Monotonicity, local independence, and
invariant item ordering were scrutinized separately with tools provided in the “Mokken”
package (Van der Ark, 2007).
We performed all analyses in R. Clean data sets, the data analysis code, the R mark-
down files, Supplementary Information, and additional analyses following the recently
developed—and modified for this research—six-step psychometric protocol in R (Dima,
2018) have been made publicly available through the Open Science Framework (OSF;
2017), and the source code has been made available therein.
We followed the local regulations on research involving human subjects; hence, a formal
approval from an institutional review board was not needed. All participants approved
an informed consent form before taking part in the studies. Data were collected between
March 2020 and February 2021. Only participants whose Prolific submission acceptance
rate was 99% and higher and who had not taken part in any of our earlier experiments
were included to ensure high data quality. Data exclusions were performed as reported in
Studies 2 and 3a; however, including all participants in these studies did not materially
change the results.
5.2.2 Study 1a: Item development
We aimed to develop at least three times more items than the desired number for the final
scale (Boateng et al., 2018). First, we reviewed the academic literature and think tank
reports on future food scarcity. Recent reports by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO, 2016), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC,
2019), and the Center for Strategic and International Studies (Sova et al., 2019) served as
a basis for item generation. We chose these reports because they focus on threats to future
food supply worldwide. Crucially, we assume that threats to the global food supply are
necessary for AFS to occur. Whereas threat is not the subject of our study, AFS would
not emerge without factors threatening the availability and access to food resources. This
first step in scale development yielded 32 items. When generating items, it is crucial to
ask nonexperts recruited from the target population of a scale for suggestions regarding
items measuring the construct of interest; doing so increases the construct’s coverage
beyond that proposed by researchers (Boateng et al., 2018). Thus, we recruited ten native
English speakers through Prolific. Their task was to read the AFS definition and propose
three items that measure this construct. Participants created 30 items in total, but 14
of them were irrelevant or referred to unlikely situations in developed countries (e.g.,
“mass starvation” or “availability of grocery stores”); thus, these items were removed.
The remaining 16 items were reworded and added to the initial pool of items. Both
these steps generated 48 items. We did not develop negatively worded items, as such
items may bias the results (Podsakoff et al., 2003). Finally, the items were analyzed
with the “Hemingway Editor” software (Long, 2020). This software is used for assessing
text difficulty, and it indicated that U.S. pupils in the second grade should be able to
understand our item pool.
5.2.3 Study 1b: Face validity
We conducted a face validity study on a target sample to increase the chance that the
items were deemed relevant to the construct of interest (Haynes et al., 1995). This study
also aimed to reduce the pool of items to those that were the most relevant for measuring
AFS.
Participants and procedure
We recruited 26 native English speakers through Prolific. Similar sample sizes have been
used in other face validity studies involving nonexperts recruited online (e.g., Umanath
& Coane, 2020). Participants first accepted a consent form and read a definition of AFS.
Then, they answered three questions regarding each item (“How relevant is each statement
to anticipated food scarcity?”; “How easy is the statement below to understand?”; and “Is
the statement below grammatically correct?”). They gauged the relevance of each item
to AFS on a four-point scale ranging from 0 = Not at all relevant to 3 = Very relevant.
Participants evaluated how easy the items were to understand. We were not interested
in the item difficulty index, which is commonly used in psychometrics, but rather in
participants’ impressions of how much effort it took to comprehend the statements. Hence,
participants responded on a five-point scale ranging from 0 = Very difficult to 4 = Very
easy.
Finally, they stated whether the items were grammatically correct on a binary scale,
where 0 = No and 1 = Yes. We randomized the order of these items. In the end,
participants were provided with a blank space in which they could suggest improvements.
The study ended with participants providing their demographic information.
Results and discussion
We calculated the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC; Shrout & Fleiss, 1979) to assess
the agreement between the raters. The intraclass correlation coefficient was obtained by
computing a mean-rating, consistency, two-way mixed-effects model (ICC [3,k]) with 26
raters across 48 items measuring the perceived relevance to the AFS. The results (ICC
= .79, 95% CI = [.71, .86]) suggested moderate-to-good reliability (Koo & Li, 2016).
We removed the items situated below the median scores in the task, where participants
evaluated the relevance of the items to the AFS. This process yielded a 22-item pool.
Items that were found to be difficult or grammatically incorrect were reworded.
5.2.4 Study 1c: Pretesting
We conducted a pretest study to primarily examine the performance of the 22-item pool
and to further reword the worst-performing items before conducting the main studies.
Participants and procedure
A total of 52 native English speakers were recruited through Prolific. Participants first
read and completed a consent form. Then, they read the instructions (“The statements
below concern food security by 2050 . Indicate how strongly you disagree (1) or agree (7)
with each statement”) and stated how much they agreed with each item. We randomized
the order of the items. After filling out the scale, participants were provided with a blank
space in which they could suggest improvements. Finally, they provided demographic
information.
We asked participants about food security rather than food scarcity in instructions
because studies on sentence comprehension show that positive sentences are generally
easier to understand (e.g., Sherman, 1973). Moreover, people infer the effort needed to
complete the task from the difficulty of its instructions, and they are willing to engage
less in tasks deemed difficult (Song & Schwarz, 2008). The word “scarcity” receives
approximately 50 times fewer search hits through the Google search engine than the word
“security.” Thus, we deemed the latter term as more straightforward to understand due
to its more frequent use. Hence, we instructed participants to think about “food security”
to facilitate comprehension and the effort put into the task.
Results and discussion
We first visually inspected the data. Most of the items, with a few exceptions, produced a
full range of responses. Skewness and kurtosis outcomes indicated a normal distribution
In the supplementary study reported in the Appendix, we asked participants to think about food
security in the future and found that changing instructions had no significant effect on the scale’s psy-
chometric properties and mean scores.
of responses. However, item 5 (“Groceries will be more expensive”) produced highly
skewed responses. Indeed, the statement in this item represents a truism; i.e., due to
inflation, it is rational to expect all products to become more expensive over time. The
mean and standard deviation of this item also suggested a ceiling effect. Therefore, item
5 was flagged for further inspection and rewording. The correlation matrix indicated that
some items correlated poorly with the others. Thus, we computed corrected item-scale
correlations (each item was correlated with the full scale except with itself). The mean
item-scale correlation was .40. Two items did not meet the minimum item-scale correlation
of .30 (Boateng et al., 2018) and were flagged for further inspection and rewording. Due to
low discrimination and potential ceiling effects, we decided to reword seven items. These
items were truisms in most cases (for instance, “Some foods will be more expensive”);
thus, most respondents strongly agreed with them. Based on this process, we then made
the items discussed above more specific (for example, “Food prices will rise faster than
wages”). No item was removed from the pool after the pretest study; hence, the 22-item
AFSS was psychometrically validated in Study 2.
5.2.5 Study 2: Psychometric validation
Study 2 was conducted to refine and shorten the 22-item pool and to evaluate its psycho-
metric properties. This study yielded nine items for further inspection in Study 3a.
Participants and procedure
We recruited 303 native English speakers through Prolific. Participants were mostly
from the United States and the United Kingdom. Sixteen participants failed the first
attention check (instructional manipulation check) and were thus removed from analysis;
three participants failed the second attention check (a question regarding the number of
siblings; two-digit answers to this question were considered a failure) and were therefore
removed from further analysis. This process yielded a final sample of 284 participants
(178 women, M = 34, SD = 13).
age
Participants first read and accepted a consent form. Then, they read the instructions
(“The statements below concern food security by 2050. Indicate how strongly you disagree
(1) or agree (7) with each statement.”) and stated how much they agreed with each item.
We randomized the order of the items. Apart from filling out the scale items, participants
responded to two attention checks and provided demographic information.
Results and discussion
We performed a Mokken scale analysis. The 22-item scale homogeneity (H = .46, SE
= .03) indicated a moderate scale (Mokken, 1971; Van der Ark, 2007, 2012). We used
the automated item selection procedure algorithm to see how the items performed at
increasing homogeneity thresholds. The items that fell below the threshold of .55 were
removed from further analyses. Although this threshold was above the recommended
minimum of .30 (Hemker et al., 1995), we decided to increase it to achieve a satisfactory
scale length. This procedure removed 11 items from the initial pool. Two items violated
the invariant item ordering (critical values over 80; Van Schuur, 2003), so they were
removed from subsequent analyses, leaving nine items for further inspection. At this
stage, none of the items showed an H coefficient lower than .60 nor violated monotonicity,
invariant item ordering, or local independence. Thus, the 9-item solution fulfilled the
criteria for the double monotonicity model, and its homogeneity level (H = .66, SE =
.03) indicated a strong and unidimensional scale (Mokken, 1971; Van der Ark, 2007, 2012).
We explored the unidimensional model fit with a confirmatory factor analysis using
the “lavaan” package (Rosseel et al., 2012). The model fit was good, with the following
outcomes: χ (27) = 67.52, p < .001, comparative fit index (CFI) = .98, Tucker-Lewis
index (TLI) = .97, root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA) = .07, 90% CI
= [.05, .09], and standardized root mean square residual (SRMR) = .03.
The 9-item AFSS had excellent reliability (α = .94).
5.2.6 Study 3a: Further scale refinement, convergent and dis-
criminant validity
We conducted Study 3a to refine the 9-item AFSS further and test its convergent and
discriminant validity. This procedure yielded the final AFSS consisting of 8 items.
Participants and procedure
We recruited 212 native English speakers through Prolific. Similar to Study 2, participants
were mostly from the United States and the United Kingdom. One participant failed an
attention check, which asked about the name of the prime minister or president located in
the same country as the participant. This process yielded a final sample of 211 participants
(148 women, M = 32, SD = 12).
age
The procedure and instructions to the AFSS were similar to those used in Study 2.
Before filling out each questionnaire, we provided separate instructions to ensure that
participants noticed the changing response formats throughout the study. These instruc-
tions were given to make participants aware of some negatively worded items and to help
them notice the reversed response format of the HEXACO-60 short personality inventory
(Ashton & Lee, 2009), where the leftmost response denoted the highest agreement, as
opposed to the AFSS and other scales, in which the leftmost response corresponded to
the highest disagreement.
Measures
Aside from the AFSS, participants completed the questionnaires described below. We
purposely avoided using the popular USDA Food Security Survey Module in this valida-
tion study, as this tool primarily captures the lack of financial resources needed to obtain
enough food; thus, it may not cover the whole spectrum of factors contributing to food
security (Ashby et al., 2016).
Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES). To assess the discriminant validity of
the AFSS, we used the Food Insecurity Experience Scale developed by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO, 2014). The advantage of this
experience-based measure is that it captures not only physical food unavailability but
also the subjective experience of food insecurity. Specifically, one question asks respon-
dents to state whether they are worried about food sufficiency (Saint Ville et al., 2019).
Participants responded to each of eight statements on a binary scale, where 0 = No and
1 = Yes. Higher scores correspond to higher levels of food insecurity.
Radimer/Cornell Measure of Hunger and Food Insecurity. Another scale that
we applied to assess the discriminant validity was the Radimer/Cornell Measure of Hunger
and Food Insecurity (Radimer et al., 1990). This tool has four items that encompass worry
about food resources in various situations. Furthermore, it allows respondents to state
how often such events happen in their lives. Participants responded to each of eight
statements on a scale ranging from 1 = No, never to 5 = Yes, always. Higher scores
correspond to higher levels of food insecurity.
Mini-K. Life-history strategy was measured with the Mini-K, which is a short, 20-item
version of the Arizona Life History Battery (Figueredo et al., 2006). According to theory
(Hill & Kaplan, 1999), humans adopt either a fast or slow life-history strategy as a re-
sponse to the low or high availability of resources in their environment to solve trade-offs
between somatic effort (saving energy for growth and survival) and reproductive effort (in-
vesting energy in reproduction). Life-history strategies can determine variations in human
behaviors such as risk-taking, temporal orientation, or proneness to approach temptations.
Consequently, studies have found that people who grow up in areas of resource deprivation
(environments facilitating fast life-history strategies) are more impulsive and risk-taking,
and they approach temptations more quickly than other individuals (Griskevicius et al.,
2013). We hypothesized AFS to be positively related to fast life-history strategies because
a shortage of resources favors fast over slow life-history strategy (Figueredo et al., 2006;
Griskevicius et al., 2013). Participants indicated their responses on the 20-item battery
on a seven-point scale ranging from -3 = Disagree strongly to 3 = Agree strongly. Higher
scores reflect a slower life-history strategy.
HEXACO-60 Personality Inventory. We measured one personality dimension from
the HEXACO-60 short personality inventory (Ashton & Lee, 2009). Considering that
environmental threats have been linked to higher anxiety levels (Twenge, 2000), we hy-
pothesized that more emotional people perceive future food resources as being scarcer
compared to the perception of less emotional people. Participants responded to the 10-
item measure of emotionality on a five-point scale ranging from 1 = Strongly disagree to
5 = Strongly agree. Higher scores correspond to higher levels of emotionality.
Generalized Sense of Power Scale. The 8-item Generalized Sense of Power Scale
(Anderson & Galinsky, 2006) was used to test the prediction that people who believe
that they can wield power over others perceive future food resources as more secure as
such people may see more ways of obtaining food and other resources than those who
have a lower sense of power. Participants responded on a seven-point scale ranging from
1 = Disagree strongly to 7 = Agree strongly. Higher scores represent a higher sense of
power.
Locus of Control Scale. The 29-item Locus of Control Scale (Rotter, 1966) measures
the external versus internal locus of control among participants. Locus of control deter-
mines whether people perceive their actions as having an impact on the outcomes from
many facets of their daily life. We hypothesized that people with a more external locus
of control would score higher on the AFSS, as these individuals believe they do not have
control over events such as agricultural turmoil. Each of the 29 items has two alternatives,
and participants select the one that they agree with the most. Higher scores correspond
to a more pronounced external locus of control.
Results and discussion
One item lowered the alpha value of the 9-item scale, and its coefficient of variation was
the highest; thus, this item was flagged for further inspection. This item also had a much
lower item discrimination coefficient than the rest of the items (these indicators combined
suggested that this item could have failed to differentiate well between participants at
different levels of the latent variable).
We performed a Mokken scale analysis, as described in Study 2. The 9-item AFSS
homogeneity coefficient (H = .74, SE = .03) indicated a strong scale (Mokken, 1971;
Van der Ark, 2007, 2012). The automated item selection procedure algorithm suggested
that the scale was unidimensional; we did not find any group of items “departing” at
a certain homogeneity level. No item violated the monotonicity or local independence.
One item exceeded the suggested critical value of 80 for invariant item ordering (Van
Schuur, 2003), but this violation was not significant. Therefore, the 9-item scale was
found to meet the criteria for the double monotonicity model (Mokken, 1971). The item
flagged for potential removal in the earlier step had the lowest homogeneity coefficient
and violated monotonicity at lower rest score group sizes (Van der Ark, 2007). Thus, this
item was removed from further analysis, yielding the final 8-item AFSS.
We explored the unidimensional model fit with a confirmatory factor analysis of our
8-item instrument. The model fit was acceptable, with outcomes as follows: χ (20) =
55.60, p < .001, comparative fit index (CFI) = .98, Tucker-Lewis index (TLI) = .97,
root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA) = .09, 90% CI = [.06, .12], and
standardized root mean square residual (SRMR) = .02.
Similar to Study 2, the 8-item AFSS had excellent reliability (α = .96). The mean
corrected inter-item correlation was .76. The 8-item mean (M = 4.60, range 4.34 to 4.82)
5.1 for the final items included in the scale). Scale skewness (-0.53) and kurtosis (-0.29),
as well as a visual inspection of the histograms, indicated a normal distribution of the
responses.
icant correlations with the Food Insecurity Experience Scale and the Radimer/Cornell
Measure of Hunger and Food Insecurity. These results provide evidence that anticipated
food scarcity is a different construct than the food insecurity construct, as studied in the
existing literature, which refers to retrospective/actual experiences of food unavailability.
Interestingly, the AFSS did not correlate with the Mini-K, suggesting that life-history
strategies and anticipated food scarcity are unrelated constructs. As predicted, the AFSS
correlated positively with the Locus of Control Scale and with the emotionality dimen-
sion of the HEXACO-60 short personality inventory. These outcomes suggest that people
with an external locus of control and those who are more emotional perceive future food
resources as being scarcer. Finally, we found a negative correlation between the AFSS
and the Generalized Sense of Power Scale. This result is in line with our prediction that
people who believe that they can convince others to do what they want perceive future
food resources as more secure, perhaps because they are more capable of finding ways to
access food and other resources.
Studies 2 and 3a jointly confirmed the good psychometric properties of the 8-item
AFSS. Although we found significant correlations according to our predictions, the AFSS
was only weakly correlated with the scales mentioned above. This means that anticipated
food scarcity is a novel construct. To further support this notion, we performed additional
analyses where we controlled for the two existing food insecurity measures described above.
These analyzes revealed that the AFSS was positively related to emotionality (p = .010).
However, both the Food Insecurity Experience Scale and the Radimer/Cornell Measure
of Hunger and Food Insecurity were not related to this personality trait (both ps > .549).
Similarly, only the AFSS (p = .003) was related to locus of control, but the remaining
two scales were not (both ps > .401). Further, both the AFSS and the Radimer/Cornell
Measure of Hunger and Food Insecurity were marginally related to the Generalized Sense
of Power Scale (both ps < .082), as opposed to the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (p
= .771). Interestingly, the existing tools were related or marginally related to life-history
strategy (both ps < .079), but the AFSS was not (p = .712).
surprising given that AFS is a perception. In contrast, the scales we compared it against
reflect personality traits and past experiences. It is plausible that current perceptions
of future food resources as scarce are affected by past experiences of food unavailability;
hence, the FIES and Radimer/Cornell Measure of Hunger and Food Insecurity are weakly
but positively associated with scores on the AFSS. Considering that emotionality is posi-
tively related to neuroticism, and multiple items capturing this trait focus on anxiety and
fearfulness (Ashton & Lee, 2009), it is justified to expect that AFS, to some extent, cap-
tures affective reactions (e.g., anxiety triggered by cues related to food scarcity). Indeed,
Studies 3a and 4 partially support this notion. Study 3a provided evidence that people
who believe that they have little influence over what happens in the world around them
(i.e., having an external locus of control and a low sense of power) score higher on the
AFSS. These results align with our definition of this construct and the items capturing
it. People who believe they can wield power over others and those who have an internal
locus of control likely also think that they can obtain access to food resources despite
these becoming scarcer. In sum, Study 3a showed that the AFSS is a construct distinct
from the existing food insecurity measures.
AFS 1 Food shortages will occur more frequently
AFS 2 Food resources will become increasingly scarce
AFS 3 There will be less food available
AFS 4 Food availability will be more uncertain
AFS 5 More people will be hungry
AFS 6 The demand for food will be higher than the supply
AFS 7 There may not be enough food for everyone
AFS 8 People will compete for food resources
5.2.7 Study 3b: Additional tests of convergent and discriminant
validity
Study 3a shows that AFS is a distinct construct to food insecurity, the latter of which
is commonly treated in the literature as the physical experience of food insufficiency.
However, Study 3a did not investigate if AFS merely reflects general anxiety or other
emotional states. Thus, Study 3b tested this possibility. Additionally, we investigated
whether AFSS could predict social attitudes in terms of support for Universal Basic
Income and attitudes toward welfare recipients.
Participants and procedure
We recruited 140 participants from the United States through Prolific (68 women, M =
age
35, SD = 13). The data were collected in connection to another research project, which
examined the influence of seasonal cues on food preferences.
After accepting an informed consent form, participants provided their Prolific IDs and
watched a 50-second video showing either a winter or summer forest walk from the first-
person perspective. These videos were devoid of emotionally laden stimuli. Participants
then filled out the scales described below. The study concluded by participants providing
demographic data and answering an attention check regarding the video content.
Measures
We measured AFS, positive and negative affect, as well as anxiety. Moreover, we investi-
gated if the AFSS was linked to gradients of prosocial behavior.
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS). Positive and negative affect was
captured on a 20-item (10 for positive and 10 for negative affect) Positive and Negative
Affect Schedule (Watson et al., 1988), with responses ranging from 1 = very slightly or
not at all to 5 = extremely. Higher scores correspond to a higher positive/negative affect.
Short form of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). We measured anxiety
using a six-item short-form of the Spielberger State—Trait Anxiety Inventory (Marteau
& Bekker, 1992), with responses ranging from 1 = Not at all to 4 = Very much. Higher
scores correspond to a higher anxiety.
Prosociality: support for Universal Basic Income and attitudes toward welfare
recipients. Several theories propose that food scarcity and social behavior may be re-
lated. The hunger hypothesis (Nettle, 2017) postulates that people of lower socioeconomic
status are more impulsive, irritable, aggressive, and experience more anxiety than people
of higher socioeconomic status partly due to food insufficiency and food insecurity preva-
lent in their environments. According to the conservation of resources theory (Hobfoll,
1989), people facing threats (e.g., food scarcity) strive to keep resources to themselves
rather than sharing these with others. Hence, as anticipating food scarcity may prompt
people to maximize their own (vs. societal) welfare, we predict that AFS will be positively
related to support for Universal Basic Income and negatively related to attitudes toward
welfare recipients.
Participants read a definition of the Universal Basic Income and stated their support
for this idea (“How bad or good an idea would it be to introduce a Universal Basic
Income in your country?”) on a sliding scale ranging from 0 = Bad idea to 100 = Good
idea (Nettle et al., 2020).
They voiced their attitudes toward welfare recipients by agreeing with the two state-
ments (“Too many get social welfare without needing it”; “Many of the unemployed don’t
really want to find work.”) on a scale ranging from 1 = disagree to 5 = agree (Petersen
et al., 2014).
Results and discussion
anxiety, and unrelated to positive affect. Thus, the construct cannot be deemed as a
direct ramification of emotional states. Although AFS was unrelated to attitudes toward
welfare recipients, we provide preliminary evidence that it can be predictive of other
social behavior gradients, such as support for Universal Basic Income. Therefore, it is
plausible that AFS can deepen the understanding of complex phenomena linked to social
interaction and resource distribution.
Because participants watched a short video clip before filling out the scales, we tested
whether these videos affected their responses. We performed a multivariate analysis of
variance (MANOVA) with all the dependent variables and the two predictors: experimen-
tal condition (watching summer or winter cues) and participant sex. Neither participant
sex (p > .462), nor experimental condition (p > .376) was related to any of our dependent
measures.
Scale Statistic Coefficient p-value
FIES Kendall’s τ .12 .017
Radimer/Cornell’s Kendall’s τ .14 .006
Mini-K Pearson’s r -0.01 .867
HEXACO-60 (emotionality) Pearson’s r .19 .005
Generalized Sense of Power Scale Pearson’s r -0.16 .018
Locus of Control Scale Pearson’s r .21 .002
PANAS (positive affect) Pearson’s r .04 .634
PANAS (negative affect) Pearson’s r .21 .012
STAI Pearson’s r .23 .007
Support for Universal Basic Income Pearson’s r .19 .027
Attitude toward welfare recipients Pearson’s r .03 .723
Note. We report the parametric correlation coefficient (Pearson’s r ) whenever the responses
approach normal distributions and data are continuous. The nonparametric correlation
coefficient (Kendall’s τ ) is reported for highly skewed and ordinal data.
5.2.8 Study 4: Sensitivity to food scarcity cues
Anticipated food scarcity is a perception and thus should, to a certain extent, be under
the short-term influence of external factors, such as exposure to news reports. According
to dual coding theory (Clark & Paivio, 1991; see also Otterbring et al., 2013), humans
possess separate systems for processing verbal and visual stimuli; thus, presenting the
same information in the form of a video versus text may yield different outcomes. Indeed,
using videos or videos with text engages students more than presenting them only textual
information (Yadav et al., 2011). Thus, Study 4 investigated if exposing participants to
cues to food scarcity indeed increases their AFS and whether this effect depends on the
media type.
Participants and procedure
We decided in advance to recruit at least 40 participants per cell. A stochastic power
simulation (Bolker, 2007) revealed that this sample size would provide a power of .80 to
detect a significant difference between two groups, assuming a medium-to-large effect size
(Cohen’s d = 0.65). We recruited 175 native English speakers (111 women, M = 34,
age
SD = 12) through Prolific. Again, participants were mostly from the United States and
the United Kingdom. No one failed the attention check (“Who is the prime minister or
president of your country?”).
Participants first read and accepted a consent form. Then, following a 2 (information
type: control vs. experimental—food scarcity) × 2 (medium type: text vs. video) design,
participants were randomly assigned to one of four groups. Depending on their assigned
condition, participants were either told to read a 500-word article or watch a 66-second
video and memorize critical facts from the content. Participants in the two experimental
groups were exposed to food scarcity content, and those in the two control groups were
exposed to stimuli unrelated to food. More specifically, the participants in the first control
group read an article entitled “Why Are Swiss Watches So Expensive?,” whereas those
in the second control group watched a 67-second-long subtitled video entitled, “Airlines
don’t have to leave the middle seats on flights empty anymore.” The participants assigned
to the two experimental groups either read an article entitled “Food Insecurity Remains
Long Term Problem,” or watched a 66-second-long subtitled video entitled “Will COVID-
19 lead to a global food crisis?” All of the articles and videos are available through this
project’s OSF webpage. After reading the article or watching the video, participants
completed the AFSS (we used the same instructions as these reported in Studies 1c–3a)
and the short, 10-item version of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (Thompson,
2007).
Measures
Positive and negative affect elicited by the stimuli, as measured through the 10-item short
version of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (I-PANAS-SF; Thompson, 2007),
were included to control for potential affective differences between participants across the
conditions. The I-PANAS-SF contains two subscales that measure positive and negative
affect, with each subscale having five items. The order of items was randomized, and
participants responded on a five-point scale ranging from 1 = Very slightly or Not at all
to 5 = Extremely. High scores on these subscales are indicators of high levels of positive
and negative affect, respectively.
Results and discussion
We averaged the scores from the AFSS (α = .95), positive (α = .76), and negative affect
scales (α = .86). Next, we performed a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the
AFS index with information type (control vs. experimental—food scarcity) and medium
type (text vs. video) as the between-subjects factors. Participants exposed to information
about food scarcity (M = 5.54, SD = 1.11) reported higher anticipated food scarcity than
their peers exposed to the control information (M = 4.73, SD = 1.44), F (1, 172) = 15.87,
p < .001, η = .08. We found no main effect of medium type, F (1, 172) = 1.91, p = .169,
η = .01, nor an interaction between information type and medium type, F < 1.
To test the robustness of our findings and ensure that food scarcity exposure drove
the increase in AFS scores, we conducted an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with the
same between-subjects factors and with positive and negative affect as covariates. One
covariate—negative affect—was significantly related to AFS scores, F (1, 172) = 19.53,
p < .001, η = .10. However, including these covariates did not change the nature or
significance of the earlier findings, with the main effect of information type still being
significant, F (1, 169) = 6.89, p = .009, η = .04, and the effect of medium type and the
interaction between medium type and information type remaining nonsignificant (ps >
.21). These results suggest that experimentally manipulated food scarcity, in terms of
Note. Middle horizontal lines indicate medians. Notches around these lines denote 95% confidence
intervals. Horizontal lines around medians correspond to interquartile ranges. Whiskers extend 1.5 times
the interquartile ranges.
5.3 General discussion
The current research examined the psychometric properties of the newly developed 8-item
Anticipated Food Scarcity Scale (AFSS), which can be used to measure people’s percep-
tions of food resources becoming less available. Anticipated food scarcity (AFS), as it is
studied herein, is a new psychological construct that can contribute to the understand-
ing of factors underlying food hoarding behaviors, impulsivity, or increased preferences
toward energy-dense foods when consumers are exposed to food scarcity cues (cf. Fol-
warczny et al., 2021; Nettle et al., 2017). In contrast to the existing measures—such as
HFIAS (Coates et al., 2007)—which focus on past experiences of food insecurity threaten-
ing relatively few people living in developed countries, the AFSS captures future-related
perceptions among the general population.
The 8-item AFSS forms a strong, unidimensional scale that meets the criteria for the
double monotonicity model (Van der Ark, 2007, 2012). The low correlations between the
AFSS and Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FAO, 2014), as well as the Radimer/Cornell
Measure of Hunger and Food Insecurity (Radimer et al., 1990), indicate that AFS and
food insecurity, as treated in the current literature, are qualitatively distinct but presum-
ably interrelated constructs. We also find that people with an external locus of control
(Rotter, 1966), a lower sense of power (Anderson & Galinsky, 2006), and higher levels of
emotionality (Ashton & Lee, 2009) perceive future food resources as being scarcer. We do
not find a meaningful relationship between AFS scores and life-history strategy (Figueredo
et al., 2006) or positive affect (Watson et al., 1988). Although the AFSS shows positive
correlations with negative affect and anxiety (Marteau & Bekker, 1992; Watson et al.,
1988), these correlations are weak. More importantly, Study 4 shows that people exposed
to food scarcity content score higher on the AFSS, with these results remaining signifi-
cant even when controlling for negative affect (Thompson, 2007). Therefore, it is unlikely
that the AFSS merely captures general anxiety or negative affect associated with fear of
losing access to food resources. Building on the literature postulating that people facing
difficulties keep resources to themselves rather than sharing them with others (Hobfoll,
1989), we predicted and found that AFS was positively related to support for Universal
Basic Income (Nettle et al., 2020). However, the scale was not predictive of attitudes to-
ward welfare recipients (Petersen et al., 2014). Taken together, these findings show that
AFS may be linked to prosocial behaviors. The AFSS is sensitive to food scarcity cues.
In Study 4, we exposed participants to either an article describing globally rising food
scarcity, a video about COVID-19-related food scarcity, or control stimuli. Participants
exposed to textual and visual food scarcity content reported higher AFS levels. This out-
come suggests that the AFSS can be used in experimental work where researchers may
be interested in manipulating AFS.
The results reported above support the evolutionary mismatch hypothesis (Li et al.,
2018). A mismatch occurs when evolutionarily-old psychological mechanisms, which our
ancestors developed across human history, interact with novel stimuli from our modern
world, thereby producing maladaptive outcomes (Gidl¨of et al., 2021; Otterbring, 2021).
Consequently, our evolved mechanisms are often outdated and no longer help us maximize
our adaptiveness in the modern world. Indeed, the environments that fashioned the adap-
tations that protected our ancestors against periods of food unavailability are vastly dif-
ferent from current environments. Nonetheless, psychological mechanisms did not evolve
to distinguish between current and impending threats and those that might occur decades
later because such distal threats are largely caused by technological developments that
have only taken place recently. Thus, the evolutionarily outdated mechanisms may still
respond to the same types of threat stimuli in similar ways that are now maladaptive
(Li et al., 2018). Indeed, research suggests that watching climate change-induced food
scarcity videos immediately increases preferences toward energy-dense foods (Folwarczny
et al., 2021). The final study in this article revealed a similar increase in AFS scores after
exposure to food scarcity content. Together, these findings provide convergent support
for the evolutionary mismatch framework.
5.3.1 Limitations and future research
Although our participants were primarily from developed countries, half of them reported
having a college degree, and only 18% reported being unemployed, it remains unknown
whether any of them were the recipients of food stamps or related programs. One study
found that all parents receiving food parcels worried about food insufficiency (Harvey,
2016). Thus, it is plausible that they should also react to food scarcity differently than
other individuals. Considering that our participants were relatively highly educated,
spoke English as their first language, and lived in developed countries, the mean AFSS
scores reported herein may not indicate the magnitude of the latent variable among less-
educated participants and those living in less developed countries, where food insecurity
is a more significant threat for societal well-being. Further, it is unknown how our con-
struct would operate when translated to languages other than English. Hence, for reasons
of generalizability, future studies should include more diverse samples in terms of educa-
tional backgrounds, cultural characteristics, and socioeconomic status as well as languages
spoken, sociopolitical attitudes, and participants recruited from both developed and less
developed countries (Henrich et al., 2010; Otterbring et al., 2020).
The degree to which people may experience food scarcity differs dramatically between
developed and less developed countries. Due to potential habituation, the latter may
not respond to the same manipulations used in Study 4. Thus, we cannot claim that
our scale is sensitive to food scarcity cues found in countries where people are frequently
threatened by actual hunger. Therefore, future research should investigate samples in
which the experience of actual food scarcity is prevalent. Furthermore, we used overt
cues to food scarcity in Study 4 (i.e., even the titles of the articles and videos used
mentioned food unavailability). It is vital to determine whether the scale is sensitive to
more subtle cues to food scarcity, such as reports showing rising global temperatures.
Finally, the AFSS has not been validated with behavioral measures. Study 4 showed
that the scale is sensitive to food scarcity cues. Although these results are promising, the
present findings do not imply that the scale has been validated comprehensively. More
studies should establish the predictive validity of the scale by, for instance, testing whether
high AFS scores correspond to choosing energy-dense over low-calorie foods in laboratory
and field experiments. Likewise, it is vital to investigate whether AFS scores can predict
the rate of obesity or overweight in populations of interest.
5.3.2 Conclusions
Existing food insecurity measures have been developed primarily to gauge the prevalence
of food insufficiency among low-income populations. However, societies worldwide are
consistently informed about publicized events in mass media, such as Brexit, climate
change, or pandemics, which pose a threat to the food supply chain. As a result, so-
cial groups other than low-income populations may also perceive that food resources are
becoming scarcer. Although numerous scientific tools exist to measure actual food inse-
curity (i.e., hunger), none of these tools capture anticipated food scarcity. To address this
shortcoming, we developed and psychometrically validated the 8-item AFSS, which was
found to be unidimensional and to have good psychometric qualities. Because the scale
is sensitive to food scarcity cues, it can be used in experimental research. Its relatively
narrow set of items makes it an exceptionally potent tool for use in online surveys, field
settings, and lab studies. In sum, the AFSS presents an alternative approach to food
scarcity measurement in affluent societies. The scale can help foster novel research on
food waste, sustainability, and a multitude of prosocial behaviors.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Alexandra Dima for her support and suggestions on the analytical
approach presented in this research.
5.4 Appendix
Study Aim N Measures
1a Develop the initial items pool 10 Proposed items
1b Investigate the face validity of the 26 Face validity, comprehension, and
items and reduce their number grammatical correctness
1c Pretest the first scale, reword items 52 AFSS
2 Shorten the scale, evaluate its psy- 303 AFSS
chometric properties
Supp. Investigate the scale’s psychometric 415 AFSS
properties under different instruc-
tions, test the criterion validity
3a Refine the scale, test the convergent 212 AFSS, FIES, Radimer/Cornell,
and discriminant validity Mini-K, HEXACO-60 (emotional-
ity), Generalized Sense of Power,
Locus of Control
3b Further test the convergent and dis- 140 AFSS, PANAS, STAI, support for
criminant validity Universal Basic Income, attitude to-
ward welfare recipients
4 Test whether the scale is sensitive 175 AFSS, I-PANAS-SF
to food scarcity cues
Note. Participants in all the studies were recruited through Prolific. They were native English speakers,
mostly from the United States and the United Kingdom. Participants could not take part in more than
one study.
Supplementary Study
In the earlier studies, the instructions for participants mentioned a specific and distant
time frame, namely—the year 2050. Thus, we wanted to check whether more generic
instructions yield a different pattern of responses. Further, we aimed to confirm the
psychometric properties with a larger sample.
Participants and procedure
The data were collected in connection to another preregistered research project. We
recruited 415 participants from the United States (204 women, M = 37, SD = 13)
age
through Prolific.
Participants first read and accepted a consent form. Then, they provided their demo-
graphic data and filled out the 8-item AFS Scale (“The statements below concern food
security in the future. Indicate how strongly you disagree (1) or agree (7) with each
statement”).
Results
We performed a Mokken scale analysis, as described in Studies 2–3a. The 8-item AFSS
homogeneity coefficient (H = .82, SE = .02) indicated a strong scale (Mokken, 1971; Van
der Ark, 2007, 2012). The automated item selection procedure algorithm suggested that
the scale was unidimensional; we did not find any group of items “departing” at a certain
homogeneity level. No item significantly violated the monotonicity, local independence,
or invariant item ordering (Van Schuur, 2003). Therefore, the 8-item scale was found to
meet the criteria for the double monotonicity model (Mokken, 1971).
We explored the unidimensional model fit with a confirmatory factor analysis. The
model fit was acceptable, with outcomes as follows: χ (20) = 105.19, p < .001, compar-
ative fit index (CFI) = .98, Tucker-Lewis index (TLI) = .97, root mean squared error of
approximation (RMSEA) = .10, 90% CI = [.08, .12], and standardized root mean square
residual (SRMR) = .02.
Similar to Studies 2–3a, the 8-item AFSS had excellent reliability (α = .97). The
mean corrected inter-item correlation was .76. The 8-item mean (M = 4.38, range 4.18 to
4.64) and standard deviation (SD = 1.49) indicated a lack of ceiling or floor effects. Scale
skewness (-0.32) and kurtosis (-0.66), as well as a visual inspection of the histograms,
indicated a normal distribution of the responses.
Discussion
This study further confirmed that the AFSS has good psychometric properties, thus
mirroring the findings from Studies 2 and 3a.
5.5 References
Anderson, C., & Galinsky, A. D. (2006). Power, optimism, and risk-taking. European
1002/ejsp.324
Ashby, S., Kleve, S., McKechnie, R., & Palermo, C. (2016). Measurement of the dimensions
of food insecurity in developed countries: A systematic literature review. Public
S1368980016001166
Ashton, M. C., & Lee, K. (2009). The HEXACO–60: A short measure of the major di-
mensions of personality. Journal of Personality Assessment, 91 (4), 340–345. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/00223890902935878
Benker, B. (2021). Stockpiling as resilience: Defending and contextualising extra food
appet.2020.104981
Boateng, G. O., Neilands, T. B., Frongillo, E. A., Melgar-Quin˜onez, H. R., & Young, S. L.
(2018). Best practices for developing and validating scales for health, social, and
10.3389/fpubh.2018.00149
∼bolker/emdbook/chap5A.pdf
Casalicchio, E. (2020). Panic-buying in UK will return ahead of Brexit transition end,
experts say. https : / / www . politico . eu / article / uk - panic - buying - set - to - return -
ahead-of-brexit-transition-end/
effects/food security.htm
Clark, J. M., & Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory and education. Educational Psy-
Coates, J., Swindale, A., & Bilinsky, P. (2007). Household Food Insecurity Access Scale
org/sites/default/files/resources/HFIAS ENG v3 Aug07.pdf
Dima, A. L. (2018). Scale validation in applied health research: Tutorial for a 6-step R-
based psychometrics protocol. Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine, 6 (1),
FAO. (1996). World Food Summit Plan of Action. http : / / www . fao . org / 3 / w3613e /
w3613e00.htm
the-hungry/fies/en/
org/3/a-i5188e.pdf
Figueredo, A. J., V´asquez, G., Brumbach, B. H., Schneider, S. M., Sefcek, J. A., Tal, I. R.,
Hill, D., Wenner, C. J., & Jacobs, W. J. (2006). Consilience and life history theory:
From genes to brain to reproductive strategy. Developmental Review, 26 (2), 243–
Folwarczny, M., Christensen, J. D., Li, N. P., Sigurdsson, V., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Cri-
sis communication, anticipated food scarcity, and food preferences: Preregistered
evidence of the insurance hypothesis. Food Quality and Preference, 91, 104213.
Galanakis, C. M. (2020). The food systems in the era of the coronavirus (COVID-19)
Garfin, D. R., Silver, R. C., & Holman, E. A. (2020). The novel coronavirus (COVID-
2019) outbreak: Amplification of public health consequences by media exposure.
Gidlo¨f, K., Ares, G., Aschemann-Witzel, J., & Otterbring, T. (2021). Give us today our
daily bread: The effect of hunger on consumers’ visual attention towards bread
and the role of time orientation. Food Quality and Preference, 88, 104079. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2020.104079
Griskevicius, V., Ackerman, J. M., Cantu´, S. M., Delton, A. W., Robertson, T. E., Simp-
son, J. A., Thompson, M. E., & Tybur, J. M. (2013). When the economy falters,
do people spend or save? Responses to resource scarcity depend on childhood en-
vironments. Psychological Science, 24 (2), 197–205. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
Griskevicius, V., Cantu´, S. M., & Van Vugt, M. (2012). The evolutionary bases for sus-
tainable behavior: Implications for marketing, policy, and social entrepreneurship.
jppm.11.040
Hanjra, M. A., & Qureshi, M. E. (2010). Global water crisis and future food security in
foodpol.2010.05.006
Harvey, K. (2016). “When I go to bed hungry and sleep, I’m not hungry”: Children and
1016/j.appet.2016.01.004
Haynes, S. N., Richard, D., & Kubany, E. S. (1995). Content validity in psychological
assessment: A functional approach to concepts and methods. Psychological As-
Hemker, B. T., Sijtsma, K., & Molenaar, I. W. (1995). Selection of unidimensional scales
from a multidimensional item bank in the polytomous Mokken IRT model. Ap-
plied Psychological Measurement, 19 (4), 337–352. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 /
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). Most people are not WEIRD. Nature,
Hill, K., & Kaplan, H. (1999). Life history traits in humans: Theory and empirical studies.
anthro.28.1.397
Hobfoll, S. E. (1989). Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing stress.
Koo, T. K., & Li, M. Y. (2016). A guideline of selecting and reporting intraclass correlation
coefficients for reliability research. Journal of Chiropractic Medicine, 15 (2), 155–
Lang, T., & McKee, M. (2018). Brexit poses serious threats to the availability and afford-
ability of food in the United Kingdom. Journal of Public Health, 40 (4), e608–e610.
Li, N. P., van Vugt, M., & Colarelli, S. M. (2018). The evolutionary mismatch hypothesis:
Implications for psychological science. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
Lufkin, B. (2020). Coronavirus: The psychology of panic buying. https : / / www . bbc .
com / worklife / article / 20200304 - coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - why - people - are -
stockpiling
Marteau, T. M., & Bekker, H. (1992). The development of a six-item short-form of the
state scale of the Spielberger State—Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). British Jour-
nal of Clinical Psychology, 31 (3), 301–306. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 -
8260.1992.tb00997.x
Merriam-Webster. (2021). Insecurity. Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Retrieved Febru-
Mokken, R. J. (1971). A theory and procedure of scale analysis: With applications in
Nettle, D. (2017). Does hunger contribute to socioeconomic gradients in behavior? Fron-
Nettle, D., Andrews, C., & Bateson, M. (2017). Food insecurity as a driver of obesity
in humans: The insurance hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X16000947
Nettle, D., Johnson, E., Johnson, M., & Saxe, R. (2020). Why has the COVID-19 pandemic
csr3u
Nettle, D., Joly, M., Broadbent, E., Smith, C., Tittle, E., & Bateson, M. (2019). Oppor-
tunistic food consumption in relation to childhood and adult food insecurity: An
j.appet.2018.07.018
Ornstein, R. E., & Ehrlich, P. R. (2000). New world new mind: Moving toward conscious
evolution. ISHK.
Otterbring, T. (2021). Evolutionary psychology in marketing: Deep, debated, but fancier
mar.21453
Otterbring, T., Shams, P., Wa¨stlund, E., & Gustafsson, A. (2013). Left isn’t always right:
Placement of pictorial and textual package elements. British Food Journal, 115 (8),
Otterbring, T., Sundie, J., Li, Y. J., & Hill, S. (2020). Evolutionary psychological consumer
research: Bold, bright, but better with behavior. Journal of Business Research, 120,
Petersen, M. B., Aarøe, L., Jensen, N. H., & Curry, O. (2014). Social welfare and the
psychology of food sharing: Short-term hunger increases support for social welfare.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J.-Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common
method biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and rec-
org/10.1037/0021-9010.88.5.879
Radimer, K. L., Olson, C. M., & Campbell, C. C. (1990). Development of indicators to
org/10.1093/jn/120.suppl 11.1544
Rosseel, Y. et al. (2012). Lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of re-
inforcement. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 80 (1), 1–28. https:
//doi.org/10.1037/h0092976
Saint Ville, A., Po, J. Y. T., Sen, A., Bui, A., & Melgar-Quin˜onez, H. (2019). Food security
and the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES): Ensuring progress by 2030. Food
Sherman, M. A. (1973). Bound to be easier? The negative prefix and sentence compre-
hension. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12 (1), 76–84. https :
//doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(73)80062-3
Shrout, P. E., & Fleiss, J. L. (1979). Intraclass correlations: Uses in assessing rater re-
2909.86.2.420
Sijtsma, K., & Molenaar, I. W. (2002). Introduction to nonparametric item response theory
(Vol. 5). Sage.
Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (2008). If it’s hard to read, it’s hard to do: Processing fluency
affects effort prediction and motivation. Psychological Science, 19 (10), 986–988.
Sova, C., Flowers, K., & Man, C. (2019). Climate change and food security: A test of U.S.
food-security-test-us-leadership-fragile-world
Stoet, G. (2010). PsyToolkit: A software package for programming psychological exper-
org/10.3758/BRM.42.4.1096
Stoet, G. (2017). PsyToolkit: A novel web-based method for running online questionnaires
org/10.1177/0098628316677643
Thompson, E. R. (2007). Development and validation of an internationally reliable short-
form of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS). Journal of Cross-
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past explains the present: Emotional adaptations
and the structure of ancestral environments. Ethology and Sociobiology, 11 (4-5),
Twenge, J. M. (2000). The age of anxiety? the birth cohort change in anxiety and neu-
roticism, 1952–1993. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79 (6), 1007.
Umanath, S., & Coane, J. H. (2020). Face validity of remembering and knowing: Em-
pirical consensus and disagreement between participants and researchers. Per-
org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-development-goals/goal-12-responsible-
consumption-and-production.html
Van der Ark, L. A. (2007). Mokken scale analysis in R. Journal of Statistical Software,
Van der Ark, L. A. (2012). New developments in mokken scale analysis in R. Journal of
Van Schuur, W. H. (2003). Mokken scale analysis: Between the Guttman scale and para-
10.1093/pan/mpg002
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief
measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 54 (6), 1063–1070.
Webb, P., Coates, J., Frongillo, E. A., Rogers, B. L., Swindale, A., & Bilinsky, P. (2006).
Measuring household food insecurity: Why it’s so important and yet so difficult to
136.5.1404S
Wheeler, T., & Von Braun, J. (2013). Climate change impacts on global food security.
Yadav, A., Phillips, M. M., Lundeberg, M. A., Koehler, M. J., Hilden, K., & Dirkin, K. H.
(2011). If a picture is worth a thousand words is video worth a million? Differences
in affective and cognitive processing of video and text cases. Journal of Computing
Chapter 6
Concluding discussion
Micha(cid:32)l Folwarczny
Department of Business Administration, Reykjavik University
6.1 Summary of the findings
The central aim of this academic endeavor was to enrich an understanding of how cues to
food scarcity affect food preferences qualitatively among people who physically do not ex-
perience food insufficiency, thus extending the generalizability of the insurance hypothesis
(Nettle et al., 2017). Each of the four Academic Papers answered separate questions. In
Paper I, we have briefly reviewed relevant literature and outlined few recommendations
for governmental institutions that wish to foster healthier food choices. However, in Pa-
per IV, we have learned that the construct of interest in this thesis may be applicable in
research areas that appear unrelated to food choices (i.e., aspects of prosociality), leav-
ing many unanswered questions for scholars with expertise in other disciplines. Below, I
summarize the main findings and highlight the unique contribution of this investigation
which these goals were achieved.
In Paper I, we proposed several strategies for policymakers that may facilitate health-
ier food choices. We reviewed relevant literature to show that modern consumers’ food
preferences are shaped by eons of struggling against hostile forces of nature, leaving them
with many mechanisms that used to be adaptive but nowadays may lead to maladaptive
outcomes. As the law of law’s leverage postulates (Jones, 2001), governmental institutions
need to invest a considerable amount of resources in order to change behaviors that used
to have a high adaptive value in the past; the reverse is true about changing behaviors
that used to have a minimal adaptive value in the past. For example, consuming a variety
of energy-dense foods was highly adaptive for our ancestors, given that they experienced
frequent and often lethal periods of food shortages. On the other hand, consuming root
vegetables and fruits low in carbohydrates was less critical for them. Thus, consumers
do not need to be incentivized to eat burgers, but it is more challenging to encourage
them to consume salads. Nonetheless, there are many strategies—inspired by the law of
law’s leverage (Jones, 2001)—such as making low-calorie and healthy foods appealing to
evolutionarily old taste buds or making healthy foods convenient to buy and consume
that may be applied as cost-effective strategies fostering healthier eating.
Studies reported in Paper II provide a piece of empirical evidence supporting the cen-
tral tenets of the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017). Precisely, we have predicted
and found that exposing participants to food scarcity cues—although distant in time and
space—elicits higher preferences toward energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods among them
than among their peers exposed to control stimuli. Moreover, the second prediction drawn
from the insurance hypothesis was also supported—the effects of food scarcity cues were
more substantial for females than for males.
The empirical package in Paper III aimed to account for several drawbacks associated
with the experimental stimuli that we used in Paper II. In Paper III, we used subtle cues to
food scarcity, namely—a winter forest walk. We found that such subtle cues elicit higher
accessibility to concepts related to survival and energy-dense foods but not to concepts
related to scarcity and low-calorie foods. Moreover, findings reported in Papers II–III,
constitute a solid piece of evidence behind the effects’ generalizability across samples and
stimuli, with different and arguably weaker manipulation yielding to similar conclusions.
Finally, in Paper IV, we strived to delineate a candidate psychological mechanism—
anticipated food scarcity (AFS)—that could partially explain why humans show a stronger
preference toward foods they deem as higher in calories after exposure to food scarcity
cues. We have developed and psychometrically validated the Anticipated Food Scarcity
Scale (AFSS). The 8-item measure has good psychometric properties and was found cor-
related with certain aspects of prosociality. Thus, AFSS provides an alternative way of
studying the impact of food shortages on food preferences and gradients of social behav-
ior. Additionally, its narrow set of items and sensitivity to food scarcity cues makes the
scale appropriate for experimental research focused on prosocial behaviors, food waste,
food choices, and other related domains of consumer behavior.
Paper Title Key findings
I Old minds, new marketplaces: How (1) Consumers decision-making machinery in food choice con-
evolved psychological mechanisms texts is largely influenced by eons of wandering between food
trigger mismatched food preferences scarcity and food sufficiency
(2) Cost-effective promotion of healthy foods should leverage
our evolutionarily outdated food acquisition mechanisms
II Crisis communication, anticipated (1) People exposed to videos showing climate change-induced
food scarcity, and food preferences: food scarcity prefer energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods more
Preregistered evidence of the insur- than their peers unexposed to such cues
ance hypothesis (2) This effect appears stronger for women than men
III Seasonal cues to food scarcity and (1) People exposed to subtle cues to food scarcity (watching a
calorie cravings: Winter cues elicit winter forest walk) prefer energy-dense (vs. low-calorie) foods
preferences for energy-dense foods more than their peers unexposed to such cues
(2) This effect may be stronger for women than men, but the
results are inconclusive
(3) Exposure to food scarcity cues (a winter forest walk) in-
creases accessibility to concepts related to energy-dense foods
and survival, but not to concepts related to low-calorie foods
and scarcity
IV Development and psychometric eval- (1) The AFSS has good psychometric properties
uation of the Anticipated Food (2) The scale is sensitive to food scarcity cues
Scarcity Scale (AFSS) (3) AFS measured with the scale is correlated with some as-
pects of prosociality; thus, this tool can likely be used in mul-
tidisciplinary research
6.2 Contribution to the academic literature
The insurance hypothesis has been initially developed to explain the higher prevalence of
obesity and overweight among food-insecure populations in developed countries (Nettle et
al., 2017). However, this theoretical account neglected the role of cues to food scarcity in
shaping food preferences among people who do not experience food insecurity understood
as a physical experience of food unavailability (i.e., hunger). Additionally, Nettle et al.
(2017) conducted a meta-analysis without providing experimental evidence supporting
their theorizing. Finally, the authors have not proposed any candidate psychological
mechanism that could contribute to a better understanding of why food scarcity cues
affect food choices and preferences.
The findings presented in the thesis extend the generalizability of the insurance hy-
pothesis by showing that cues to food scarcity affect food preferences among the pop-
ulation where food insecurity is relatively rare. In addition, participants in studies re-
ported herein were recruited online from the US, UK, and—in the case of a laboratory
experiment—from a Danish university, thus further increasing the generalizability of find-
ings across samples. In Paper III, we used nonexplicit and subtle cues to food scarcity
by exposing participants to a winter forest walk (vs. a summer forest walk in the con-
trol condition). Although not all of these studies yielded results supporting our primary
hypothesis at conventional significance levels, when treated together, these findings pro-
vided a shred of evidence that the effects of food scarcity exposure are generalizable across
stimuli of varying intensity, even if these stimuli do not show food scarcity explicitly.
Although the insurance hypothesis does not propose a psychological mechanism ex-
plaining a shift in food preferences after exposure to environmental cues to food scarcity
(Nettle et al., 2017), results from the studies in Paper III show that food scarcity cues elicit
higher accessibility to concepts related to survival and energy-dense foods. To propose
a candidate psychological mechanisms that could contribute to a better understanding
of why people exposed to food scarcity show higher calorie cravings, we have delineated
anticipated food scarcity (AFS)—a new psychological construct. We also developed and
validated a scale measuring this construct that was, surprisingly, correlated with support
for Universal Basic Income. These findings align with the conservation of resources the-
ory (Hobfoll, 1989), which postulates that people facing threats such as food shortages
maximize the resources they keep for themselves. Supporting social welfare programs to
a larger extent when facing difficulties fulfills these criteria—people benefit more from re-
sources redistribution under such circumstances. As such, findings from this thesis show
that the effects of exposure to food scarcity cues may wield influence on gradients of social
behavior among people not experiencing food scarcity physically, thus suggesting that the
insurance hypothesis is a theoretical account that may be applied across many disciplines
(see Nettle, 2017, for a related discussion of how hunger impacts social behavior).
Overreliance on null-hypothesis significance testing has impaired scientific progress
across disciplines, leading to an overrepresentation of findings confirming predictions in
academic literature; hence, many effect sizes are inflated (Ioannidis, 2005). As a response
to this crisis, Cumming (2014) outlined the principles on the new statistics, encouraging
academic practices such as performing an internal meta-analysis, complete reporting of
findings, replicating studies, preregistration, and making datasets and other materials
publicly available. Notably, inferences should be made based on effect sizes, confidence
intervals, and conclusions from empirical data should be treated as estimation, rather
than a dichotomous decision that often hinges on conventionally used p-values (Cumming,
2014). With full reporting of findings, making all materials and analysis code publicly
available, as well as including two preregistered studies in the empirical package, this
thesis largely adheres to these methodological standards set to increase the replicability
of findings.
6.3 Managerial implications
In Paper I, we argued that many marketing practices bear some responsibility for the
current pandemic of overweight and obesity. However, to remain profitable in competi-
tive markets, companies must maximize profits and minimize costs associated with their
business activities. Although Papers II–III merely show that exposing participants to
food scarcity cues increases their preferences toward foods deemed as higher in calories,
Paper I draws straightforward suggestions for retailers and policymakers on how to remain
profitable while phasing out strategies that yield negative consequences for public health.
Consumers’ decision-making machinery is essentially outdated and mismatched against
present-day needs (Li et al., 2018); in most cases, it is maladaptive to respond to food
scarcity cues with increased preferences toward energy-dense foods. Thus, policymak-
ers need to enforce strategies accounting for the specificity of consumers’ evolutionarily
outdated decision-making mechanisms when helping retailers stay profitable while selling
low-calorie and healthier products.
There are several strategies that retailers may adopt to stay profitable when focusing
on selling healthy foods. First, building on results from studies reported in Papers II–
III, it is crucial to consider eliminating food scarcity cues from the retail environment.
For instance, some retailers organize campaigns where they collect money that is used
to fight famine. Although we have not collected data in retail environments, it may be
sensible to ask consumers for such donations no sooner than after they finish shopping (vs.
before or during collecting a shopping basket). In fact, having paid a bill, consumers can
be more generous due to the contrast effect, where small donations appear even smaller
when contrasted against a receipt for the whole basket of groceries; hence, people may
eventually donate more money for charitable purposes (e.g., Cialdini et al., 1975).
Although eliminating consumers’ cravings for products that taste and appear like
energy-dense foods is unrealistic, and our findings suggest that these products are espe-
cially desired among consumers exposed to food scarcity, retailers may offer substitutes
of these products by selling healthier (lower-calorie) options “in disguise.” For instance,
the government of Singapore financially supports producers of vegan meat alternatives
that typically are healthier and lower in calories than traditional meat (Ramli, 2021).
As a result, retailers offering such products may remain exceptionally profitable. For
example, the financial performance of Impossible Foods and Beyond Meat—the industry
leaders—recently surpassed expectations (Ramli, 2021).
Even having a widespread awareness of how cues to food scarcity affect food prefer-
ences will not prevent these cues from occurring in communication campaigns. Critical
challenges like, for instance, the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, need to be publicized.
Given that such publicized events may be received as cues to food scarcity, it is likely
that these cues will elicit a desire for calories among consumers. Therefore, marketing
practitioners may consider assuring consumers that food supplies will not be harmed. Im-
portantly, however, it remains unknown whether it is possible to mitigate the consequences
of food scarcity cues on food preferences by simply telling people not to worry about food
supply. Additional studies may investigate the effectiveness of such communication in
ameliorating, or possibly reversing, effects reported across Studies II–III.
In some cases, governmental institutions may have to resort to solid incentives to
promote healthier eating habits. Still, such policies do not have to harm retailers. For
example, the UK soft drink levy, also known as a “sugar tax,” reduced the average sugar
intake by a tenth per household without lowering overall sales of soft drinks, thus not
harming retailers (Pell et al., 2021). Similar policies may be imposed to lower the average
calorie content of more complex foods. Indeed, some countries successfully lowered the
amount of fat and sugar in products known globally, without consumers being aware of
that (The Center for Science in the Public Interest, 2016).
Applying an evolutionary approach to studying consumer behavior is still uncommon
in marketing literature, with recent calls to develop this interdisciplinary stream of re-
search (Durante & Griskevicius, 2018; Griskevicius & Kenrick, 2013; Otterbring et al.,
2020; Saad, 2017, 2020a, 2020b, 2021). As such, the present studies contribute to this
scarce body of literature by showing that consumer behavior in food-related domains is
largely influenced by evolutionarily outdated mechanisms that have emerged to cope with
challenges found in ancestral environments, and many modern problems can be addressed
with evolutionarily informed theories such as the evolutionary mismatch hypothesis (Li
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020).
6.4 Limitations and future research
There are at least several limitations and questions that warrant future investigation.
Although in Paper IV we discussed anticipated food scarcity (AFS) as a potential psy-
chological mechanism that could partially explain the results reported in Papers II–III,
this construct has not been investigated in such a context, primarily due to lack of a
psychometric scale measuring it when the studies reported in Papers II–III were con-
ducted. Future studies may therefore apply the Anticipated Food Scarcity Scale (AFSS)
and test AFS as a potential mediator of the effects (although results from mediation anal-
ysis should be treated with caution, often leaving at least several alternative explanations
of psychological processes underlying changes in dependent measures; see Spencer et al.,
2005, for a more detailed discussion of this issue).
The scale aimed at capturing AFS is yet to be comprehensively validated. Studies
reported in Paper IV merely provide a piece of preliminary evidence behind this con-
struct’s distinctiveness from other potentially related constructs such as food insecurity
or state anxiety. A comprehensive validation process is lengthy, requiring numerous stud-
ies and ruling out alternative explanations of a psychological phenomenon. Therefore,
it is imperative to test the predictive validity of the AFSS, emphasizing whether the
scale is predictive of food preferences and choices in ecologically valid contexts, including
extra-laboratory settings.
There are at least several alternative explanations of results obtained from studies
reported in Papers II–III. First, affective states, especially negative emotions, impact food
preferences, often leading to increased desire to consume energy-dense products (Macht,
2008; Van Strien et al., 2013). We attempted to develop control and experimental stimuli
so that both stimuli elicit similar affective responses. Nevertheless, the control video used
in studies in Paper II elicited higher dominance captured by the Self-Assessment Manikin
(Bradley & Lang, 1994). Further, in these studies, we used only one control variable
(hunger), whereas in studies reported in Paper III, we relied exclusively on pretesting
without controlling for other potential confounds. Therefore, our results could have been
partially driven by specific affective states that the experimental or control videos elicited
among participants. Second, although controlling for participants’ body mass index (BMI)
is common in food-related research, likely due to that BMI has been discussed as a variable
predicting certain food preferences (Czyzewska & Graham, 2008; Drewnowski et al., 1992;
Wardle et al., 2001), we have not collected such data. Therefore, we cannot rule out the
possibility that potential differences in BMI between experimental groups, rather than
our proposed psychological mechanism, have driven the pattern of the observed results.
Third, studies conducted by Hill et al. (2013), which were informed by life history theory
and the critical fat hypothesis, suggest that women who grew up in low socioeconomic
status households react to environmental harshness with increased “calorie cravings,” as
compared to their female peers who grew up in more affluent families. Interestingly, such
a pattern of results has not been present among men. Likewise, our findings suggest
that the effects of food scarcity cues, which can be interpreted as cues to environmental
harshness, might be more substantial or found only among women but not men. As such,
findings reported by Hill et al. (2013) may provide at least several alternative explanations
of our results, contesting our theorizing built upon the insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al.,
2017).
This research was conducted in part to address public health threats. Whereas labo-
ratory studies, including these in online settings, are essential for a deeper understanding
of the phenomenon, their role is to optimize the effects that occur in field settings, ulti-
mately leading to the development of large-scale behavioral interventions (Marteau et al.,
2021). Because we only measured food preferences in the online studies, it is crucial to
examine the external validity and boundary conditions of the phenomenon with mean-
ingful behavioral outcomes (e.g., Dolin´ski, 2018, 2020; Dolin´ski et al., 2017; Folwarczny
et al., 2018; Szczepanowski et al., 2019). The existing literature shows a discrepancy be-
tween stated preferences and actual behaviors measured in subsequent naturalistic studies.
However, previous research has also shown a discrepancy between attitudes and behav-
ioral outcomes in the same online study. For example, Byrka et al. (2019) investigated
whether attitudes toward social groups captured in an online study were associated with
donations to organizations representing those groups. When donation behaviors were
measured before capturing attitudes, the authors found no relationship between the two.
In contrast, when participants first reported their attitudes toward social groups, the lat-
ter were weakly related to their subsequent donations to organizations representing those
groups. These results suggest that online measurements can change subsequent behavior
per se, rather than a construct that such measurements attempt to capture. The current
study is, therefore, a plea for real-world field studies to test whether food scarcity cues
are indeed sufficient to change food-related behavior. For example, participants may be
exposed to food scarcity cues or cues unrelated to food in laboratory settings. Then they
can be asked to select one of several snacks as an additional reward for taking part in the
study. These snacks can differ in their caloric density. Ideally, studies may be conducted
in a retail environment, where experimenters can expose shoppers to food scarcity cues
(e.g., they can be asked to donate for food charity and informed that their donations
would help fight famine in the world) and test whether such cues increase their choices of
energy-dense products.
These extra-laboratory studies should preferably include participants of different so-
cioeconomic statuses, as this variable has been shown to predict dietary responses to en-
vironmental stressors, at least among women (Hill et al., 2013). Further, socioeconomic
status is one of the key predictors of food insecurity worldwide (Pereira et al., 2017), with
its experience or lack of thereof likely moderating effects reported across Academic Papers
II–III Nettle et al. (cf. 2017). Notably, people are likely unaware of how their socioeco-
nomic background affects their food preferences. Given that human behavior is largely
driven by automatic processes that occur in response to environmental stimuli, successful
behavioral interventions such as increasing the consumption of healthy foods should take
this automaticity of decision-making into account (Marteau et al., 2012). This notion
may be especially true for children, who may be less aware of how various environmental
stimuli influence their decisions. Therefore, future studies, preferably in field settings,
should include samples differing in age as well.
The current results were relatively generalizable across samples in developed countries.
However, most people in the world do not live in these countries, with many aspects of
human psychology bearing a considerable degree of variation across the globe (Henrich
et al., 2010). Therefore, future research should be conducted on more diverse samples
with respect to their cultural background, and places of residence. Such studies are
critical in the context of the research reported in Papers II–III, as in some countries,
more people experience food insecurity than relatively stable and secure access to food
resources (Pereira et al., 2017). As a result of their frequent exposure to food scarcity,
potentially leading to desensitization to such cues, the conclusions from this thesis may
not apply to them.
This academic endeavor was primarily informed by evolutionary thinking, which has
often been criticized for its broad level of analysis that often ignores inter-sample vari-
ability and the characteristics of many individuals (e.g., Nicholson & Xiao, 2010; Saad,
2017). Thus, demonstrating that the present results can indeed be replicated, for ex-
ample, among adolescents in less developed countries would invalidate this criticism and
invite scholars from other disciplines to study the consequences of cues to food scarcity
for shaping food preferences and, once behavioral data become available, food choices as
well.
Findings in Paper IV suggest that AFS may be related to some aspects of prosociality.
Thus, this construct should be further scrutinized through multidisciplinary research.
Considering that low blood glucose and hunger have been discussed as linked to social
behavior and decision-making in domains unrelated to food choices (Nettle, 2017; Orquin
& Kurzban, 2016; Orquin et al., 2020), it is plausible that AFS is a construct that may
foster novel research on cooperation, prosociality, and other research areas.
Probably the most critical limitation of the findings reported in this thesis is an incon-
sistent pattern of results. In Paper II, all three studies supported our primary hypothesis
postulating that exposure to climate change-induced food scarcity increases preferences
toward foods deemed to be higher (vs. lower) in calories. In the same paper, results from
two of three studies provided support for our secondary hypothesis, implying that this
effect was likely stronger for women than men, aligning with predictions driven from the
insurance hypothesis (Nettle et al., 2017). Additionally, the results from the third study
therein directionally supported the secondary hypothesis.
Despite finding this initial support for both our predictions, the pattern of results in
Paper III was less consistent, differing considerably from findings in Paper II. Although
Studies 2a–2b in Paper III appear to confirm our primary hypothesis, these studies were
likely underpowered, as a power curve estimated based on observed power analysis con-
ducted on data from Study 2a suggested that at least 420 participants were needed for
.95 power to detect the effect size of interest. Thus, results from these studies should
be treated with caution. This may be true especially given that the results from the
final, appropriately powered study (Study 2b) in Paper III did not confirm our primary
hypothesis. Instead, we observed a trend in the opposite direction. Finally, barely one
underpowered study (Study 2a) in Paper III provided results supporting our secondary
hypothesis, where only women—but not men—responded to food scarcity (winter) cues
with an increased preference toward foods deemed to be higher (vs. lower) in calories. De-
spite this, data from Study 2c, which had an appropriate sample size for testing both our
hypotheses, suggest a trend in a hypothesized direction, with women potentially exhibit-
ing more substantial “calorie cravings” than men after exposure to food scarcity (winter)
cues than control (summer) stimuli. Therefore, more studies with different manipulations
are warranted to establish the generalizability of the effects reported in Papers II-III. It
is plausible that the manipulation we used in Paper III was too weak to trigger responses
found in Paper II, where we exposed participants to vivid and overt cues to food scarcity:
videos depicting drought, famine, and future threats to global food supply chains.
6.5 References
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1994). Measuring emotion: The Self-Assessment Manikin
and the semantic differential. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psy-
Byrka, K., Grzyb, T., & Dolinski, D. (2019). The question-behaviour effect in intergroup
attitudes research: When do attitudes towards a minority predict a relevant be-
1002/ijop.12469
Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J. E., Lewis, S. K., Catalan, J., Wheeler, D., & Darby, B. L.
(1975). Reciprocal concessions procedure for inducing compliance: The door-in-
the-face technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31 (2), 206–215.
Cumming, G. (2014). The new statistics: Why and how. Psychological Science, 25 (1),
Czyzewska, M., & Graham, R. (2008). Implicit and explicit attitudes to high-and low-
calorie food in females with different BMI status. Eating Behaviors, 9 (3), 303–312.
Dolin´ski, D. (2018). Is psychology still a science of behaviour? Social Psychological Bul-
Dolin´ski, D. (2020). Do psychologists study behaviour? Health Psychology Report, 8 (4),
Dolin´ski, D., Grzyb, T., Folwarczny, M., Grzyba(cid:32)la, P., Krzyszycha, K., Martynowska, K.,
& Trojanowski, J. (2017). Would you deliver an electric shock in 2015? Obedience in
the experimental paradigm developed by Stanley Milgram in the 50 years following
the original studies. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 8 (8), 927–933.
Drewnowski, A., Kurth, C., Holden-Wiltse, J., & Saari, J. (1992). Food preferences in
org/10.1016/0195-6663(92)90198-F
Durante, K. M., & Griskevicius, V. (2018). Evolution and consumer psychology. Consumer
Folwarczny, M., Kaczmarek, M. C., Dolin´ski, D., & Szczepanowski, R. (2018). Emotional
See-Saw affects rationality of decision-making: Evidence for metacognitive impair-
Griskevicius, V., & Kenrick, D. T. (2013). Fundamental motives: How evolutionary needs
influence consumer behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 23 (3), 372–386.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). Most people are not WEIRD. Nature,
Hill, S. E., Rodeheffer, C. D., DelPriore, D. J., & Butterfield, M. E. (2013). Ecological
contingencies in women’s calorie regulation psychology: A life history approach.
1016/j.jesp.2013.03.016
Hobfoll, S. E. (1989). Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing stress.
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Medicine,
Jones, O. D. (2001). Time-shifted rationality and the law of law’s leverage: Behavioral
economics meets behavioral biology. Northwestern University Law Review, 95 (4),
Li, N. P., van Vugt, M., & Colarelli, S. M. (2018). The evolutionary mismatch hypothesis:
Implications for psychological science. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
Li, N. P., Yong, J. C., & Van Vugt, M. (2020). Evolutionary psychology’s next challenge:
Solving modern problems using a mismatch perspective. Evolutionary Behavioral
Macht, M. (2008). How emotions affect eating: A five-way model. Appetite, 50 (1), 1–11.
Marteau, T. M., Fletcher, P. C., Munafo`, M. R., & Hollands, G. J. (2021). Beyond choice
architecture: Advancing the science of changing behaviour at scale. BMC Public
Marteau, T. M., Hollands, G. J., & Fletcher, P. C. (2012). Changing human behav-
ior to prevent disease: The importance of targeting automatic processes. Science,
Nettle, D. (2017). Does hunger contribute to socioeconomic gradients in behavior? Fron-
Nettle, D., Andrews, C., & Bateson, M. (2017). Food insecurity as a driver of obesity
in humans: The insurance hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. https:
//doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X16000947
Nicholson, M., & Xiao, S. H. (2010). On the evolutionary bases of consumer reinforcement.
10.1080/01608061003756356
Orquin, J. L., & Kurzban, R. (2016). A meta-analysis of blood glucose effects on human
decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 142 (5), 546–567. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1037/bul0000035
Orquin, J. L., Dalgaard, C. J., & Lagerkvist, C. J. (2020). A meta-analytical and ex-
perimental examination of blood glucose effects on decision making under risk.
Judgment and Decision Making, 15 (6), 1024–1036.
Otterbring, T., Sundie, J., Li, Y. J., & Hill, S. (2020). Evolutionary psychological consumer
research: Bold, bright, but better with behavior. Journal of Business Research, 120,
Pell, D., Mytton, O., Penney, T. L., Briggs, A., Cummins, S., Penn-Jones, C., Rayner,
M., Rutter, H., Scarborough, P., Sharp, S. J., et al. (2021). Changes in soft drinks
purchased by British households associated with the UK soft drinks industry levy:
bmj.n254
Pereira, A. L., Handa, S., & Holmqvist, G. (2017). Prevalence and correlates of food
insecurity among children across the globe. UNICEF Office of Research, Innocenti
Ramli, D. (2021). Temasek makes rare seed investment in plant-based chicken maker.
seed-investment-in-plant-based-chicken-maker
Saad, G. (2017). On the method of evolutionary psychology and its applicability to con-
10.1509/jmr.14.0645
Saad, G. (2020a). Building a global database of nomological networks of cumulative evi-
Saad, G. (2020b). The marketing of evolutionary psychology. Journal of Business Re-
Saad, G. (2021). Addressing the sins of consumer psychology via the evolutionary lens.
Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2005). Establishing a causal chain: Why
experiments are often more effective than mediational analyses in examining psy-
chological processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89 (6), 845.
Szczepanowski, R., Folwarczny, M., Kro´l, M., Dolin´ski, D., & Budzisz, J. (2019). Electro-
physiological correlates of Emotional See-Saw Effect on a Go/No-Go task. Current
The Center for Science in the Public Interest. (2016, November 29). U.S. cereals higher
cereals-higher-sugar-and-sodium-certain-other-countries-20161129
Van Strien, T., Cebolla, A., Etchemendy, E., Gutierrez-Maldonado, J., Ferrer-Garcia, M.,
Botella, C., & Ban˜os, R. (2013). Emotional eating and food intake after sadness
Wardle, J., Guthrie, C., Sanderson, S., Birch, L., & Plomin, R. (2001). Food and activity
preferences in children of lean and obese parents. International Journal of Obesity,