Please note this paper has been published ahead of print in Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism:
Digard, B. G., & Sorace, A. (2021). Bringing together autism and bilingualism research: Language
Please do not cite this preprint.
Bringing together autism and bilingualism research: language matters
Bérengère G. Digard & Antonella Sorace
University of Edinburgh
(Commentary to keynote by Philippe Prevost and Laurice Tuller, “Bilingual language
development in autism”)
As pointed out by Prevost and Tuller (2022, hence P&T), bilingual language development in
autism is a recent field at the crossroad between autism and bilingualism research. Within
the limited body of work already available, most publications focus on the language
development of autistic bilingual children. Yet, even though this topic is addressed by most
of the recent studies available, there are already a number of caveats and limitations that
restrict the reproducibility and applicability of the findings.
As this field is relatively new, it is likely that many of its researchers approached the topic
from either an autism or a bilingualism background, considering the other domain as a tool
to learn more about their own topic of interest. As P&T wrote in the opening of their keynote:
“What can be learned about bilingualism by studying autism, and what can be learned about
autism by studying bilingualism?”. This approach, however, does not allow researchers, and
by extension their studies, to fully grasp the ramifications of the other domain, be that autism
or bilingualism. This may result in a body of work that does not actually acknowledge the full
complexity of bilingualism in autism, and the richness of experiences and profiles existing
within the autistic bilingual population. Indeed, as illustrated by the anecdotal cases reported
by the authors, and as described in our recent publication on the language learning profiles
and social experiences of 208 autistic bilingual adults (Digard et al., 2020), autistic children
can become bilingual in as many ways as their neurotypical peers, through fairly common
journeys and unusual circumstances alike. In sum, bilingualism in autism is at the opposite of
a one size fits all.
This reality means that the field should move away from simply using either autism or
bilingualism as a tool to understand the other type of experience. It is time to fully map out
the specificities and complexities of this field on its own terms, genuinely bringing together
autism and bilingualism research in an integrated manner. This change in approach will allow
for robust research driven by community needs and preoccupations, grounded in relevant
theories, accounting for its full complexity, and producing meaningful results that will
positively impact bilingual people and their communities.
As a first step in this endeavour, the authors make a number of highly relevant points. Indeed,
this review builds upon previous reviews on the topic by focusing on a critical assessment of
the methods used in the available body of work. The authors rightfully argue that the tasks
routinely used to measure language skills in autistic children are not suitable to produce an
accurate picture of the children’s skills, strengths, and difficulties alike, especially when they
are growing up in a bilingual environment. Instead, there is a need for data on a wider range
In this commentary we use identity-first language (e.g. “autistic people”) as this is the preferred language of
many people in the autistic and autism communities (Kenny et al., 2016; Sinclair, 2013).
of linguistic and non-linguistic skills in autistic bilingual children, and future studies should
make sure to adapt the level of details needed to comprehensively address their research
question, avoiding the reliance on a single score task by default.
The authors are also correct to argue that a categorical approach of bilingualism is at best
unhelpful to understand the effects of bilingualism in autism. Instead, the field needs to adopt
a more ecologically valid definition of bilingualism that will allow us to understand the role of
different aspects of the bilingual experience, such as age of onset, exposure, proficiency,
dominance, use (especially in therapy), or language distance. As recommended by P&T, richer
and more meaningful reporting and characterisation of the autistic bilingual children taking
part in the studies will be critical to better understand the interplay between bilingualism and
autism in some specific contexts, such as language regression, language impairment, or
learning disability. If anything, adequate characterisation of the samples will at least highlight
the dearth of data regarding these specific children. This detailed level of understanding will
allow researchers and practitioners to offer advice and support tailored to the specific needs
and profile of each autistic bilingual person (Davis et al, 2021).
However, we argue that shift must not only come in the methods, but also in researchers’
attitude, leading to a change of both substance and form. Future research should be
scientifically grounded in adequate methods, of course, but also created in partnership with
stakeholders from the autistic bilingual community and its allies, and shared in a respectful
manner, both within and outwith academia. This also entails adopting the appropriate
language when writing about autism and autistic people in academic publications. Just as for
other research with non-neurotypical populations, researchers must earn the trust of the
autistic bilingual community, which cannot be achieved when researchers use terms such as
“severity”, “affected”, “spared”, or “normal” when other more appropriate terms could as
efficiently convey the information. Focusing on a niche and recent topic cannot be an excuse
for the use of inappropriate terminology, such as some of the terms used by the authors of
this keynote – i.e. “there is a great heterogeneity as to which language domain are
affected/spared” (page 2) “Normal bilingual language acquisition” (page 2), “more severe
autistic symptoms” (page 4), or “autism severity in bilingual children with ASD” (title of
section 4.4.2, page 15).
Indeed, this specific point may be especially critical in autism research in general, and in the
niche topic of bilingualism in autism in particular. Neurodiversity and autism pride
movements are now successfully reshaping how researchers talk about autism in their own
terms (Dyck & Russell, 2020), but this shift towards more respectful language might be
happening more slowly in countries and cultures with a more deficit-based and stigmatising
attitude regarding autism than that we are observing in the UK or in some parts of North
America (Cascio, 2015). However, the advances needed in the field of bilingualism in autism
require international collaboration, and researchers from countries that have not yet widely
adopted the appropriate language regarding autism should also make this additional shift in
attitude, and be active allies of neurodiversity pride movements in their own countries.
Without this shift, many valuable concepts and findings might find themselves lost in
translation.
The research available to date does suggest that in general at least, a bilingual upbringing is
not detrimental for autistic people, but we are still in the dark regarding the connections
between specific autism profiles, specific bilingual experiences, and specific linguistic or
cognitive skills. When it comes to the experiences of autistic bilinguals, almost everything has
to be properly understood. This new research field has its whole history left to write, and we
researchers must work together to ensure it is built in a robust and respectful way, promoting
participatory, reproducible, and suitable methods that acknowledge and support the great
diversity of autistic bilinguals. This global approach cannot be only limited to a more adequate
choice of tasks, but also extended to the words used to report the results of these tasks. In
the field of bilingualism in autism as in any other, and maybe more than in any other, language
matters.