2PL GLMM 1
2PL Model: Compare Generalized Linear Mixed Model with Latent Variable
Model based IRT framework
Jihong Zhang, Terry Ackerman
University of Iowa
Yurou Wang
University of Alabama
2PL GLMM 2
2PL Model: Compare Generalized Linear Mixed Model with Latent Variable
Model based IRT framework
Abstract
Fitting item response theory (IRT) models using the generalized mixed logistic regression
model (GLMM) has become more popular in large-scale assessment because GLMM allows
to combine complicated multilevel structure (i.e., students are nested in classrooms which
are nested in schools) with IRT measurement models. However, the estimation accuracy of
item parameters between these two models is not well examined. This study aimed to
compare the estimation results of the GLMM based 2PL model (using the PLmixed R
package) with the traditional IRT model (using flexMIRT software) under different sample
sizes (N = 500, 1000, 5000) and test length (J = 15, 21) conditions. The simulation results
showed that for both the GLMM-based method and the traditional method, item
threshold’s estimates had lower bias than item discrimination parameters. We also found
that according to the simulation study, GLMM estimates via PLmixed had lower accuracy
than traditional IRT modeling via flexMIRT for items with high discrimination.
2PL GLMM 3
Introduction
The link between the generalized mixed logistic regression model (GLMM) for binary data
and latent variable model (LVM) have been well established for many years (Skrondal &
Rabe-Hesketh, 2004). Many IRT models, among them the "standard" IRT models, fit
nicely into GLMM framework. Some software packages such as SAS or R packages (i.e.
lme4) allow users to estimate complex IRT models with an arbitrary number of nested or
crossed random effects, making it useful for fitting, for example, the 1PL multilevel IRT
(Doran et al., 2007) and random item IRT models (De Boeck et al., 2011). Fitting
standard IRT models in GLMM framework can also be easily extended and adapted to
more complicated scenarios. However, from our current experience, the application studies
using GLMM-based IRT in measurement field have been limited for several reasons. The
first is that few software programs allow researchers to estimate complex standard IRT
models (2PL/3PL) within GLMM framework until Jeon and Rabe-Hesketh (2012)
proposed the profile-likelihood estimation method which could fit the 2PL models or the
3PL models using PLmixed package. Second, the estimation accuracy of GLMM-based IRT
have not been well examined. Standardized testing practitioners may face challenges when
applying the GLMM estimation procedures to measurement data because it is still unclear
whether GLMM-based estimates have better estimation accuracy of item parameters than
IRT. Thus, this study is aimed to fill the void by performing a simulation study to compare
the item parameter estimates generated by PLmixed and by flexMIRT software.
Specifically, the main purpose of the current study is to compare the performance of the
GLMM-based 2PL modeling with LVM-based traditional 2PL IRT modeling software
(flexMIRT ) with the measures of parameter estimation accuracy and standard errors. The
results of this study could also help extend traditional psychometric framework to a broad
multilevel frameworks which contributes to the applications in real large-scale scenario.
This article was organized as followings. First, we discussed the association between
GLMM with the standard 2PL IRT model. Second, we conducted a simulation study to
2PL GLMM 4
examine the performance of GLMM based 2PL model in terms of parameters accuracy and
recovery rate. Next, we present the comparison of estimates between GLMM 2PL model
using the PLmixed package and the standard 2PL modeling using flexMIRT. Finally, the
advantages and limitations of GLMM IRT modeling will be discussed. Some advice for
future research will be provided.
Generalized Linear Mixed Model for 2PL
IRT are strongly associated with generalized linear mixed model in term of statistical form.
One-parameter item response models (1PL-IRT) can be viewed (Eq.1) as two-level logistic
regression models for a binary response Y to item i by person p, nested in person, where
ip
the person abilities are considered as a random intercepts and item difficulties are
considered as the regression coefficients of item dummy variables.
logit[P r(Y ) = 1|θ ] = β d i + θ (1)
ip ip r r p
r=1
Here d is a dummy variable of item i with the value 1 when r = i and 0 otherwise, the
ri
diagnal of the matrix −β represents item difficulties, and θ represents person abilities. θ
r p p
is a random effect (or latent variable in factor models) with θ ∼ N (0, σ ).
In addition, two-parameter item response models (2PL-IRT) models could be viewed (Eq.
2) as an extended version of generalized linear mixed models with the item discrimination
parameters as a fixed part multiplied by the latent abilities as random part. The
multi-level version of two-parameter model could be written as
logit[P r(Y ) = 1|θ ] = β d + θ α (2)
ip ip r ri p i
r=1
Similar to the conventional factor model, for model identification, a factor loading (α ) for
one item is typically constrained to one or the variance of the latent variable (σ ) is
constrained to one.
2PL GLMM 5
Method
Simulation Study
To compare 2PL results in GLMM framework with IRT, a simulation study was conducted
with three different levels of sample size (N = 500, 1,000, 5,000) and two different test
length (J = 15, 21). The data generation process was conducted using the mirt package in
R where discrimination values were randomly sampled from a low level (.4-.8), a middle
level (.8-1.2) and a high level (1.2-1.6). The discrimination parameters were then
multiplied by 1.702 for switching from ogive link to logit link. Three items were selected at
the intercept values [-1.5, -.5, 0, .5, 1.5] for 15-item scale and [-2, -1.5, -.5, 0, .5, 1.5, 2] for
21-item scale. For each condition, 100 repetitions were performed.
Computer System
The analyses of profile-likelihood based generalized linear mixed model were performed
using the PLmixed package in R under MacOS and the conventional 2PL model were
performed using flexMIRT (Cai, L. ,2017) under Windows 10.
Comparisons
Estimates and true parameters values were compared using root mean squared differences
(RMSE, see Eq.3) and local bias. Item parameters estimates of PLmixed and flexMIRT
were compared in term of mean of estimates (item slopes and item intercepts) across all
repetitions, standardized deviation of estimates and average standard errors of item
parameters estimates. The RMSE of an estimator θ with respect to the true parameter θ is
defined as the square root of the mean square error:
ˆ ˆ
RM SE(θ) = E((θ − θ)2) (3)
2PL GLMM 6
Results
Estimation Consistency of item parameters
standard errors (SEs) and standard deviations (SDs) of item discrimination estimates for
item 2, 8, 9 and 14 (red line: SE; blue line: SD; dashed line: PLmixed; solid line:
flexMIRT). It showed that first, as the sample sizes increased, the standard deviations of
item discrimination estimates between PLmixed and flexMIRT got closer. Second, across
all conditions the item discrimination estimates by PLmixed had higher SDs than the
estimates of flexMIRT which indicates that the flexMIRT’s estimation process was more
stable. Third, average standard errors for both estimates decrease when sample size got
larger.
(SDs) of item threshold estimates for item 2, 8, 9 and 14. Generally speaking, item
threshold estimates had similar standard deviation for PLmixed and flexMIRT. The items’
average standard error suggested that PLmixed estimates (.054- .113 for N=5000) had
relatively higher standard errors than flexMIRT’s estimates (.040-.078 for N=5,000). As
(.091-.192 for N=500) have very similar standard deviation (SD) or slightly smaller than
the estimates from flexMIRT (.09-.243 for N=500) even for relatively smaller sample size
(N=500). Standard errors (SE) of estimates by PLmixed (.0306-.0590 for N=5000) were
slightly smaller than SEs of flexMIRT (.0311-.0711 for N=5000).
Estimation Accuracy of item parameters
flexMIRT. The results suggested that as sample sizes increased, the RMSE of item
discrimination estimates by PLmixed decreased (from .255-.711 in N=500 condition to
2PL GLMM 7
.154-.325 in N=1000, .053-.137 in N=5000). The flexMIRT’s RMSEs decreased more than
PLmixed as sample size increased (from .114-.275 in N=500 condition to .079-.168 in
N=1000, .039-.081 in N=5000). In addition, higher item discrimination values resulted in
the bias and RMSEs of item discrimination estimations for item 2, 8, 9 and 14.
and flexMIRT. It turned out that the estimates by PLmixed were very similar to those for
flexMIRT except two items: item 11 and item 15. The pattern was the same for bias. As
for the bias of item threshold estimates, because of the shrinkage, item 11’s item threshold
was underestimated but item 15’s was overestimated
Conclusion
In summary, we found four main conclusions for this study: first, for both PLmixed
package and flexMIRT, item thresholds’ estimates were always more accurate than the
estimated item discrimination parameters; second, for both mixed model and flexMIRT,
the estimation error decreased as sample size increased; third, generally speaking, flexMIRT
had better performance of estimating both item thresholds and item discrimination than
PLmixed; last, for 2PL models, profile-likelihood based linear mixed modeling had lower
estimation accuracy when estimating high-discrimination or low-discrimination items.
There are still some limitations in this study: first, the test length for this study was fixed
to 15 and 21. More items in the test may also play an important role in the estimation
process. It is also important to note that the two models were estimated by two different
software. The differences of performance may come from the software rather than
modeling. For future research, the estimation program should be controlled when
estimating different models.
2PL GLMM 8