Running head: CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 1
Word count (Abstract): 240
Word count (Manuscript): 4,500
Tables: 2
Figures: 3
Supplementary Tables: 6
Supplementary Figures: 2
Prospective Network Analysis of Proinflammatory Proteins, Lipid Markers, and Depression
Components in Midlife Community Women
Nur Hani Zainal, M.S.
Harvard Medical School
Michelle G. Newman, Ph.D.
The Pennsylvania State University
Author Note
Please direct all correspondence to Dr. Michelle G. Newman (mgn1@psu.edu). This article has
not been peer-reviewed. Please do not cite without the authors’ permission.
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 2
Abstract
Background: Vulnerability theories propose that suboptimal levels of lipid markers and
proinflammatory proteins predict future heightened depression. Scar models posit the reverse
association. However, most studies testing relations between non-specific immune/endocrine
markers and depression have been cross-sectional, precluding within-person temporal inferences,
and did not differentiate components. We thus used cross-lagged prospective network analyses
(CLPN) to investigate this topic. Methods: Community midlife women (n = 2,224) completed
the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression scale and provided biomarker samples across
five time-points spanning nine years. CLPN identified significant relations (edges) among
components (nodes) of depression (depressed mood, somatic symptoms, interpersonal issues),
lipid markers (insulin, fasting glucose, triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL),
high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL)), proinflammatory proteins (C-reactive protein
(CRP), fibrinogen), within and across time-points. All models adjusted for age, estradiol,
follicle-stimulating hormone, and menopausal status. Results: In within-person temporal
networks, CRP, fibrinogen, and HDL predicted all three depression components (|d| = 0.101 to
2.816). Reduced insulin and increased LDL preceded higher depressed mood and interpersonal
issues (vs. somatic symptoms) (|d| = 0.327 to 0.943). Elevated triglycerides predicted more
somatic symptoms (vs. depressed mood and interpersonal problems) (d = 0.174). Moreover, all
depression components predicted higher fibrinogen and LDL levels (vs. other surrogate
immunometabolism markers) (|d| = 0.108 to 0.441). Conclusions: Results offered more support
for vulnerability (vs. scar models). Long-term dysregulated immunometabolism systems, social
disengagement, and related patterns are possible mechanistic accounts. Cognitive-behavioral
therapies that optimize nutrition and physical activity may effectively target depression.
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 3
Keywords: cross-lagged network analysis; inflammation; immune; endocrine; depression;
interpersonal; scar theory; vulnerability theory
Word count: 240
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 4
Heightened depression symptoms are commonly observed in the general population
annually and across the lifetime (Jeuring et al., 2018). Reliable evidence has linked subthreshold
depression to a wide range of physical ailments involving the cardiometabolic, gastrointestinal,
and autoimmune systems (Simpson et al., 2021). Elevated depression also adversely affects
romantic and professional relationships, career development, and other life satisfaction domains
(Sivertsen et al., 2015). Economically, heightened depression consumes significant government
expenditure in various countries every year (Revicki et al., 2012). Thus, a better understanding of
the risk factors and consequences of elevated depression components is essential.
Potential risk factors or consequences of elevated depression components have been
theorized to include suboptimal levels of lipid markers and chronic peripheral proinflammatory
proteins (e.g., Penninx, 2017). Proxy lipid markers might comprise insulin, fasting glucose,
triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL) (Marz et al., 2017). C-reactive protein (CRP) are acute-phase pro-inflammatory proteins
the liver secretes in response to increased interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tends to be embedded in
plasma and other bodily fluids (Johansson-Persson et al., 2014). Depression components include
somatic symptoms (e.g., appetite changes, sleep disturbances), depressed mood, and
interpersonal problems (e.g., perceived unfriendliness) (Cosco et al., 2017). These variables have
been incorporated into vulnerability and scar theories of depression.
In particular, vulnerability models propose that suboptimal levels of insulin, fasting
glucose, triglycerides, LDL, and HDL might influence future somatic (vs. mood and
interpersonal) aspects of depression (Lamers et al., 2020; Penninx, 2017). Surrogate lipid
markers have been theorized to predict future depressed mood and somatic symptoms through
reduced neurogenesis, suboptimal cell metabolism function, and heightened inflammation
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 5
(Dantzer et al., 2008). These processes could decrease motivation to engage regularly in healthy
behaviors and physical activity (Ignacio et al., 2019), leading to subsequent depressed mood.
Proinflammatory proteins that likely predict multiple aspects of depression include C-reactive
protein (CRP) and fibrinogen (Konsman, 2019; Lafitte et al., 2015). As they deplete
dopaminergic neurons and disrupt mitochondrial function (e.g., glucose production) (Dantzer et
al., 2021), increased proinflammatory proteins (vs. proxy lipid markers) would likely more
strongly impact somatic (vs. mood and interpersonal) depression components (Majd et al., 2020).
Proinflammatory proteins (vs. proxy lipid markers) could, to a larger degree, perpetuate
‘sickness behaviors’ (i.e., fatigue, reduced activities) and negatively impact emotion regulation-
related brain areas (e.g., dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex) (Felger
et al., 2016; Torres-Platas et al., 2014), leading to future elevated somatic symptoms.
Scar theories posit that somatic symptoms, compared to depressed mood and
interpersonal issues, are depression components with the most extensive relations to future
increased proinflammatory proteins (Felger et al., 2020; Lamers et al., 2013) vs. surrogate lipid
markers (Rotella & Mannucci, 2013). These processes could occur via the buildup of stress
hormones and chronic dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA) over long periods
(Dias et al., 2020; Vingeliene et al., 2019). Suboptimal habits (e.g., decreased exercise, excessive
caloric intake, or carbohydrate-dense foods) and social withdrawal patterns (Feng & Astell-Burt,
2017) could mediate elevated depression components predicting worse immunometabolism.
Also, depression components might adversely affect immunometabolism via decreased attempts
to tap into social support resources during stress (Gouin et al., 2020). Increased social isolation
could negatively alter the body's reactivity toward biological or interpersonal stressors (e.g.,
worsening social cohesion) (Smith et al., 2020). These challenges could prompt more robust
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 6
long-term increased proinflammatory (vs. proxy lipid markers) responses, resulting in more
somatic symptoms relative to depressed mood and interpersonal issues (Smith et al., 2020).
Prospective data to date reliably support the theories above. Consistent with vulnerability
and scar models, data across 15 studies showed that excessive surrogate lipid markers (e.g.,
insulin, fasting glucose) bidirectionally predicted future major depression severity and diagnosis
in clinical and community samples (cf. meta-analysis and empirical study by Hiles et al., 2016;
Pan et al., 2012). Likewise, concordant with vulnerability models and scar theories, more than 85
studies that recruited diverse youth and adult populations showed that depressive symptoms
bidirectionally predicted heightened surrogate lipid markers and non-specific proinflammatory
proteins (e.g., IL-6, CRP, fibrinogen) across two months to 18 years (cf. reviews and empirical
studies by Colasanto et al., 2020; Lamers et al., 2019; Mac Giollabhui et al., 2021; Valkanova et
al., 2013; Zainal & Newman, 2021b, 2022). Collectively, suboptimal proinflammatory proteins
and surrogate lipid marker levels could be bidirectionally related to somatic symptoms,
depressed mood, and interpersonal problems. Moreover, the literature offers more evidence for
vulnerability models than scar theories (e.g., Mac Giollabhui et al., 2021).
However, most prior longitudinal studies thus far have not tested how components of
proinflammatory proteins, surrogate lipid markers, and depression related to one another.
Examining these relationships is essential because depression may arise from the interactions
among these mutually-influencing components, and unique depression components will likely
relate differently in magnitude and direction to distinct surrogate immunometabolism markers
(Zhang et al., 2022). In addition, the literature is replete with studies on this topic using ordinary
least squares (OLS) regression and structural equation modeling (SEM) approaches. Although
informative, OLS, SEM, and other traditional statistical approaches tend to yield parameters that
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 7
enable understanding of the relations among the mean-overall score or latent constructs rather
than relations among the components of these constructs. The latent variable modeling approach
precludes determining unique immunometabolism trajectories for persons with the same mean-
overall score but elevated on different components (e.g., high somatic symptoms and low
depressed mood versus low somatic symptoms and high depressed mood). Cross-lagged
prospective network analysis (CLPN) (Epskamp, 2020) is thus a means to understand how
components (or nodes) rather than latent constructs relate to one another in a network of
mutually-influencing nodes across multiple time-points, within and between persons. Relations
between nodes are called edges, typically expressed as partial correlations that have adjusted for
the effects of all other nodes. Moreover, CLPN permits identifying nodes with the biggest impact
and the highest number of associations with all future nodes (Borsboom et al., 2021).
Conceivably, these most impactful nodes in temporal networks are key therapy targets, as
altering those influential nodes might change future depression nodes (Roefs et al., 2022).
To date, only six studies have used network analyses with cross-sectional data to
investigate this topic. Recently, Jia et al. (2020) observed that although higher HDL levels
coincided with stronger concurrent depressive symptoms, other lipid markers (e.g., triglycerides,
LDL) had null relations. Further, depressive symptoms were nodes with the most robust
connections with other nodes in the network (Jia et al., 2020). A separate network analysis
showed that higher IL-6 and CRP more strongly coincided with increased somatic symptoms
(i.e., aches, pains, sleep issues) versus other depression nodes in Dutch adults with and without
elevated depression (Fried et al., 2020). Another network analysis found that persons with (vs.
without) heightened CRP had more notable edges in a depression network, with thicker networks
indicating more significant psychopathology (Moriarity et al., 2021b). Concentration deficits and
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 8
psychomotor problems (vs. other depression nodes) were the most influential in this study
(Moriarity et al., 2021b). Moreover, higher CRP showed the largest associations with appetite
changes and fatigue than other depression nodes in another large community sample (Moriarity
et al., 2021a). Likewise, the polygenic risk score of CRP (but not IL-6 and other
proinflammatory proteins) was most potently linked to fatigue and decreased anhedonia
(Kappelmann et al., 2021). In addition, levels of triglyceride, total cholesterol, and insulin
resistance, but not HDL, displayed the most substantial concurrent relations with higher
depression severity in Korean adults (Nam et al., 2021).
Therefore, the current study used CLPN to understand better the relations among
surrogate lipid markers, proinflammatory proteins, and depression nodes across five time-points
spanning nine years. This research aim is essential for multiple reasons. Globally, metabolic
syndrome-linked disorders (e.g., diabetes) and depressive disorders have increased (Jeuring et
al., 2018; Leon & Maddox, 2015). Enhancing knowledge of the modifiable risk factors and
outcomes for depression and related immunometabolism problems can facilitate fine-tuning
current evidence-based treatments (e.g., physical exercise-focused behavioral therapies; Li et al.,
2017). Also, most studies examining the links among depression components, proinflammatory
proteins, and surrogate lipid markers have been cross-sectional (e.g., Persons & Fiedorowicz,
2016), hindering weak causal inferences (Blanchard et al., 2022). Thus, based on theory and
evidence, we tested two hypotheses. First, we hypothesized that the within-person temporal (lag-
1) network would show evidence more consistent with vulnerability models compared to scar
theories (Hypothesis 1). Second, we expected that within and between persons, somatic
symptoms (vs. depressed mood and interpersonal problems) would have stronger associations
with levels of proinflammatory proteins (vs. surrogate lipid markers) (Hypothesis 2).
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 9
Method
Participants
The present study was a secondary analysis of merged open-access datasets from the
Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN) project (Greendale et al., 2010). At Wave
1 (W1), the all-female participants (n = 2,224) had a mean age of 45.96 years (SD = 2.67, range
materials (OSM) for descriptive statistics of demographic, study variables, and related variables
not included in the final analyses). The proportion of participants ethnically identified as
Caucasian, African American, Hispanic, Chinese, and Japanese were 47%, 28%, 8%, 8%, and
8%, respectively. In addition, whereas 3% reported they did not know or declined to state their
past annual total household income, 47% disclosed earning $49,999 or below, and 50% $50,000
or more.
Procedures
Participants completed a depression self-report and biomarker data collection protocols at
W1 (1997-1998), Wave 2 (W2; 1998-2000), Wave 3 (W3; 2000-2002), Wave 4 (W4; 2002-
2004), and Wave 5 (W5; 2004-2006). These five time-points were selected as they contained
data that could speak to our research question. Both self-reports and biomarker assays were
collected on the same day of the study visit, and the SWAN researchers collected and processed
these variables once at each time-point (McClure et al., 2014). Blood specimens were collected
via blood draws following a 12-hour fast. The blood draw took place on the morning after fasting
to standardize the protocol. For menstruating women, specimens were collected between days 2
and 5 of the menstrual cycle (i.e., the early follicular phase) to reduce hormonal variations.
Subsequently, specimens were shipped with dry ice at -20°C to project-affiliated laboratories,
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 10
where the plasma was frozen at -80°C (Medical Research Laboratories, Highland Heights,
Kentucky) (Myers et al., 1989). Storage time of specimens in the freezer did not differ widely
across participants (El Khoudary et al., 2016a).
Measures
Surrogate lipid markers. EDTA-treated plasma and enzymatic approaches determined
the levels of triglycerides and LDL (Myers et al., 1989). Heparin-2M manganese chloride
facilitated the extraction of HDL levels (Warnick & Albers, 1978). The radioimmunoassay (RIA)
(DPC Coat-a-count, Los Angeles, California) method assessed serum insulin levels with monthly
quality assurance checks (Diabetes Diagnostic Laboratory, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri). Also, the Hitachi 747-200 (Boehringer Mannheim Diagnostics, Indianapolis, Indiana)
with the hexokinase-coupled reaction feature enabled the measurement of fasting glucose levels.
Proinflammatory proteins. A clot-based turbidometric identification system assessed
the fibrinogen level in frozen plasma preserved with citric acid (Medical Laboratory Automation
Inc., Mt. Vernon, NY) (Falconi et al., 2016). The CRP level was determined by an ultrasensitive
rate immunonephelometry approach with a lower identification limit (0.3 mg/L) (BN100; Dade-
Behring, Marburg, Germany). Also, the within-run coefficients of CRP were 10-12% and 5-7%,
at CRP amounts of 0.5 and 22.0mg/L, respectively (Kelley-Hedgepeth et al., 2008).
Depression components. Past-week depression components were measured with the
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES-D) scale (Radloff, 1977). Participants rated
items on a 4-point Likert scale (0 = rarely to 3 = most or all of the time). Its scores have shown
excellent retest reliability and good convergent and discriminant validity (Cosco et al., 2017).
Moreover, we focused on three theory-based components derived from a recent factor analytic
study in community adults: depressed mood; interpersonal problems; and somatic symptoms
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 11
(Cosco et al., 2017). Each node indicated a mean composite score of items averaged for these
components: depressed mood (Cronbach’s α = 0.937–0.943); interpersonal problems (α = 0.711–
0.739); and somatic symptoms (α = 0.849–0.860).
Statistical Analysis
All data analyses were conducted using R version 4.1.0 and RStudio version 1.4.1717 (R
Core Team, 2021). As part of the preprocessing, missing data (comprising 11.13% of total
observations) was managed with multiple imputation using the mice R package (van Buuren &
Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011); the gold standard given the total amount of missingness and with
the high likelihood the current data were missing at random (Lee & Shi, 2021). Data were
aggregated across 100 imputed datasets, each with a maximum of 10 iterations. Community
structure detection analysis with the Walktrap algorithm (Pons & Latapy, 2005) revealed three
(interpersonal problems, depressed mood, somatic symptoms), proinflammatory proteins and
surrogate lipid markers (CRP, fibrinogen, HDL, fasting glucose, insulin, LDL, triglycerides), and
covariates (age, estradiol (pg/mL), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (mIU/mL), menopausal
status (coded as 1 = premenopausal, 2 = early perimenopausal, 3 = late perimenopausal, 4 = post-
menopausal)). These covariates were selected, given consistent evidence that they could affect
proinflammatory proteins and surrogate lipid markers levels over time (El Khoudary et al.,
dataset). Before network estimation, scores for all nodes were rescaled to range from 1 to 4
(matching the CES-D) to minimize biases due to variability differences (Fried et al., 2018). No
outliers were identified (i.e., all skewness and kurtosis values were within normal limits).
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 12
Next, we used the panel data-graphical vector autoregressive (panelgvar) model
(Epskamp, 2020) to determine three networks: (a) within-person temporal (lag-1) network
(directed partial associations for the mean within-person effects across time); (b) within-person
contemporaneous network (partial associations for the mean within-person effects within a time-
point over and above temporal effects); (c) between-person network (partial associations for
stable trait-level differences across time). The panelgvar-model computes directed and
undirected network edges, above and beyond trait-level between-person and autoregressive
effects and baseline scores by adding a random intercept (Hamaker et al., 2015; Wild et al.,
2010). A better understanding of within-person effects is important as they can uncover
treatment mechanisms explaining relations among depression components and identify chief
treatment targets. However, the panelgvar model can only offer insights on average population-
level (fixed effects) instead of individual-level, within-person temporal dynamics. We fit a non-
regularized (unpruned) panelgvar model (Speyer et al., 2022). Model fit was evaluated with the
following fit statistics: confirmatory fit index (CFI; CFI ≥ .90) and root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA; RMSEA ≤ .060) (Hu & Bentler, 1999).
As our sample size was large (n = 2,224), we used an unpruned or non-regularized (vs.
regularized) Gaussian graphical model to interpret network structures because it raises the
chances of selecting the true model (Isvoranu & Epskamp, 2021). Non-regularized networks
were fit using the qgraph (Epskamp et al., 2018; Epskamp et al., 2012) and psychonetrics
The graphical least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (graphical LASSO) was used to
estimate the structure of 100 regularized network models from sparse to dense. This approach
iteratively fits a non-regularized network for each model using graphical LASSO without
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 13
regularization, but with zeros constrained based on the network structure. To acquire unbiased
parameter estimates, we used maximum likelihood estimation. Further, the non-regularized (vs.
the more popular regularized graphical LASSO) network estimation approach has higher
specificity (lower false positives) to empirically identify unique non-zero edges likely derived
from the true population (Williams & Rast, 2020). It does not assume that the true network is
sparse (Epskamp et al., 2017). Moreover, non-regularized (vs. regularized) network models
produce fewer biases in parameter estimates (e.g., dropping of edges with proinflammatory
proteins) (Moriarity et al., 2021a).
To determine the accuracy of network edges, we computed the 95% confidence intervals
(CI) of the edge weights with 1,000 bootstrap samples (Costenbader & Valente, 2003).
Furthermore, only edges that were statistically significant (p < .001) and included ≥ 25% of the
time across 1,000 bootstrap samples were regarded as stable (Betz et al., 2020). Cohen’s d effect
sizes were calculated to ease interpretation (Dunlap et al., 1996). Based on the literature (Mac
Giollabhui et al., 2021), d ≥ 0.100 was interpreted as meaningful. We rendered edges that were
accurate, stable, and with d ≥ 0.100 as significant. In addition, the Fruchterman–Reingold
algorithm was used to organize the networks by locating the largest associations in the center and
weaker associations toward the boundary and placing nodes with stronger relations closer to each
other (Fruchterman & Reingold, 1991). Line thickness indicates the strength of association.
Whereas bold blue lines signal positive relations, red dotted lines reflect negative relations.
Results
CLPN Model Fit Evaluation
The non-regularized CLPN model had good fit (CFI = 1.00, TLI = .95, RMSEA = .000,
90% CI [.000, .000]).
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 14
Accuracy and Stability of Networks
Figures S2(a)-(c) present the 95% CI plot that indicates the accuracy of all edges for the
within-person temporal network, within-person contemporaneous network, and between-person
network, respectively. The percentages of 95% CI of edges that did not cross the 0 value were
95.8% (182/190) for the temporal network, 98.9% (90/91) for the contemporaneous network, and
96.7% (88/91) for the between-person network. Tables S2(a)-(c) show the partial correlation
across all 1,000 bootstrap samples. The frequency of edges included in ≥ 25% of all bootstrap
samples was 149 out of 196 edges (76.0%) for the temporal network, 60 out of 91 edges (65.3%)
for the contemporaneous network, and 61 out of 91 edges (67.0%) for the between-person
network. Thus, all networks showed a high degree of accuracy and stability.
Within-Person Temporal (Lag-1) Network
displays parameter estimates of all lag-1 directed network edges within and across constructs.
Scar Theories. Within persons, depressed mood significantly positively predicted future
levels of fibrinogen (d = 0.108) and LDL (d = 0.157) (all ps < .001) in a stable manner instead of
other proinflammatory proteins and lipid markers. Likewise, within-person increased somatic
symptoms significantly predicted future increased fibrinogen (d = 0.251) and LDL (d = 0.131)
(all ps < .001) rather than other lipid markers and proinflammatory proteins. Also, heightened
interpersonal problems significantly predicted future higher fibrinogen (d = 0.172) and LDL (d =
0.441) (all ps < .001) instead of other lipid markers and proinflammatory proteins.
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 15
Vulnerability Models. These three surrogate immunometabolism markers significantly
predicted all future depression nodes: (a) CRP (higher CRP à higher depressed mood: d =
1.429; higher CRP à higher somatic symptoms: d = 2.416; higher CRP à higher interpersonal
problems: d = 2.816); (b) fibrinogen (higher fibrinogen à lower depressed mood: d = -0.101;
higher fibrinogen à higher somatic symptoms: d = 0.208; higher fibrinogen à lower
interpersonal problems: d = -0.487) (all ps < .001); and (c) HDL (higher HDL à higher
depressed mood: d = 0.261; higher HDL à higher somatic symptoms: d = 0.216; higher HDL à
higher interpersonal problems: d = 0.179) (all ps < .001). Also, higher depressed mood was
significantly predicted by previous levels of lower insulin (d = -0.327) and higher LDL (d =
0.334) (all ps < .001), but not fasting glucose and triglycerides. Greater somatic symptoms were
significantly predicted by prior higher triglycerides (d = 0.174) (all ps < .001), but not insulin,
fasting glucose, and LDL. More interpersonal problems were significantly predicted by prior
reduced insulin (d = -0.943) and higher LDL (d = 0.436) (all ps < .001), but not fasting glucose,
and triglycerides. Hypothesis 1, which predicted that there would be more evidence consistent
with vulnerability models than scar theories, was fully supported.
Within-Person Contemporaneous Network
statistics after adjusting for within-person temporal relations and between-person differences.
Within persons, greater depressed mood was significantly related to higher fasting glucose (d =
0.397) and HDL levels (d = 0.128) (all ps < .001), but not CRP, fibrinogen, insulin, triglycerides,
and LDL. Also, greater somatic symptoms were significantly associated with lower fibrinogen (d
= -0.701) and insulin (d = -0.143) and higher fasting glucose (d = 4.781) (all ps < .001), but not
CRP, triglycerides, LDL, and HDL. Additionally, within-person greater interpersonal problems
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 16
were significantly correlated with higher fibrinogen (d = 1.372), fasting glucose (d = 1.406) and
HDL (d = 0.241) (all ps < .001), but not CRP, insulin, triglycerides, and LDL levels.
Between-Person Network
significantly related to higher CRP (d = 0.358), fasting glucose (d = 0.241) and insulin (d =
0.137) (all ps < .001), but not fibrinogen, triglycerides, LDL, and HDL levels. Between persons,
stronger somatic symptoms were significantly associated with higher CRP (d = 0.420), fasting
glucose (d = 0.780), insulin (d = 0.404) and LDL (d = 0.149) (all ps < .001), but not fibrinogen,
triglycerides, and HDL. Also, between persons, more interpersonal problems were significantly
associated with higher levels of fibrinogen (d = 0.115), CRP (d = 0.115) and insulin (d = 0.165)
(all ps < .001), but not fasting glucose, triglycerides, LDL, and HDL. Hypothesis 2, which
anticipated that proinflammatory proteins (vs. proxy lipid markers) would have stronger relations
with somatic symptoms (vs. depressed mood and interpersonal problems) within and between
persons, was partially supported.
Discussion
Overall, findings provide evidence more consistent with vulnerability models rather than
scar theories, with small-to-large effect sizes. Further, results were partially consistent with the
expectation that somatic symptoms (vs. depressed mood and interpersonal problems) would have
stronger relations with proinflammatory proteins than surrogate lipid markers. Generally,
stronger within- (vs. between-) person effect sizes might also highlight the more state-like rather
than trait-like relations among proinflammatory proteins, proxy lipid markers, and depression
components. Results are congruent with emerging prospective evidence that compared within-
(vs. between-person) variances when testing associations among these components and found
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 17
more state- versus trait-like differences (Moriarity et al., 2020; Wagner et al., 2017). Based on
outcomes produced by the largely data-driven, cutting-edge CLPN in the current study, we offer
potential theoretical accounts on this topic. The within-person temporal network, rather than
within-person contemporaneous and between-person networks, takes precedence when
interpreting results because it provides directionality information.
Some notable temporal network relations emerged between components of depression
and proinflammatory proteins. First, replicating and extending a recent meta-analysis with
similar findings (Mac Giollabhui et al., 2021), higher CRP unidirectionally predicted later
increased depressed mood, somatic symptoms, and interpersonal problems, but not vice versa.
Moreover, fibrinogen had a positive reciprocal effect on somatic symptoms over time. Our
findings support the idea that inflammatory processes tend to be more pronounced in atypical
(vs. melancholic/mood-focused) depression characterized by bodily symptoms (Penninx, 2017).
They also buttress the ‘sickness behavior’ hypothesis that somatic symptoms (e.g., psychomotor
slowing, restless sleep) compared to mood-focused depressive symptoms substantially predict
increased proinflammatory proteins (Iob et al., 2020). Moreover, findings are consistent with
findings that an induced proinflammatory response heightened reactivity to social cues and
raised the desire to surround oneself with social support to aid with the recovery process or
withdraw socially, possibly prompting depression (Eisenberger et al., 2017).
Overall, our results highlight the importance of clarifying unique depression components
that specific proinflammatory proteins impact and their direction. Plausibly, increased CRP and
fibrinogen predicted heightened depression components, particularly somatic symptoms, by
producing more proinflammatory cytokines from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (e.g., IL-6,
tumor necrosis factor-α) (Haroon et al., 2012). Proinflammatory cytokines might trigger and
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 18
increase the enzyme indolamine-2,3-dioxygenase, which depletes monoamine precursors (i.e.,
antecedents of serotonin and dopamine such as tryptophan) by breaking it down into kynurenine
(Felger, 2018). Eventually, reduced serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine synthesis and
modified apoptosis and oxidative stress (Lamers et al., 2020) could contribute to elevated
depression. Future basic science research should evaluate these notions.
Unexpectedly, higher fibrinogen preceded lower future depressed mood and interpersonal
problems. Such findings contradict evidence for fibrinogen levels positively predicting
depression indices (e.g., major depressive disorder) (Zainal & Newman, 2021a). However,
another study observed that increased fibrinogen correlated with reduced anxiety severity in
women (Toker et al., 2005). Future replication efforts could test if unmeasured confounding
variables (e.g., IL-6), sample characteristics (e.g., gender), statistical analysis, and measurement
differences (Kryczka et al., 2021) contribute to conflicting evidence.
Notably, temporal networks showed that excessive HDL predicted all depression
components measured herein but not conversely. Reduced insulin predicted depressed mood and
interpersonal issues instead of somatic symptoms. Further, temporal networks revealed positive
feedback loops between LDL and depressed mood and LDL and interpersonal problems. Despite
somatic symptoms preceding higher LDL, LDL did not predict later somatic symptoms. Also,
elevated triglycerides preceded more somatic symptoms (vs. other depression nodes) than vice
versa, suggesting that this is an event that could occur in both community-dwelling adult women
and men (Xu et al., 2021). Such observations agree that reducing hypertriglyceridemia is
essential to treat and prevent the onset or recurrence of physical aspects of depression (Hamer et
al., 2012). The state-of-the-art network analysis thus offers much information on the direction,
magnitude, and possible reciprocal influence(s) among components of depression and surrogate
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 19
lipid markers. Our results expand on cross-sectional meta-analytic evidence that HDL positively
correlated with depression only among women (Shin et al., 2008) and network analytic evidence
that heightened HDL (vs. LDL and total cholesterol) coincided with more depressed mood (Jia et
al., 2020). They also add to accruing longitudinal evidence for the role of proxy markers of
insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and poor glycemic control serving as risk factors for
elevated depression in community adults (Mezuk et al., 2008; Watson et al., 2021).
Suboptimal levels of unique lipid markers heightened the risk of experiencing more
distinct aspects of depression later, likely by dysregulating the HPA axis via excessive or blunted
(vs. optimal) cortisol production (Mansur et al., 2015). Other tenable mechanisms include
decreased neurogenesis in reward- and executive functioning- related brain regions and
connectivity between physiological states and synaptic plasticity (Goldsmith et al., 2020; Hamer
et al., 2019). Plausibly, these processes can unfold with and without chronic social stressors and
relate more to somatic aspects (e.g., appetite changes, fatigue) of depression that often co-occur
with motivational deficits and social withdrawal (Coccurello, 2019). Future prospective network
analyses should examine these ideas.
Partially consistent with scar theories, all depression components preceded higher levels
of fibrinogen and LDL. Results largely concur with evidence that more daily positive
interpersonal events dovetailed with future reduced CRP and fibrinogen among women but not
men (Sin et al., 2015). They also build on evidence that rises in HDL or LDL levels (indicators
of the buildup of fatty plaques in heart arteries) predicted depression in community adult women
instead of men (Beydoun et al., 2015) and more cardiovascular events and rapid cognitive
decline (Hua et al., 2021). Most importantly, findings suggest improving lifestyle patterns to
lessen depression and prevent dyslipidemia and heightened inflammation.
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 20
Study limitations merit attention. First, the all-female sample precluded the generalization
of findings to the general population. Future studies should examine how sex assigned at birth
might influence our CLPN-derived results due to documented sex differences in
proinflammatory proteins, lipid markers, problem- versus emotion-focused coping approaches,
and their interactions (Shimanoe et al., 2018). For example, sex could moderate within-person
CRP-depression associations (Das, 2020) and relate to the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis,
corticotropic-releasing hormone, cell death programming, and mitochondrial differences
(Dantzer et al., 2021). Whereas women usually consume fatty acids in most cell metabolism
processes, men mainly use amino acids and proteins (Demarest & McCarthy, 2015). For these
and related biopsychosocial reasons, heightened depression occurs in more women than men
(Shimamoto & Rappeneau, 2017), necessitating the recruitment of both genders in future studies.
Second, as the current study was a secondary analysis, we were limited to available data. Other
related chronic low-grade systemic proinflammatory proteins (e.g., IL-6), endocrine markers,
and psychopathology components might have contributed to the current pattern of results. For
example, IL-6 is instrumental in CRP and fibrinogen production, and inhibiting IL-6 with
monoclonal antibodies affects lipid markers (Raison et al., 2018). Also, although controlling for
age did not affect the results in this middle-aged sample, network associations might be more
potent in middle-aged compared to younger adult women (Walker et al., 2021). Nonetheless,
study strengths include the large sample size and the cutting-edge CLPN that separated within-
and between-person relations and offered more information than traditional statistics. Moreover,
our analyses adjusted for age, estradiol, follicle-stimulating hormone, and menopausal status.
Prognostically, suboptimal CRP, fibrinogen, HDL, insulin, and LDL levels are probably
proinflammatory proteins and surrogate lipid markers driving the etiology of depression. Thus,
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 21
modifying these proxy immunometabolism markers with the most substantial upstream effect on
all depression components in the network might efficiently treat depression and improve
immunometabolism profiles. Cognitive-behavioral therapies (CBT) that raise the consumption of
foods with high soluble dietary fiber (e.g., oat bran, rye bran), reduce intake of sugary or low
fiber foods and promote regular physical activity may facilitate those aims (Johansson-Persson et
al., 2014; Li et al., 2017). Also, clinical science can profit from testing the efficacy of
encouraging the consumption of a Mediterranean diet (e.g., olive oil, fish, fruits, vegetable)
(Abenavoli et al., 2018) and improving sleep using evidence-based CBT strategies (Irwin et al.,
2014). Further, findings highlight how optimizing immunometabolism profiles require enhancing
social support (e.g., reducing loneliness), social engagement, and related contextual variables (cf.
interpersonal theories; Walker et al., 2019; Wiebe et al., 2016). Mounting evidence indicates that
these CBT approaches could alleviate depression and enhance immunometabolism profiles long-
term (Shomaker et al., 2017), which merits more consideration.
CLPN OF DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, AND BIOMARKERS 22