ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 1
How Envy and Being Envied Shape Social Hierarchies
1 2, 3
Jens Lange & Jan Crusius
Department of Differential Psychology and Psychological Assessment, University of
Hamburg
Department of Social Psychology, Tilburg University
Social Cognition Center Cologne, University of Cologne
Lange, J., & Crusius, J. (in press). How envy and being envied shape social hierarchies.
In S. Protasi (Ed.), The moral psychology of envy. Rowman & Littlefield.
Author Notes
We thank Sara Protasi, Felipe Romero, and the other contributors of this volume for
valuable feedback.
Correspondence should be addressed to Jens Lange, University of Hamburg,
Differential Psychology and Psychological Assessment, Von-Melle-Park 5, 20146 Hamburg,
Germany, lange.jens@outlook.com.
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 2
How Envy and Being Envied Shape Social Hierarchies
Humans have a strong tendency to form social hierarchies (Magee and Galinsky
2008). They do so quickly and spontaneously. Even when contextual factors minimize the
potential for hierarchical structures, they are hardly ever completely absent. This preference
for hierarchical organization partly stems from the fact that being at the top of a hierarchy has
important advantages. For instance, higher-ranked persons have access to valuable resources,
better health, or power over others (e.g., Fournier 2020; Sapolsky 2005; Von Rueden, Gurven,
and Kaplan 2011).
Consequently, people are highly vigilant about their social rank. They continuously
strive for higher social rank (Anderson, Hildreth, and Howland 2015) and even when they
have a high position, their desire to stay at the top remains almost insatiable (Anderson,
Hildreth, and Sharps 2020). If humans have a fundamental need for social rank, it follows that
humans should be equipped with a set of strong psychological tools allowing them to deal
with changes in their position in the hierarchy (Pettit et al. 2016; Sivanathan, Pillutla, and
Murnighan 2008). Rising in the hierarchy elicits reactions aimed to reinforce the current
course of action, whereas threats to one’s position elicit reactions aimed to prevent losing
one’s rank. Among these strong reactions are emotions. That is, people react emotionally to
rank improvements and rank threats, eliciting behaviors aimed to communicate rank
improvements to others or averting potentially detrimental consequences of rank threats.
Emotions therefore contribute to the regulation of social hierarchies (Steckler and Tracy
2014). One emotion that is at the center of these dynamics, we argue, is envy.
We propose that envy regulates social hierarchies in two ways. First, higher-ranked
persons’ successes elicit envy in lower-ranked persons. Second, lower-rank persons’ envy in
turn elicits reactions in higher-ranked persons. Envying and being envied thus occur in a
dynamic relationship. To unravel the complexities of this dynamic, we argue in favor of
considering the different ways in which social hierarchies form, and how emotions are
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 3
multifaceted experiences. We review evidence for a broad framework that considers these
points.
Envy
Theoretical approaches agree that envy situations include three elements: two
persons and an object (e.g., D’Arms 2018; Smith and Kim 2007). One person is advantaged
by having the object. The other person is disadvantaged by lacking it. Envy objects include
achievements, possessions, or characteristics. Importantly, in all situations, the object is
highly self-relevant for the disadvantaged person (e.g., Salovey and Rodin 1984). Put
differently, the disadvantaged person experiences envy to the extent that lacking the object
reflects negatively on the person’s self-evaluation.
Broad evidence indicates that the object’s relevance often means higher social rank
of the advantaged person (e.g., Crusius and Lange 2017; Fiske 2010; Leahy 2021; see also
Rodriguez Mosquera this volume; Romero this volume). Specifically, the object may signal to
observers that the person is highly ranked. Hence, envy may often not be elicited by lacking
the object but by the advantages associated with it. People envy others primarily for socially
valued characteristics such as wealth, attractiveness, status objects, academic success,
popularity, or authority (DelPriore, Hill, and Buss 2012). Being advantaged on these
dimensions leads to more respect and social influence. Put differently, it leads to a higher
social rank. Being disadvantaged on these dimensions, in turn, leads to a lower social rank.
Thus, the identity relevance of lacking envy objects may often signal that one’s social rank is
lower than expected. In line with this notion, changes in people’s self-evaluation correspond
to changes in their social rank (Mahadevan, Gregg, and Sedikides 2019).
In situations relevant for one’s social rank, envy then constitutes a response to
inferiority, dealing with this threat to a fundamental need. To do so, envy includes various
affective, cognitive, and motivational reactions (e.g., Lange, Weidman, and Crusius 2018;
Parrott and Smith 1993). Relatedly, people with a higher desire to attain social rank, such as
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 4
people with higher greed, narcissism, or entitlement, tend to experience envy more intensely
(Crusius, Thierhoff, and Lange 2021; Lange, Crusius, and Hagemeyer 2016; Lange, Redford,
and Crusius 2019). The goal of the diverse reactions included in envy might thus be to level
the rank difference relative to the advantaged person (e.g., Sayers 1969; Van de Ven,
Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2009).
According to this perspective, one of envy’s social functions is to contribute to the
regulation of social hierarchies. It helps persons overcome rank differentials, ensuring that
they may eventually gain access to the advantages afforded to those who have higher rank
than they have. Notably, this perspective challenges the common view on envy that depicts
envy as an immoral emotion with maladaptive consequences for enviers and society. Envy
may not be uniformly negative but may even have value such that some of the consequences
of envy help enviers improve their outcomes (for a discussion see Lange and Protasi 2021;
see also Romero this volume).
The social-functional approach to envy also has implications for persons who exceed
another person’s rank. If envy aims to level differences in rank, enviers are a threat to a
higher-ranked person’s position. Accordingly, this person must react to a lower-ranked
person’s envy to protect their standing and its ensuing advantages. Hence, higher-ranked
persons and their enviers could engage in a self-reinforcing cycle of complex emotional
interactions.
envy is a response to other persons’ social rank, it will be elicited if a difference in ranks has
been established and communicated to others. Second, envy may manifest itself in emotional
expressions and behavioral cues communicating itself to others, allowing higher-ranked
persons to infer the envy of others. Third, in response to being envied, higher-ranked persons
react with either approach or avoidance behavior to deal with this situation. Fourth, these
reactions can change the position of higher-ranked persons, starting the circle anew. Jointly,
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 5
these four steps comprehensively outline key elements of the process in which envy and being
envied shape social hierarchies.
Step 1: Rank Displays and Envy
Anthropological and psychological evidence indicates that people attain social rank
in at least two ways (e.g., Henrich and Gil-White 2001; Maner and Case 2016). When people
pursue a prestige strategy, they gain respect by showing competence, sharing knowledge, and
contributing to the group such that others have opportunities to advance. When people pursue
a dominance strategy, instead, they intimidate others and elicit fear to secure their position,
while they may even lack competence. Notably, despite their differences, both prestige and
dominance strategies lead to higher social rank (Cheng et al. 2013). Thus, prestige and
dominance strategies differ in their means to reach social rank, yet not in their eventual
success.
The two strategies have different implications for lower-ranked persons. In prestige
hierarchies, lower-ranked persons can learn how to obtain a higher rank in the long term. In
dominance hierarchies, however, lower-ranked persons’ future advancement can be
obstructed by incompetent superiors. These two different situations have implications for
lower-ranked persons’ envy toward higher-ranked others. Before turning to these
implications, we must consider different ways in which envy can manifest itself.
Specifically, enviers can also accomplish their goal to level the difference between
themselves and higher-ranked persons in two ways, namely via benign or malicious envy
(e.g., Lange, Weidman, and Crusius 2018; Van de Ven 2016; for a comparison of different
perspectives on envy see Crusius et al. 2020). In benign envy, enviers try to level themselves
up, that is, improve their relative standing. Benign envy includes higher perceived control to
advance (Lange, Crusius, and Hagemeyer 2016; Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2012),
more positive feelings towards envied persons (Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2009),
thoughts about what oneself could have done better (Crusius and Lange in press; see also
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 6
Vendrell Ferran this volume), and a focus on means to improve (Crusius and Lange 2014;
Protasi 2016). Moreover, benign envy fosters improvement behaviors, such as increased effort
in achievement tasks (e.g., Lange and Crusius 2015; Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters
2011), higher motivation to obtain a better grade (Khan, Bell, and Quratulain 2017), or a
higher tendency to purchase products that facilitate productive work (Salerno, Laran, and
Janiszewski 2019).
In malicious envy, enviers try to level the envied person down, that is, harm the
envied person’s social rank. Malicious envy includes higher subjectively perceived
undeservingness of envied persons’ position (Lange, Crusius, and Hagemeyer 2016; Van de
Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2012), more negative feelings towards them (Van de Ven,
Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2009), thoughts about how others should have acted differently
(Crusius and Lange in press; see also Vendrell Ferran this volume), and a focus on envied
persons (Crusius and Lange 2014; Protasi 2016). Moreover, malicious envy fosters harming
behaviors such as choosing more difficult tasks for envied persons (Lange and Crusius 2015),
deception in negotiations (Yusainy et al. 2019), or schadenfreude when envied persons fail
(Lange, Weidman, and Crusius 2018; Van de Ven et al. 2015).
Therefore, we would expect that the two ways of attaining social rank affect lower-
ranked persons’ envy differently. When higher-ranked persons in prestige hierarchies share
competencies and knowledge with lower-ranked persons, lower-ranked persons may
experience control to change their situation. These perceptions of control should elicit benign
envy. When lower-ranked persons in dominance hierarchies are obstructed by incompetent
superiors, they should perceive higher-ranked person’s position as undeserved. These
subjective perceptions of undeservingness should elicit malicious envy. Prestige and
dominance are neither fixed nor exclusive characteristics of social hierarchies. How people
perceive them should thus be highly malleable. Hence, when higher-ranked persons display
specific signals that lead lower-ranked persons to infer that higher-ranked persons pursue a
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 7
prestige or dominance hierarchy, these displays should elicit benign and malicious envy,
respectively.
Evidence is in line with these hypotheses. For instance, higher-ranked persons can
signal their higher position by displaying different forms of pride in response to a success
(Cheng, Tracy, and Henrich 2010) that, in turn, elicit different forms of envy in lower-ranked
persons (Lange and Crusius 2015; see also Lange and Boecker 2019). Specifically, in these
studies, participants were or imagined being outperformed by another person in a competition.
After winning the competition, the person displayed different forms of pride signaling either
prestige or dominance. When higher-ranked persons displayed authentic pride,
communicating achievement, accomplishment, and self-worth, observers inferred that higher-
ranked persons pursued a prestige strategy. Accordingly, authentic pride expressed by higher-
ranked persons elicited benign envy in lower-ranked persons. When higher-ranked persons
displayed hubristic pride, communicating that they are snobbish, stuck-up, and arrogant,
observers inferred that higher-ranked persons pursued a dominance strategy. Accordingly,
hubristic pride expressed by higher-ranked persons elicited malicious envy in lower-ranked
persons. Thus, higher-ranked persons’ displays of social rank shape lower-ranked persons’
envy (Crusius and Lange 2017; see also Romero this volume).
Step 2: Cues to Envy
In competitive situations, lower-ranked persons’ envy should become a threat to
higher-ranked persons’ social rank. Benign envy predicts improved effort in lower-ranked
persons (Lange and Crusius 2015; Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2011) that can
eventually translate into higher social rank (Lange, Crusius, and Hagemeyer 2016). Malicious
envy predicts harming behavior that can lower higher-ranked persons’ standing in the eyes of
others (Lange and Boecker 2019). Either way, higher-ranked persons may lose their relative
advantage if enviers’ behavioral strategies are successful. Given people’s fundamental desire
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 8
for social rank (Anderson, Hildreth, and Howland 2015), it is likely that they react to this
threat.
Notably, before higher-ranked persons can react to this threat, they need to identify
enviers in the first place. To do so, envy must manifest in expressive cues that higher-ranked
persons can perceive. Envy could change lower-ranked persons’ facial, vocal, or bodily
expressions. Typically, emotions distinguish themselves in at least one of these cues (Keltner
et al. 2019). Hence, also for envy it may be possible to identify distinct expressive cues.
However, theorizing on envy implies that looking for such expressive cues is a
fruitless endeavor. A frequent notion is that enviers disguise their envy (Miceli and
Castelfranchi 2007). In fact, they may disguise their envy to such an extent, that they even
deny it towards themselves (Smith and Kim 2007). Hence, if envy never manifests in
expressive cues, it should be impossible to perceive lower-ranked persons’ envy.
Recent evidence puts this earlier research into perspective (Lange et al. 2020).
Dovetailing with the earlier arguments, when unacquainted persons engaged in a competition,
successful persons were unable to accurately judge how envious their unsuccessful
competitors were. However, when acquainted persons judged each other’s inclination to be
envious across situations, these judgments were accurate. That is, participants’ judgments of
acquainted persons’ inclination to be envious across situations correlated positively with these
persons’ self-ratings of these inclinations. This was the case even when controlling for the
similarity of the two partners and the possibility that they projected their own (similar)
personality on the other person. Thus, with sufficient time or across repeated observations, it
may be possible to perceive envy, even if direct evidence for this notion is not yet available.
One reason for the need of time or repeated observations may be that people have to
integrate multiple pieces of information to accurately perceive others’ envy (e.g., Puranik et
al. 2019; Rodriguez Mosquera, Parrott, and Hurtado de Mendoza 2010). Sometimes, a single
situation may provide all necessary cues. Often, the necessary cues to others’ envy may leak
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 9
only when the persons meet each other in different situations, however. In this respect, envy is
different from other emotions that are observable from single, distinct cues.
Research started investigating cues to persons’ benign and malicious envy. It
suggests that observers infer the specific envy forms from three classes of cues (Lange,
Fischer, and Van Kleef in press; see also Puranik et al. 2019). First, a requirement common to
benign and malicious envy is that a person is perceived as being worse off than someone else.
Second, the situation has painful implications for the person as evidenced by a facial
expression. These facial expressions should be different for benign and malicious envy.
Specifically, observers should be more likely to infer that a relatively inferior person is
benignly envious when a person displays disappointment (which shares a facial expression
with sadness). In contrast, observers should be more likely to infer that a relatively inferior
person is maliciously envious when this person displays anger. A third cue, specific for
benign versus malicious may be whether the person directs attention to either the envied other
or the object. An inference of benign envy should be more likely when an inferior person
directs attention to the envy object. An inference of malicious envy should be more likely
when an inferior person directs attention is to the envied other. Lange et al (in press)
presented combinations of these cues in controlled experimental designs or via dedicated
photographs. When all three cues were combined in a single situation, facilitating their
integrated perception, observers inferred the respective envy form in line with the predictions.
Notably, research suggests that enviers indeed display these cues (e.g., Crusius and Lange
2014; Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2012). However, no research has yet investigated
whether enviers display these cues and observers then use the displayed cues accurately to
infer enviers’ emotion.
Step 3: Reactions to Being Envied
How higher-ranked persons react to the threat posed by lower-ranked persons is
difficult to predict. Early research indicated that people dislike being the target of an upward
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 10
comparison by another person (Exline and Lobel 1999). More recent research indicates that
being envied is an ambivalent experience (Duffy, Lee, and Adair 2021; Fileva 2019; Parrott
2017). Specifically, higher-ranked persons react to being envied with both positive and
negative feelings; sometimes they like it and sometimes they do not. These feelings may, in
turn, spur motivation to approach or avoid enviers, respectively.
A variety of studies documents this ambivalence. For instance, in situations in which
they have been envied, people reported that they tried being nice in return, distanced
themselves, or deflected attention from themselves (Rodriguez Mosquera, Parrott, and
Hurtado de Mendoza 2010). In one study, people imagined that another person is envious and
has no control to change the situation (Romani, Grappi, and Bagozzi 2016). Based on the
appraisals that shape benign and malicious envy, low control implies that the other person
was more likely perceived as maliciously envious. This situation elicited positive feelings
when people disliked the envier and negative feelings when people liked the envier. In
another study in a work context, being envied predicted both positive feelings as well as
anxiety to lose the relationship with the envier (Lee et al. 2018). The positive feelings
predicted higher work engagement, which in turn predicted higher job performance. In
contrast, anxiety predicted lower work engagement, which in turn predicted lower job
performance. In other studies in a work context, being envied predicted efforts to socially
reconnect but also predicted higher experienced job tension and desire to leave the
organization (Scott et al. 2015) as well as the tendency to hide knowledge from others (Y.
Liu, Zhu, and Lam 2020). Finally, when people had an advantage over another person
following a random draw, they were more likely to mitigate this person’s envy by being more
prosocial (Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2010). This prosocial tendency was more
likely to the extent that they perceived the person’s envy as malicious.
Thus, being envied causes a variety of reactions in higher-ranked persons. It elicits
positive and negative feelings and envied persons sometimes try to get closer to enviers and
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 11
sometimes they distance themselves. Studies document this pattern in remembered situations,
the work context, or in experimentally-induced comparison situations. This diversity of
methodological approaches underlines that reacting ambivalently to being envied is a robust
phenomenon. Until now, there is less theorizing or research predicting which reaction is more
likely in a particular situation.
Taking the distinction between benign and malicious envy into account may partly
clarify this complexity (see also Parrott 2017), even though no direct evidence supports this
proposition. Specifically, we predict that higher-ranked persons who are benignly envied
appreciate this situation more. Being benignly envied implies that lower-ranked persons
consider higher-ranked persons as role models and try emulating their success. Being in such
an exemplary role should bolster higher-ranked persons’ confidence and hence elicit positive
feelings. The higher appreciation for being benignly envied may subsequently foster approach
tendencies, potentially to connect with enviers, to further reinforce self-confidence, or to
appease enviers such that enviers cannot threaten the superior position of higher-ranked
persons. In contrast, we predict that higher-ranked persons who are maliciously envied dislike
this situation. Being maliciously envied implies that lower-ranked persons consider higher-
ranked persons’ success as subjectively undeserved and try undermining it. Depending on
how effectively enviers can put the harmful intentions into practice, the more afraid higher-
ranked persons will be. The higher dislike for being maliciously envied may subsequently
foster avoidance tendencies, potentially to get out of the reach of enviers, isolate them, or to
distract oneself from the threat.
One theoretical framework aligns with these ideas (Puranik et al. 2019). It proposes
that approach is more likely when the involved parties are in interdependence relationships.
Interdependence implies that a groups' success depends on close collaboration. According to
the framework, in these contexts, being envied predicts appeasement behaviors. In contrast,
when interdependence is low, being envied predicts self-protective behaviors. The framework
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 12
aligns with our predictions because interdependence should be a hallmark of prestige
hierarchies, whereas it is less likely to be characteristic for dominance hierarchies. In
interdependent groups, given that prestige hierarchies foster benign envy, lower-ranked
persons should be more likely to be benignly envious. Higher-ranked persons may then
appease enviers, helping them to achieve greater collaborative success in the future and to
mitigate enviers’ efforts to improve. In contrast, in less interdependent groups, all members
must fight for themselves because success is ascribed to individuals and not the team.
Relationship-promoting initiatives could even backfire and harm individual success. In such
an environment, people might tend to dislike higher-ranked others, eliciting malicious envy.
Higher-ranked persons would then need to protect their rank, ideally by avoiding enviers such
that they cannot interfere with higher-ranked persons’ work.
Two studies further support our arguments. First, in one study, a cooperative as
compared to a competitive context led to less feelings of being envied. In this study,
according to our opinion, the measure of envy mapped more onto malicious than benign envy
(Ye et al. 2021). Second, another study relied on people from Spain as participants and
compared them to people from the US (Rodriguez Mosquera, Parrott, and Hurtado de
Mendoza 2010; for a detailed discussion of the role of culture in envy see Rodriguez
Mosquera this volume). Culturally, Spain is characterized by horizontal collectivism which
values higher connectedness and cooperation compared to more individualistic cultures such
as the US. In line with our reasoning, Spanish participants expected more benign envy in
others than US participants. Thus, situations and cultural contexts that emphasize
collaboration are more likely to foster perceptions of being benignly envied, while the same
situations also foster approach. In contrast, situations that emphasize competitiveness are
more likely to foster perceptions of being maliciously envied, while the same situations also
foster avoidance.
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 13
However, our proposition cannot explain all findings. In particular, sometimes
higher-ranked persons experience positive feelings when being maliciously envied (Romani,
Grappi, and Bagozzi 2016). One interpretation for this finding may be that these positive
feelings reflect increased psychological distance between envied persons and enviers. Positive
feelings occurred only in situations in which higher-ranked persons disliked enviers. Hence, it
may have been pleasurable to see these enviers suffer. This notion is further supported by the
finding that higher-ranked persons reported negative feelings toward malicious enviers they
liked. These negative feelings may signal empathy towards enviers, a reaction that can soothe
the situation.
Another finding that may initially seem at odds with our proposition is that higher-
ranked persons sometimes appease malicious enviers (Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters
2010). However, we think this finding is nevertheless compatible with our reasoning. In the
study, higher-ranked persons’ success resulted from a random draw. Therefore, they may
have felt uncomfortable with being advantaged as compared to other persons. Believing that
the other persons consider higher-ranked persons’ advantage as subjectively undeserved (i.e.,
is maliciously envious), the higher-ranked persons should be motivated to make it up to the
other persons. Appeasement becomes, hence, more likely. Moreover, appeasement behaviors
may help higher-ranked persons deal with their own negative feelings that result from being
the target of an upward comparison (Exline and Lobel 1999). We expect that when higher-
ranked persons’ advantage stems from a competitive interaction, a different pattern will occur.
Higher-ranked persons can infer from malicious envy that lower-ranked persons consider
their advantage as subjectively undeserved (for a review of such inferences see Lange,
Heerdink, and Van Kleef 2021). When higher-ranked persons instead think that they earned
their advantage, they may think of lower-ranked persons as disrespectful. Such thoughts
should render avoidance more likely.
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 14
Thus, higher-ranked persons who are maliciously envied may appease lower-ranked
persons they want to keep close and avoid lower-ranked persons they perceive as distant to
begin with. This reasoning implies that the path from being maliciously envied to avoidance
is likely moderated. We propose two moderators that determine how the path will unfold:
interpersonal closeness and competitiveness. Higher-ranked persons may feel bad for being
maliciously envied and appease malicious enviers when they are close to these enviers and
when they received non-competitive rewards. In contrast, higher-ranked persons may feel
good for being maliciously envied and avoid malicious enviers when they are not close to
them and when they received competitive rewards.
Moreover, we expect that also the path from being benignly envied to approach is
moderated. When being benignly envied, higher-ranked persons may sometimes fear losing
their position. Avoiding benign enviers then assures that these enviers cannot learn from
higher-ranked persons or emulate their success. Potentially, the same moderators as for being
maliciously envied are important for being benignly envied as well. Specifically, higher-
ranked persons may approach benign enviers when they are close to these enviers and when
they earned their success in a competitive context. In contrast, higher-ranked persons may
avoid benign enviers when they are not close to these enviers and when they received their
success without engaging in a competition.
Even though we argue that the paths from being benignly and maliciously envied to
approach and avoidance behaviors, respectively, are moderated, we nevertheless think that
they occur most frequently in their direct form. Specifically, we expect that higher-ranked
persons react to being benignly envied most frequently with approach and to being
maliciously envied with avoidance. This expectation is based on the idea that common
situations eliciting benign and malicious envy will steer reactions by higher-ranked persons
towards the respective behavior. In most contexts, benign and malicious envy result from
competitive encounters, or at least the hierarchy is based on non-random achievements
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 15
(DelPriore, Hill, and Buss 2012). Moreover, prestige hierarchies often foster mutual liking,
whereas dominance hierarchies foster mutual disliking (for related arguments see Cheng et al.
2013; Henrich and Gil-White 2001; Lange and Crusius 2015). In combination, these
characteristics should foster approach toward benign enviers and avoidance of malicious
enviers.
Step 4: Rank Implications of Approach and Avoidance
Finally, we argue that reactions to being envied further regulate social hierarchies.
Approaching benign enviers may reinforce higher-ranked persons’ prestige. Approach may
include appeasing enviers, but may also increase higher-ranked persons’ own effort and
performance, as studies document (e.g., Lee et al. 2018). Hence, higher-ranked persons would
strengthen their image of being a cooperative, knowledgeable, and successful person. In
contrast, avoiding and ignoring malicious enviers may protect higher- ranked persons’
dominance without much effort. By reducing contact to malicious enviers, higher-ranked
persons lower the risk of becoming a victim of harming behaviors that will challenge or even
diminish their intimidating image.
Research at least indirectly supports these predictions. First, previous theorizing
predicts that approach fosters mutually supportive relationships between coworkers, whereas
avoidance lowers it (Puranik et al. 2019). Hence, approaching benign enviers may further
improve social relationships, potentially reinforcing the prestige hierarchy. In contrast,
avoiding malicious enviers may further isolate lower-ranked persons, potentially protecting
the dominance hierarchy. Second, envied persons were more likely to be ostracized when they
were high on neuroticism and low on their need to belong, suggesting that they would not try
to reconnect with enviers (F. Liu et al. 2019). From our perspective, trying to socially
reconnect with benign enviers may keep relationships with them alive and consequentially
reinforce a prestige hierarchy.
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 16
Additional findings also support our proposition. Specifically, expressing positivity
as hubristic pride fosters perceptions of dominance (Cheng, Tracy, and Henrich 2010). Hence,
expressing positivity towards disliked malicious enviers can reinforce the dominance
hierarchy. Moreover, appeasing others by sharing one’s failures next to one’s successes
mitigates their malicious envy and fosters their benign envy (Brooks et al. 2019). Hence,
approach following being maliciously envied may protect the dominance hierarchy or even
lead to perceptions of prestige when lower-ranked persons start experiencing benign envy.
Thus, various studies indicate that reactions by envied persons could further strengthen or
protect their social rank.
Interestingly, sustaining or increasing social rank could start the cycle with the four
steps anew. Potentially, approach and avoidance initially decrease lower-ranked persons’
envy. Nevertheless, the maintained superiority keeps higher-ranked persons in an exposed
situation, potentially leading to more envy by others in the future. Thus, envy and being
envied shape the social hierarchy continuously.
Summary and Discussion
In sum, diverse evidence is in line with the conclusion that envy and being envied
shape social hierarchies. We analyzed the entire process from rank displays via envy to being
envied and corresponding reactions by dividing it into four intertwined steps. Moreover, we
argue to consider the two different envy forms—benign and malicious envy—to unravel the
dynamic complexities of this process.
Importantly, many of our conclusions are based only on indirect evidence. This point
primarily applies to research on being envied, which is still in its infancy. The few studies on
this topic rarely distinguished between benign and malicious envy. Accordingly, future
research should investigate how higher-ranked persons react to being benignly and
maliciously envied and which moderators affect their reactions. Furthermore, categorizing
higher-ranked persons’ reactions in terms of approach and avoidance may turn out to be too
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 17
broad. Instead, it may be reasonable to develop a more fine-grained classification covering
reactions such as appeasement, teasing, or ostracism. Moreover, we deem it important to
investigate how these reactions eventually affect the existing hierarchy.
Research on being envied will further benefit from methodological advancement. So
far, research on being envied is mostly based on self-report, almost uniformly relying on one
particular three-item scale (Vecchio 2005). Two items of this scale measure resentment.
Resentment is conceptually distinguishable from envy but, if anything, close to malicious
envy (Crusius and Lange 2014; Van de Ven, Zeelenberg, and Pieters 2009; 2012). Therefore,
one risk is that research on being envied focused on an emotion other than envy or focused
primarily on being maliciously envied. Interestingly, potentially to take this confound into
account, sometimes authors replaced the term resentment with envy when using the scale (Lee
et al. 2018). The present reasoning implies that future research should develop and validate
new scales to measure being benignly and maliciously envied.
Relatedly, it is not certain whether and when self-reports of being envied are valid. In
all studies we are aware of, people reported that they are envied. However, the research did
not ensure that this impression is accurate. Only in one case did authors complement their
main studies with additional data to investigate this question. It suggested that perceptions of
being envied may sometimes correlate with actual envy judgments (Lee et al. 2018). Given
that, in other studies, people failed to perceive the envy of unacquainted competitors (Lange
et al. 2020), we are hesitant to conclude that perceptions of being envied are always accurate.
More research is needed on the chronic and situational determinants of people’s motivation as
well as their ability to show or to hide their envy. Such research should also provide insight
into when observers’ judgments are more likely to be accurate. At the same time, it is often
not important that these perceptions are accurate given that any reaction will mostly depend
on higher-ranked persons’ subjective perception that they are envied and not necessarily on
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 18
the accuracy of this perception. However, research on being envied has a different meaning
when it is about attributions of envy to others as compared to actually being envied.
Ideally, future research would even investigate all four steps simultaneously. One
context for such an investigation is a rivalry. A study could follow rivals over repeated
interactions in which they establish a hierarchy, measuring lower-ranked rivals’ envy and
higher-ranked rivals’ displays of rank as well as perceptions of being envied and ensuing
reactions. For instance, the study could investigate fans of known rivals in team sports in
which these teams repeatedly compete. Such a comprehensive study could advance our
understanding of the regulatory role of envy in social hierarchies.
Conclusion
Given their fundamental desire for social rank, people constantly try to advance in
social hierarchies or to protect their standing. We argue that one emotion contributing to these
efforts is envy. Importantly, envy shapes social hierarchies not only by governing the
behavior of those who are worse off. Envy also affects behavior in those who are its target.
Specifically, not only do lower-ranked persons react with envy to higher-ranked persons rank
displays to change the situation in their favor; higher-ranked persons also try to keep the
hierarchy in check by mitigating or distancing themselves from the threat enviers pose. We
hope that the present framework facilitates future research by structuring the existing
literature and pointing out promising avenues to illuminate how envy and being envied shape
social hierarchies.
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 19
Highly ranked Person
Prestige Display Benign Envy
Dominance Display Malicious Envy
4 2
Avoidance Person-oriented Cues
Approach Object-oriented Cues
Lower ranked Person
ENVY AND BEING ENVIED 20