The Effectiveness of Using Indonesian Language Learning Media
Mutiara Khairani/19016179
mutiarakhairani09@gmail.com
Learning media is a very important thing in supporting learning, especially in
Indonesian language lessons between teachers and students, both inside and outside the
classroom. It is undeniable that learning media is one aspect that must exist in learning. The
purpose of using the learning media itself is to facilitate the delivery of information related to
Indonesian language lessons in the form of subject matter or other things that are considered
important in the teaching and learning process. Of course, the trend of using learning media
in the 21st century is increasing in accordance with its development. The use of information
technology is an integral part of modern education (Mulyadi, et, al., 2019)
Efforts to use information and communication technology in Indonesian language
learning media are expected to improve the quality of education by developing today's
modern learning. Education is a form of progress. An advanced society is characterized by
the advancement of the quality education sector (Indriyani, et, Al., 2019). One way that can
be done to advance education is to use learning media that are suitable for students and also
of high quality.
The use of modern learning media that utilizes communication and information
technology in the 21st century introduces various creative innovations in supporting
Indonesian language learning to make it more interesting and arouse students' interest in
learning. Of course, if the students themselves already have a great interest then the lesson
information can be accepted by students easily. According to Ramadhan et al (2019), media
allows students to interact in the most modern, innovative but not too formal way in
educational activities.
The use of information technology in learning in the 21st century era can improve
the quality of education in a country. As we know that we are in the era of the industrial
revolution 4.0 which allows information technology to coexist with us. According to
Mulyadi, et al (2019), current technology can improve the quality of learning, because
technology has new concepts, such as computers, internet, multimedia, audio, video, and
animation, which greatly affect the quality of education. The use of modern technology is
capable and very effective in bringing about better education, effective use of time, and
lower costs (Mulyadi, et al., 2019).
By using modern learning media, it is easier for students to interact with each other
with teachers. The need for teachers to understand the times to encourage today's modern
learning that is tailored to the needs of students so that learning can take place well. Teachers
must have competence in choosing and using media in learning that is tailored to the needs of
students (Ramadhan, et al., 2019).
Various types of learning media are often used by teachers such as audio, visual, and
audiovisual media. One of them uses audio-visual media that involves various senses in a
learning process. Audiovisual media is media that has sound and image elements (Hartidini,
et al., 2018). Media provides direct experience, can be through computers and the internet
and all sources to communicate. (Novelti, et, al., 2018). The use of each type of media must
be able to be used by teachers in the teaching and learning process that is adapted to various
learning materials, especially in learning Indonesian. Teachers must be able to use interesting
and creative learning media for students. Teachers are expected to be able to use creative
media so that learning can be fun for students. According to Amalia et al (2018), this
audiovisual media looks more attractive because it contains two building elements, namely
images and sounds that make objects look alive and attractive.
To create an interesting, creative, efficient and innovative learning process, teachers
must have competence, select teaching materials from various sources, use the latest learning
tools; and using various media to create fun learning (Ramadhan, et, al., 2019). The existence
of this learning media is to support Indonesian language learning taught by the
teacher. Especially in the four aspects of skills that must be mastered by students. In learning
there are 4 aspects of language skills that must be mastered by students, namely listening,
speaking, reading, and writing skills (Andriani, et al., 2020). Students' language skills in
Indonesia need to be improved, especially for writing skills (Ramadhan, et al., 2018). From
these four aspects, teachers should be able to adjust how appropriate learning media are used
by teachers so that learning is also fun for students.
One of the media that can be used in this 21st century era is electronic media or
digital media. This electronic media allows the delivery of information in the form of audio,
visual, or audiovisual. The use of electronic media nowadays supports Indonesian language
learning, especially during the current pandemic. As we know, the COVID-19 pandemic has
spread widely in Indonesia. As a result of the spread of COVID-19, it affects many sectors
such as the economic sector, health, and even education. Until, the government issued a
policy to conduct distance learning or online to reduce the spread of covid.
For this reason, of course, this electronic media can be used as a support for online
learning so that education can continue even during the pandemic. One of them is whatsapp
media which is often used by teachers in the teaching and learning process. This is the
importance of why teachers must be able to master information technology and follow every
development of the times related to the media used in learning. According to (Ramadhan, et
al., 2019) the need for professional development of teachers in digital media literacy is not an
option but an obligation.
The use of interesting learning media will certainly arouse students' motivation to
learn. The information received can also be captured properly. this is in accordance with the
opinion of Zulhafizh, et, al. (2013) that one of the success of a person or student in mastering
and understanding the lesson is indicated by learning outcomes. For this reason, the success
of students in understanding learning, of course, is also based on interesting Indonesian
language learning media used by teachers in the teaching and learning process in the
classroom. If students' motivation increases in learning, the success will also be even greater.
Based on the questionnaire that the author has distributed, it is related to how
Effective the Utilization of Indonesian Language Learning Media is. The author has
distributed this questionnaire to equivalent high schools both in the city of Padang and
outside the city of Padang. Overall respondents who filled out the questionnaire, as many as
36 high school students or equivalent. This questionnaire was distributed to students in grades
X, XI, and XII. Filling out the questionnaire was dominated by class XII with 18 students or
50%, Class XI with 15 students or 41.7%, and Class X as many as 3 students or 8.3%. Of the
total respondents who filled out this questionnaire, it was more dominantly filled by women
with a total of 22 people or 61.1% and men amounting to 14 people or 38.9%. The results of
the percentage data taken through the google form. The results of the questionnaire are as
follows:
The first statement “Indonesian language teachers use interesting media in learning”
25% stated very often, 38.9% said often, 33.3%, and 2.8% said never. The second statement
"Teachers use electronic media in learning Indonesian" 16.7% said very often, 41.7% said
often, 36.1% said sometimes, and 5.6% said never. The third statement "Teachers use
whatsapp groups to support Indonesian language learning" 50% said very often, 38.9% said
often, 8.3% said sometimes, and 2.8% said never. The fourth statement “I feel less clear in
capturing the subject matter through the media used by teachers in learning Indonesian”
22.2% stated often, 72.2% stated sometimes, and 5.6% stated never. The fifth statement
"Teachers use audio, visual, and audiovisual media in supporting Indonesian language
learning" 27.8% said very often, 36.1% said often, 33.3% said sometimes, and 2.8% said
never . The sixth statement "I feel that the teacher has difficulty operating learning media
during Indonesian lessons" 5.6% said very often, 13.9% said often, 52.8% said sometimes
and 5.6 said never. The seventh statement "I feel learning Indonesian by using media is more
interesting than just lectures" 22.2% said very often, 44.4% said often, 25% said sometimes,
and 8.3% said never. The eighth statement “During the pandemic the Indonesian language
learning media used by teachers helped me understand the subject matter” 25% stated very
often, 44.4% said often, 25% said sometimes, and 5.6% said never. The ninth statement
"Teachers use power point media in learning Indonesian, so that it makes me understand
more" 16.7% said very often, 33.3% said often, 38.9% said sometimes, and 11.1% said no
once. The tenth statement "Teachers continue to innovate along with the times related to
media in Indonesian language learning" 33.3% said very often, 52.8% said often, 5.6% said
sometimes, and 8.3% said no once.
Based on the data from the distribution of the questionnaires that have been carried
out. The author can conclude that using learning media in Indonesian lessons is more
interesting and tends to be bored if the teacher only lectures. Although sometimes the
management and use of learning media by teachers still experience many obstacles, teachers
continue to strive to keep up with the times and utilize media to support effective and creative
learning. The use of learning media carried out by Indonesian language teachers so far can be
said to be effective because teachers are able to implement these media in Indonesian
language learning, especially during this pandemic which shifts face-to-face learning to
online learning. Electronic learning media can be used and operated properly by
teachers. The application of interesting Indonesian language learning media can make it
easier for students to receive information and understand Indonesian language subject matter
well.