Running head: PROACTIVE MINDSET 1
In Press, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
In the Mindset of Opportunity: Proactive Mindset, Perceived Opportunities, and Role Attitudes
Tessa M. Benson-Greenwald
Amanda B. Diekman
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405
Corresponding Author: Tessa Benson-Greenwald, tmbenson@iu.edu, Psychology Building, 1101 E 10th
Street, Bloomington, IN 47405
Author Note: This research was supported in part by a National Science Foundation grant awarded to
Amanda Diekman (GSE/RES-1232364). We have previously presented some of the data in the
manuscript at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association in Chicago (April 2017)
and at the annual meeting of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology in Atlanta (March 2018).
Acknowledgement: The authors thank Maggie Winstel, Melissa Fuesting, Mansi Joshi, Andrew White,
Heidi Vuletich, Mary Murphy, Stephanie Reeves, Dorainne Green, Jennifer LaCosse, Katelyn Kroeper,
Elise Ozier, Heidi Williams, and Caitlyn Jones for comments on drafts of the article. We also thank Alex
Dlugosz, Anusuya Bandyopadhyay, Melanie Cervantez, Benjamin Maddock, Nathaniel Merriot, Drew
Klinepeter-Persing, and Ruby Smith for their help collecting data for this project.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 2
Abstract
Perceiving roles as fulfilling goals offers motivational benefits to students, and yet the features
of individuals or contexts that align with seeing such role opportunities have not been studied
systematically. The current research investigated how these goal affordances are related to proactive
mindset, or a person’s belief that they can shape their contexts. Three studies examined how variation
in proactivity aligns with perceiving more communal and agentic goal opportunities in roles. Study 1
found that highly proactive college students (vs. less proactive students) tended to perceive their future
careers as fulfilling communal and agentic goals, which predicted positive career attitudes. Study 2
replicated this association, while ruling out behavioral flexibility as accounting for the proactivity-
positivity relationship. Study 3 experimentally tested whether growth-oriented contexts foster
proactivity. Proactive mindset aligns with more expansive views of roles as fulfilling fundamental
motives. These views, in turn, carry positive implications for one’s future career attitudes.
Key words: proactive mindset; motivation; affordances; role attitudes; social roles
PROACTIVE MINDSET 3
In the Mindset of Opportunity: Proactive Mindset, Perceived Opportunities, and Role Attitudes
In any context, two people might perceive their surroundings and their possibilities for action
quite differently. For example, two first-year physics majors might experience similar student roles in
many respects: They take the same courses and engage in similar activities. Even so, they may perceive
their opportunities differently. These perceived opportunities have documented consequences:
Individuals who perceive their roles as fulfilling valued goals express greater role interest and motivation
(Allen et al., 2018; Thoman et al., 2017), anticipate better performance in the role (Belanger et al.,
2017), and anticipate greater belonging in the role (Belanger et al., 2020). With evidence of these
benefits in hand, the question then turns to understanding more about the origins and correlates of
affordance beliefs. As we review below, perceived affordances can be shaped through direct
observation of what the role is: What do people in this role do? Yet we propose that another set of
relevant cognitions might involve not only beliefs about what is, but with beliefs about what might be.
Might this role be enacted in such a way to meet valued goals?
As we review below, substantial evidence shows that direct information about role activities
perceiving a wide range of goal opportunities are less examined. The current research examines
whether certain individuals or contexts hold a sense that roles can be enacted in different ways to fulfill
fundamental motives. It is these associations that we investigate in the current research. In particular,
we examine how affordance beliefs vary with proactivity (Bateman & Crant, 1993), or the sense that one
can mold the environment to their needs.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 4
This research investigates how contexts and individuals vary in proactivity and in turn with affordances
(i.e., beliefs that roles can fulfill valued goals). Essentially, a proactive orientation reflects the capacities
to perceive and act on the world not only as it is, but as it could be. For instance, individual differences
in employee proactivity predict creativity in work settings, and this creativity in turn predicts job
satisfaction (Kim et al., 2009). Such proactivity might be fostered in contexts that promote development,
such as growth-oriented contexts, as we explore below.
Why Perceived Affordances Matter: A Goal Congruity Perspective
Individuals move toward social roles that they see as affording their fundamental motives
(Diekman et al., 2017, 2020). The most frequently invoked fundamental motives are the dimensions of
agency and communality (Bakan, 1966; Fiske, 2003; Judd et al., 2005): Agency motives reflect needs for
independence, competition, and achievement, whereas communality motives reflect needs for
connection, altruism, and collaboration.
For example, science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields are commonly perceived
to lack other-oriented opportunities, and given these perceptions, communally-oriented people express
PROACTIVE MINDSET 5
less interest in STEM (Diekman, Brown, et al., 2010). Yet goal affordance perceptions are mutable:
Highlighting opportunities to meet communal goals (e.g., helping others) results in students expressing
more positivity toward entering STEM careers (Belanger et al., 2017; Diekman et al., 2011; see Schneider
et al., 2016, for similar finding for political career interest). Naturalistic variation also occurs: Biomedical
students’ perceptions of social-collaborative opportunity in science shift over time and predict their
interest in continuing in science (Allen et al., 2018).
Direct Sources of Affordance Beliefs: Information about Role Activities
One source of affordance beliefs is direct information about role activities, including what
people in the role do. Evidence for such direct sources comes from experimental studies that
manipulate role descriptions to include different kinds of activities. For example, participants randomly
assigned to read about a scientist whose work includes collaborative activity or prosocial purpose report
that science careers afford more communal goals (Diekman et al., 2011; Norman et al., 2021).
Descriptions of scientific research that include altruistic benefits also increased perceived communal
affordances, and in turn, student motivation (Brown, Smith, et al., 2015). Students who read about an
engineering course that included a service-learning component, where community service is directly
integrated into the course (versus one that did not), anticipated greater opportunity to fulfill communal
goals and reported greater likelihood of taking the course (Study 2; Belanger et al., 2017). When
perceivers see that STEM roles involve collaboration or altruism, their beliefs encompass a broad array
of goal fulfillment opportunities.
Other Potential Sources of Affordance Beliefs: Perceiving Possibility
A less investigated possibility is that a broader array of goal affordance beliefs might be
associated with individual or situational tendencies to see roles more expansively. Understanding how
individuals vary in their sense that roles can be shifted, and how this perception aligns with varying
affordance beliefs, can contribute to understanding how individuals navigate the social structure. Even
PROACTIVE MINDSET 6
among individuals with similar cultural background or levels of STEM experience, individuals report a
range of perceptions of goal opportunities within a career field. For example, students vary widely in
perceiving STEM careers as fulfilling communal goals (Brown, Thoman, et al., 2015). Because
affordances are a mental representation of the outer world, they might be rooted both in aspects of the
social role (e.g., affordances in a physics classroom may differ from those in a social work classroom), as
well as in properties of the individual perceiver (e.g., two physics majors may differ in their perceived
affordances). Considering variation in proactivity can provide insight into this within-person variability in
perceptions of affordances.
This research investigates how proactivity – perceiving the possibility to enact change to one’s
environment – relates to perceived opportunities within the social structure. There is reason to expect
that proactivity will be related to either or both agentic and communal affordances. Agentic affordances
might be especially pronounced among proactive individuals because proactivity is defined as the sense
that one can enact change (Bateman & Crant, 1993; Seibert et al., 1999). A sense of the self as a
proactive agent likely corresponds to seeing agentic opportunities in one’s roles (i.e., heightened agentic
affordances). Communal affordances might be especially pronounced among proactive individuals
because proactivity may involve with seeing opportunities where others typically do not. Even in the
achievement-oriented contexts of college, highly proactive individuals might see heightened communal
affordances in their roles. Overall, the tendency to be proactive might be associated with perceiving a
broader range of opportunities, both communal and agentic.
Individual and Contextual Differences in Proactivity
Individual Differences in Proactivity
Individuals vary in their sense that they can enact change to their surroundings: Proactive
mindset encapsulates a belief that one can effect environmental change despite situational constraints
(Bateman & Crant, 1993). For example, an individual with a proactive mindset might innovate their role
PROACTIVE MINDSET 7
or challenge the status quo to ensure their goals are met (Crant, 2000). This construct thus can
illuminate how people construe the social structure: A hallmark of proactive mindset is the sense that
one can engage in one’s role in innovative and flexible ways. Proactivity is associated with an
entrepreneurial orientation, or belief that one can pursue opportunities across organizational
boundaries (Fuller & Marler, 2009). Proactive orientation also relates to self-reports of flexibility in role
behaviors: Proactive employees engage more in specific tasks that broaden job scope and exert more
control over the ways their roles are carried out (Fuller & Marler, 2009; Parker et al., 1997, 2006). For
example, proactive office employees might enact behavioral role flexibility by taking responsibility for
tasks outside of defined job descriptions (e.g., ensuring work unfinished by others is completed on time;
Parker et al., 2006) or working to acquire a wide range of skills and knowledge (e.g., participating in
voluntary professional development seminars; Parker et al., 1997).
Proactivity is related to but distinct from other personality constructs. Although proactivity is
positively associated with four of the Big Five factors (openness to experience, conscientiousness,
extraversion, neuroticism; Fuller & Marler, 2009), the effects of proactivity cannot be reduced to the Big
Five (Bateman & Crant, 1993; Fuller & Marler, 2009). Likewise, proactivity differs from other
dispositional factors such as optimism (Tolentino et al., 2014) and locus of control (Bateman & Crant,
1993; Fuller & Marler, 2009). Thus, relative to other personality constructs, proactive mindset offers a
unique understanding of how people tend to navigate their social roles.
The focus on perceptions of roles lends some advantages to considering individual differences in
proactive mindset compared to individual differences in growth vs. fixed mindset. Most notably, both
proactivity and growth mindsets share a common element of incorporating change, but these two
constructs differ in the inclusion of the environment as a target of that change. Proactivity targets
changing the environment to suit one’s own needs and goals (Bateman & Crant, 1993), whereas growth
mindset focuses on potential for the self to develop (Dweck, 1999, 2006). Because the focus of this
PROACTIVE MINDSET 8
research is on beliefs and attitudes about roles, we considered proactive mindset as the individual-
difference variable most relevant to capturing perceived capacity to change the environment. Yet, the
question of what contexts promote proactivity is also relevant. Here, we drew on the literature about
organizational mindset (organizational contexts that promote growth or fixed mindset; Murphy &
Dweck, 2010), as we examine next.
Do Growth-Oriented Contexts Foster Proactivity?
Proactivity may be fostered in contexts perceived as promoting a range of possibilities. A
growth-oriented context is one characterized by beliefs that ability can be developed over time,
whereas a fixed-oriented context is one characterized by beliefs that ability is unchangeable (Murphy &
Dweck, 2010). When leaders in a particular context are seen as promoting growth, perceivers may infer
that many opportunities exist within a role.
The signaling of multiple possibilities in growth contexts has been documented in educational
and occupational settings. For example, students who were randomly assigned to consider classes with
faculty who expressed growth mindset (vs. fixed mindset) perceived both communal and agentic goal
opportunities in STEM courses and careers (Fuesting et al., 2019). Further, the sense that one can
engage in a range of innovative behaviors may be facilitated by growth-oriented contexts because they
foster trust. When participants were randomly assigned to read growth-oriented (vs. fixed) mission
statements, they perceived cultural norms characterized by integrity, innovation, and collaboration in
the company culture (Canning et al., 2020). This accumulating evidence suggests that growth contexts
highlight a range of goal opportunities in a role. In the current research, we seek to understand whether
growth contexts foster proactivity, and this proactivity in turn is associated with broader ranges of
perceived opportunities.
Current Research
PROACTIVE MINDSET 9
Across three studies, we investigated how proactive mindset relates to role perceptions and
attitudes toward future roles. The grounding of this research in goal congruity theory led us to start
from the established effect of perceived affordances on role attitudes (e.g., Allen et al., 2018; Diekman
et al., 2011; Schneider et al., 2016), and then to ask how individual differences or contextual differences
in proactivity might align with perceived variation in affordances. For this initial investigation, we focus
on documenting whether individual variation in proactivity is associated with variation in goal
affordances, and in turn, with role attitudes. Although not investigated here, we fully anticipate that
relationships among proactivity, role experience, and affordance beliefs are reciprocal over time. For
example, it is likely that individuals who experience roles with a wide range of activities perceive higher
affordances, and in turn learn to see themselves as proactive.
In the current research, Studies 1 and 2 document associations between proactivity and
affordance beliefs. Study 1 investigated whether college students who were high or low in proactivity
tended to differentially see their future careers as fulfilling communal and agentic goals. Study 2
replicated the association between proactivity and affordances, while also testing whether anticipated
behavioral flexibility in the role can account for this relationship. Finally, Study 3 examined a contextual
basis of proactivity: Here, we employed experimental methods to test whether individuals randomly
assigned to recall growth- vs. fixed-oriented contexts reported greater proactivity and greater
affordance beliefs. Data for all studies are available at
Study 1
Study 1 tested the association between individual differences in proactive mindset and role
cognitions with college students at two time points. We investigated whether proactivity is related to
perceiving heightened opportunities for agency, for communality, or for both motives. Finally, we
PROACTIVE MINDSET 10
examined whether these individual differences relate to perceived affordances and, in turn, to career
attitudes, given prior experimental evidence demonstrating that causal link (e.g., Diekman et al., 2011).
To date, little research has examined proactive orientation within student populations. Indeed,
most research has been conducted with samples of employed college graduates or MBA students with
prior work experience (Bateman & Crant, 1993; Fuller & Marler, 2009; Parker et al., 1997; Parker &
Sprigg, 1999; Seibert et al., 1999). Understanding any benefits associated with proactive mindset among
college students is important for two reasons. Developmentally, college students hold less crystallized
attitudes than older adults (Sears, 1986), and young adulthood is marked by exploration of different
occupational pathways. As such, proactive mindsets might be especially important for college students’
satisfaction with their majors or commitment to a particular career path. Further, the impact of
proactivity at the college stage can initiate cumulating effects for career trajectories, given that
decisions or habits initiated in college set the stage for future opportunities. Small shifts in perception or
behavior early in a developmental process can yield large differences in outcomes if early shifts set into
motion cumulating processes (Yeager & Walton, 2011). The role of college student is inherently one that
is in service of a different future role. College students’ own sense that they can shape their
environments to fulfill valued goals can especially matter in achieving that reality precisely because
those future roles are not yet set.
Method
Participants. The sample consisted of 146 undergraduate students (82 women, 62 men, 2 not
reported; Age: M = 19.31, SD = 2.16) from a midsize Midwestern university who participated in
exchange for payment or partial fulfillment of a course requirement and who completed measures at
both time points. An additional 88 respondents completed measures at Time 1 but did not respond at
Time 2 (63.7% response rate) and were not included in analyses. Respondents who did not participate at
Time 2 reported a lower GPA (M = 3.23, SD = 0.63) than continuing participants (M = 3.40, SD = 0.42),
PROACTIVE MINDSET 11
t(114.15) = -2.10, p = .04, d = 0.31; no other differences emerged on any variables of interest, ps >.16.
The sample included 122 participants identifying as European American, 8 as Asian American, 3 as
African American, 3 as Hispanic American, 9 as other, and 1 not reported.
Most of the sample (n=145) reported a specific major, with the other participant reporting
undecided, and the majority (n=126) reported STEM majors of natural science, engineering,
computing/technology fields, or mathematics. The remaining participants (n=19) reported majors in
business, social sciences, education, or fine arts. Additionally, 138 participants reported a specific career
intention (94.5%) and 8 had not decided on a career (5.5%).1
Sensitivity analyses showed sufficient power (0.80; alpha=.05) to detect small-to-medium sized
regression coefficients in all analyses (f2 = 0.05 for models with two to five predictors; Faul et al., 2007,
2009).
Procedure. Online survey data were collected at two points approximately one year apart as
part of a larger data collection. Only measures relevant to current hypotheses are reported here; other
measures and results are available from the authors. All hypotheses and analyses presented here are
new; analyses testing different hypotheses that employed other measures and/or subsamples have
been published previously (Belanger et al., 2020; Diekman et al., 2020). Participants were recruited
either from an email invitation delivered to introductory STEM courses or an advertisement in the
psychology participant pool. For all potential participants, the recruitment message called for STEM
majors to take part in a longitudinal examination of perceptions about whether certain careers fulfill
valued goals.
After granting informed consent, participants responded to the measures described below and
were debriefed. Participants were compensated with a $10 gift card or partial course credit. Participants
1 Results remain the same when participants who were undecided on their major or career are excluded from
analyses.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 12
from the first phase of the study (Time 1) were e-mailed approximately one year after their initial
participation to participate in the second phase of the study (Time 2). The recruitment message was
identical to the Time 1 message. After granting informed consent, participants responded to the
measures described below as part of a larger battery of questionnaires. Participants who responded to
Time 2 were compensated with a $15 gift card.
Measures.
Proactive mindset. Participants completed the short version of the proactive personality scale
(Seibert et al., 1999). They rated their agreement on scales ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7
(strongly agree) for each of 10 items (i.e., I am constantly on the lookout for new ways to improve my
life; Wherever I have been, I have been a powerful force for constructive change; Nothing is more
exciting than seeing my ideas turn into reality; If I see something I don’t like, I fix it; No matter what the
odds, if I believe in something I will make it happen; I love being a champion for my ideas, even against
others’ opposition; I excel at identifying opportunities; I am always looking for better ways to do things;
If I believe in an idea, no obstacle will prevent me from making it happen; I can spot a good opportunity
long before others can). These items showed high internal consistency and a proactive mindset index
was created by averaging across items within each time point (Time 1, α = 0.89; Time 2, α = 0.92; all
reported alphas are Cronbach’s α).
Career affordances. Participants rated how much they perceived their future careers to offer
opportunities to meet communal and agentic goals. Participants responded to several items beginning
with the statement, “In your future career, will you be able to. . .” Participants considered several
different goals (Steinberg & Diekman, 2018). The items consisted of 8 communal affordances (providing
direct help to others; helping society; improving the lives of others through direct contact; improving the
lives of others through innovation; working face-to-face with others; participating in the broader
professional community; directly mentoring others; and serving as a role model in the community (Time
PROACTIVE MINDSET 13
1, α = 0.84; Time 2, α =0.88) intermixed with 3 agentic affordances (gaining power; achieving; and being
independent; Time 1, α = 0.50; Time 2, α = 0.65).2 Participants rated each opportunity from 1 (Not at All)
to 7 (Extremely). Items were averaged to form indices of communal and agentic affordances.
Career attitudes. Participants rated their agreement with two items on scales from 1 (Not at all)
to 7 (Extremely): “I will enjoy my future career” and “How sure are you that this will be your future
career?” Items were averaged [Time 1, r(139) = 0.39; Time 2, r(136) = 0.59].3
Results
To investigate the primary question of whether individual differences in proactivity are
associated with perceptions of affordances, we examine correlations between proactivity and
affordance measures. As a robustness check, we investigate correlations at two time points (early in
college and one year later). We then employ mediational analyses to examine whether individual
differences in proactivity relate to perceiving both agentic and communal affordances, which in turn
relate to career attitudes. Although this analysis does not provide causal evidence for this relationship, it
allows us to understand whether both types of affordances are plausible mediators of a potential
proactivity-career positivity relationship.
Initial analyses tested for participant gender effects but did not find moderation by or main
effects of gender. Further, when we controlled for gender in analyses, results remained significant and
of equivalent magnitude (see SOM for analyses with gender). Thus, gender was omitted from analyses.
Individual differences in proactivity are associated with perceived career affordances. As
expected, more proactive individuals saw greater goal opportunities in their careers, and these heighted
2 Although the alpha for agentic affordances is low, similar patterns emerged when items were examined
separately. We retained the index for simplicity of reporting.
3 Similar patterns emerged when items were examined separately. We retained the index for simplicity of
reporting.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 14
relationships are robust across time: Students both early in their college trajectory and one year later
show similar magnitude relationships. The correlations at Time 1 and Time 2 did not significantly differ
for communal affordances (Z = -0.92, p = .36) or agentic affordances (Z = -0.78, p = .44). Thus, individuals
with a more proactive mindset tended to see their future careers as affording both communal and
agentic goals.
Time 1 Time 2
Communal Agentic Communal Agentic
affordances affordances affordances affordances
Proactive mindset .25** .46*** .35*** .53***
Communal affordances — .30*** — .52***
Agentic affordances — —
Note. N = 146. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001
Proactivity, perceived goal affordances, and career attitudes. We then employed path analysis
to investigate the plausibility of relationships in which individual differences in proactivity are associated
with perceiving both communal and agentic affordances and whether these perceptions were, in turn,
associated with more positive career attitudes. We note that as with mediational analyses generally, this
analysis makes several assumptions (see Rohrer & Hünermund, 2021). We specifically provide
information with regard to three assumptions: linearity of relationships, interactive effects of predictor
and mediators, and other causal influences. First, to investigate whether this analysis violated
assumptions of linearity, we examined plots of the residuals versus predicted values. This examination
provided support for linear relationships in this model. Second, moderation analyses did not find
significant interactions between proactivity and affordances (all ps > .08). Third, inferring causality from
this analysis is not possible because a causal interpretation of the mediational analysis would assume
PROACTIVE MINDSET 15
the successful measurement of and control for all common causes of perceived affordances and career
attitudes. We cannot rule out other variables that would play a causal role in shaping affordances and
attitudes, and indeed the goal congruity perspective views these as important to investigate (see
Diekman et al., 2017, 2020). We thus interpret the mediational analysis as providing information about
plausible causal sequences, which is worthwhile in understanding how individual differences in
proactivity relate to the known affordance-attitude relationship.
We tested a parallel path model, controlling for Time 1 career attitudes (Hayes PROCESS macro
communal and agentic affordances: Early college proactivity was associated with perceiving greater
opportunities for both communion and agency in future careers. Consistent with prior experimental and
correlational evidence, both communal and agentic affordances were positively related to positive
career attitudes, although the indirect effect was significant only for agentic affordances. These
mediational analyses are consistent with a model in which early proactive mindset fosters a beneficial
set of cognitions. Controlling for Time 1 attitudes, individuals who are more proactively oriented early in
college see heightened career opportunities for both communal and agentic goals later in college.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 16
ᶧ p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001
Discussion
This initial evidence documents that individual differences in proactivity were positively
associated with beliefs that one’s career would fulfill fundamental motives. Proactive individuals do not
simply have greater perceptions of agentic opportunity or greater perceptions of communal
opportunity, but a more expansive view of roles that includes both. Further, these positive associations
appear to be robust at different points in the college trajectory. Notably, this study illustrates these
proactive tendencies among college students, rather than employees. Understanding how individual
differences in students’ proactive mindset relate to their perceptions of their future roles provides
insight into the psychological processes at play as students navigate the social structure.
Study 2
Study 2 investigated whether the role cognitions associated with proactivity can be explained by
a general tendency to enact one’s roles flexibly, rather than through involving perceived opportunities
to fulfill motives. Is it that more proactive individuals perceive latitude to behave flexibly in their roles,
and this perceived behavioral flexibility is associated with more positive attitudes?
The logic for examining anticipated behavioral flexibility draws from reasoning that this process
might be parallel to the benefits of cognitive flexibility (Martin & Anderson, 1998; Martin & Rubin,
1995), which includes awareness of multiple options available across situations and a willingness to
adapt. The goal congruity perspective diverges from this reasoning by emphasizing that the perceptions
of multiple options matter especially if those options evoke intrinsic interest (e.g., Harackiewicz &
Sansone, 1991); in other words, motivation is key. We thus hypothesize that greater role positivity aligns
with the perceived ability to fulfill fundamental motives, and not merely from perceiving latitude to
PROACTIVE MINDSET 17
engage in a variety of tasks (i.e., behavioral flexibility). For example, a highly proactive student might
seek out opportunities to engage in community outreach about their scientific research. This task could
include a wider range of behaviors (e.g., speaking to the public, organizing, scheduling) than is typically
included in a student role. Yet, according to goal congruity theory, such behavioral flexibility will not
contribute additional motivational benefits unless the wider version of the role is construed as fulfilling
fundamental motives. In this example, community outreach might be construed as fulfilling goals for
science to have altruistic impact, and that heightened communal affordance would be predicted to
foster positivity toward a scientific career. To test this alternative directly, we examined whether
positive career attitudes are more strongly associated with behavioral flexibility or with perceptions that
the role will afford fundamental motives.
Method
Participants. The sample consisted of 152 undergraduate students (110 women, 40 men, 1
transgender male, 1 not reported; Age: M=19.42, SD=1.24) from a large Midwestern university who
participated in exchange for payment or partial fulfillment of a course requirement. The sample included
114 participants identifying as White/European American, 18 as Asian/Asian American, 9 as
Black/African American, 4 as Hispanic American/ Latinx, 5 as multiracial, 2 as other/not reported.
Most of the sample (n=150) reported a specific major and 2 reported undecided. Ninety-six
participants were majoring in business, social sciences, education, or fine arts and 54 were majoring in
STEM.
Sensitivity analyses showed sufficient power (0.80; alpha=.05) to detect small-to-medium sized
regression coefficients in all analyses (f2 = 0.05 for models with one to three predictors; Faul et al., 2007,
2009).
PROACTIVE MINDSET 18
Procedure. Participants reported their beliefs and attitudes toward their major and career and
completed a measure of proactivity. Finally, participants answered demographic questions, were
debriefed, and were thanked for their participation.
Measures. The measures of proactive mindset (α=0.89) and career attitudes [r(149) = 0.48, p <
.001] were identical to Study 1.
Role affordances. Participants rated how much they perceived both their major and future
careers to offer opportunities to meet communal and agentic goals. Participants responded to several
items beginning with the statement, “As a student for the courses in your major, are you able to…” and
included three communal goals (be altruistic, work with others, and help others) and three agentic goals
(achieve, gain power, be independent). Items for future career affordances were identical but began
with the statement, “In your future career, will you be able to…”. Participants rated each opportunity
from 1 (Not at All) to 7 (Extremely). Items were averaged across the roles to form indices of communal
affordances (α = 0.80) and agentic affordances (α = 0.71).
Behavioral flexibility. Participants rated how flexibly they believed they could behave in their
major or future career on 12 face-valid items.4 For the 6 items related to the major, items began “When
I think about my major…” and included the following: It is clear that there is variety in how to behave in
my major, There are not many options for how to pursue my major*, Everyone in my major seems to be
the same*, I feel I could choose my own way in my major, Everyone seems to do things in my major
slightly differently, and There is only one path to success in my major*.5 For the 6 items related to future
career, the words “my major” were replaced with “my future career.” Participants rated their
agreement on scales from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree). A principal component factor
4 Existing measures did not suit the purposes of this study because they focused on specific tasks in employment
contexts (Jackson et al., 1993; Parker et al., 1997, 2006; Parker & Sprigg, 1999).
5 Items marked with an asterisk were reverse-scored.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 19
analysis of the 12 items confirmed one factor that accounted for 33.4% of the variance with an
eigenvalue of 4.00. These items were averaged to form an index of behavioral flexibility (α=0.81).
Results
but did not find moderation by or main effects of gender. Further, when we controlled for participant
gender in analyses, results remained significant and of equivalent magnitude. Thus, participant gender
was omitted from analyses.
Communal Agentic Behavioral Career
Affordances Affordances Flexibility Attitudes
Proactive Mindset .31*** .27** .20* .28**
Communal Affordances — .54*** .19* .34***
Agentic Affordances — .23* .31***
Behavioral Flexibility — .09
Note. N = 152. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001
Proactive mindset, affordances, behavioral flexibility, and career attitudes. We examined a
parallel path model to examine affordances or behavioral flexibility as plausible mediators between
samples). As before, we address three assumptions involved in mediational analyses (Rohrer &
Hünermund, 2021). Examination of plots of residuals versus predicted values provided support for linear
relationships in this model. Further, moderation analyses did not find interactions among proactivity,
affordances, and behavior flexibility (all ps > .14). Finally, we cannot rule out measurement error or
other potential causal variables, and so we cannot infer causality from this analysis.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 20
Proactivity was associated with both types of affordances, as well as with behavioral flexibility.
Communal affordances were positively associated with career attitudes, whereas agentic affordances
and behavioral flexibility were not significantly related to career attitudes. Similar to Study 1,
affordances are positively related to career attitudes, although here the association is only significant for
communal affordances. Most important, this analysis demonstrates that it is not the case that
association between proactivity and role attitudes can be reduced to perceiving greater latitude to
behave flexibly in the role.
Note. The figures present unstandardized beta coefficients. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001
Discussion
This study provides further evidence that proactivity is associated with heightened perceptions
of both communal and agentic opportunities in roles. Yet, the tendency for these more expansive
affordances to be associated with role positivity cannot be reduced to generalized perceptions of
behavioral flexibility in roles. Individual differences in proactive mindset predicted variation in the sense
PROACTIVE MINDSET 21
that one could behave more flexibly in current and future professional roles, but these perceptions of
flexibility did not directly predict career attitudes. Instead, seeing possibilities to fulfill fundamental
motives (in these data, particularly communal motives) appears to be a robust pathway to positive role
attitudes. We note that Study 1 and Study 2 differ in whether communal affordances or agentic
affordances significantly predict role positivity. This variation across studies might be due to difference
in the design (longitudinal in Study 1; cross-sectional in Study 1), to the affordance measures (career
affordances in Study 1; major and career affordances in Study 2), or to the other variables included in
the models (Time 1 career attitudes in Study 1; behavioral flexibility in Study 2). Yet despite this
variation, we note that proactivity is consistently positively associated with affordances, and perceiving
a greater range of opportunities, whether communal or agentic, is positively associated with role
attitudes. Together, Studies 1 and 2 demonstrate that individual differences in proactive mindset are
associated with a more expansive perspective of the motivational opportunities within roles, and these
perceived motivational opportunities relate to beneficial views of one’s future roles.
Study 3
Study 3 examines what contexts might set in motion the sense that people see themselves as
able to shape their environment to meet their goals. This study investigated whether proactivity is
fostered by contexts known to promote expansiveness of goal opportunities. In prior research, growth-
oriented contexts (vs. fixed-oriented contexts) were perceived as providing opportunities for both
communal and agentic goals (Fuesting et al., 2019). In Study 3, we investigated whether psychological
immersion in growth-oriented contexts (vs. fixed contexts) elicited greater proactive responses. We then
examine whether the associations between those proactive responses, affordances, and role attitudes
replicate the patterns demonstrated in Studies 1 and 2.
Method
PROACTIVE MINDSET 22
Participants. Participants were 124 undergraduate students (39 men, 84 women, 1 not
reported; Age: M = 18.69, SD = 1.05) from a large Midwestern university who participated in exchange
for partial fulfillment of an introductory psychology course requirement. The sample included 91
participants identifying as European American, 8 as African American, 12 as Asian American, 6 as
Hispanic/Latinx, 5 as multiracial, and 2 not reported.
The majority of the sample (n=118) reported a specific major; few (n=6) were undecided. Of
those reporting a major, 67 reported business, social sciences, education, or fine arts, and 51 reported
STEM.
Sensitivity analyses showed sufficient power (0.80; alpha=.05) to detect medium-sized effects
(Faul et al., 2007, 2009). Independent samples t-tests were powered to detect an effect size of d = 0.51
or larger, and mixed model ANOVAs with 2 groups and 2 dependent measures could detect within-
between interactions with an effect size of f2 = 0.13 or larger.
Procedure. Participants considered their math or science courses “from the past few years” and
then were randomly assigned to consider an instructor who exemplified a growth or a fixed mindset
(adapted from Fuesting et al., 2019).
Participants in the growth mindset condition read the following:
Today we are interested in a math or science course that was taught by a teacher or
professor who most strongly believed that intelligence or talent in math or science can
be grown and developed through hard work, effort, practice, and persistence.
Participants in the fixed mindset condition read the following:
Today we are interested in a math or science course that was taught by a teacher or
professor who most strongly believed that intelligence or talent in math or science is
just one of those things that is innate, in that some people just have it and others don’t
regardless of how hard they try.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 23
Participants provided either the course name or instructor and then responded in writing to the
prompts, “Please take a few minutes to write about what this was like, how you felt, and what you did.”
Participants could not advance to the next screen until 2 minutes had elapsed.
Measures.
Proactive mindset. Participants completed a measure of context-specific proactive mindset by
responding to the following prompt: “Consider your reflection about what it was like to be in this
professor’s class. As a student enrolled in that class, how much did you feel encouraged to…” and
responded to each item on a scale from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very much). The adapted proactive mindset
items were nearly identical to the measure used in Studies 1 and 2, with slight wording changes to
General Proactivity (Seibert et al., 1999) Context-Specific Proactivity
Please rate your agreement with the As a student enrolled in that class, how much
following statements. did you feel encouraged to…
I am constantly on the lookout for new ways Be on the lookout for new ways to improve
to improve my life. your life.
Wherever I have been, I have been a powerful Be a more powerful force for constructive
force for constructive change. change.
Nothing is more exciting than seeing my ideas Be excited about seeing your ideas turn into
turn into reality. reality.
If I see something I don’t like, I fix it. Fix things if you see something you don’t like.
No matter what the odds, if I believe in Make it happen if you believe in something,
something I will make it happen. no matter what the odds.
I love being a champion for my ideas, even Be the champion for your ideas, even against
against others opposition others’ opposition.
I excel at identifying opportunities. Excel at identifying opportunities.
If I believe in an idea, no obstacle will prevent Let no obstacle prevent you from making your
me from making it happen. ideas happen if you believe in them.
I can spot an opportunity long before others Spot a good opportunity long before others
can. can.
I am always looking for better ways to do
things.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 24
Note. Both general and context-specific proactivity items are provided for comparison. Study 3
participants responded only to context-specific proactivity items.
Career affordances.6 Participants considered how much the class encouraged them to focus on
different goal opportunities in their careers. Beginning with the statement, “As a student enrolled in
that class, how much did you feel encouraged to...”, participants responded 4 items focused on
communal career affordances (think about how your work benefits others, think about how a career in
this field will help others in the future, focus on how this coursework leads to the ultimate goal of making
a difference in the world, think about how people in this profession ultimately make the world a better
place; α = 0.92) and 3 items focused on agentic career affordances (think about how much money people
in this profession make, focus on how much status a career in this field would give me in society, think
about how a career in this field would allow me to be independent; α = 0.84). These items were rated on
scales from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very much).
Career attitudes. Participants reported attitudes toward a career in a field related to the target
course. They responded to three items: “Please rate your general impression of what it would be like to
have a career in a field related to this course” [from 1 (Very negative) to 7 (Very positive)]; “How much
would you enjoy working in a career in a field related to this course?”; “How successful would you be
working in a career in a field related to this course” [from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very much)]. Items were
averaged to form an index of career attitudes (α=0.86).
Results
Initial analyses tested for participant gender effects but did not find moderation by or main
effects of gender. Further, when we controlled for gender in analyses, results remained significant and
of equivalent magnitude. Thus, gender was omitted from analyses. Correlations among variables are
6 An initial auxiliary purpose of this study was to examine whether examining how proactivity relates to more
psychologically distant versus close goal affordances. Because this investigation was not central to the goal of this
paper and the evidence for those claims was weaker, we removed these analyses from the main text. For
transparency, we report them in the online supplement.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 25
related to both communal and agentic affordances.
Communal Agentic Career
Affordances Affordances Attitudes
Proactive Mindset .64*** .40*** .46***
Communal Affordances — .59*** .65**
Agentic Affordances — .51***
Note. N = 124. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001
Growth contexts foster proactivity. As predicted, an independent samples t-test found that
participants considering the growth context reported greater proactivity (M = 4.85, SD = 1.47) than
those considering the fixed context (M = 3.84, SD = 1.71); t(122) = -3.54, 95% CI = [0.45, 1.86], p = .001,
d = 0.64.
Growth contexts, proactivity, and perceived affordances. Next, we investigated whether
context-based proactivity was associated with perceptions of goal opportunities and positive career
attitudes. We tested a serial-parallel mediation model in which context predicted proactivity, which
predicted communal and agentic career affordances, which in turn predicted career attitudes (see
mediational analyses make assumptions. The assumption of linearity was supported through
examination of residuals versus predicted values plots. Moderation analyses did not find significant
interactions (all ps > .64). As with Studies 1 and 2, inferring causality from this analysis is not possible
because we cannot rule out the possibility of measurement error or the causal influence of unmeasured
variables.
greater proactivity, proactivity is associated with both communal and agentic career affordances, and
affordances are associated with positive career attitudes (Contrast = 0.18, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.42]).
PROACTIVE MINDSET 26
Discussion
This experimental design highlights the causal role of proactivity-supportive contexts in
promoting proactive mindset, which in turn is associated with expanded views of opportunities in roles.
When individuals recalled educational contexts they perceived as growth-oriented (vs. fixed), they
reported greater proactivity and more positive attitudes toward careers associated with topics of that
particular educational context. Contextual proactivity was associated with beliefs that both communal
and agentic goals could be fulfilled.
General Discussion
Proactive mindset aligns with different mental representations of roles. Across three studies,
individuals who expressed more proactive mindsets reported more expansive views of roles as fulfilling
fundamental motives of agency and communality. In turn, these more expansive views were associated
PROACTIVE MINDSET 27
with positivity toward relevant career pathways. Further, this research identified a contextual cause of
proactivity in situations perceived as promoting individuals’ growth.
Because the studies employed similar measures, we summarize the central relationships with an
positively to perceived communal affordances (95% CI = [0.37, 0.52], z = 9.82, p < .001) and agentic
affordances (95% CI = [0.34, 0.50], z = 9.19, p < .001). These perceived goal affordances were, in turn,
associated with more positive attitudes toward anticipated careers. Indeed, both communal affordances
(95% CI = [0.40, 0.55], z = 10.52, p < .001) and agentic affordances (95% CI = [0.37, 0.53], z = 9.95, p <
.001) were consistently associated with positive role attitudes, consistent with prior research (e.g.,
Brown, Thoman, et al., 2015; Diekman et al., 2011).
N Proactivity and Affordances and
Affordances Role Attitudes
Communal Agentic Communal Agentic
Study 1 146 .39 .58 .44 .54
Study 2 152 .31 .27 .34 .31
Study 3 124 .64 .40 .65 .43
Overall 422 .45 .39 .48 .45
Note: All effect sizes are provided in r. Role attitudes include certainty and positivity. The overall effect size
includes the partial correlations among Study 1 Time 2 variables, controlling for Time 1 variables. The meta-
analytic effects remained significant, in the same direction, and of similar strength in calculations that either used
Time 2 variables without controlling for Time 1 variables or only used Time 1 variables.
Theoretical Implications
These findings expand social structural perspectives by exploring how individuals’ cognitive
processes might shape their attitudes toward role trajectories. A core claim of social structural theories
is that roles influence people’s attitudes and cognitions (Diekman, Eagly, et al., 2010; Eagly & Wood,
2012); this current paper addresses the plausibility of a reciprocal path in which individuals cognitively
construct their roles. Proactivity – whether assessed as an individual difference or elicited by
PROACTIVE MINDSET 28
experimental manipulation – is associated with more expansive beliefs about the opportunities available
in current and future roles. Hence, understanding proactive mindset can further elucidate how
individuals are influenced by and influence the social structure, consistent with cultural models of the
self (Markus & Kitayama, 2010).
The current work extends the literature on individual differences in proactivity by identifying
differential perceptions of role affordances as potential mechanisms through which proactivity might be
associated with positive career attitudes. Prior research has documented that general perceptions of
behavioral flexibility in roles relate to proactivity (Fuller & Marler, 2009), and Study 2 replicates that
association. Yet the current paper provides a novel contribution by delineating that perceived
opportunities to fulfill fundamental motives might matter above and beyond anticipated behavioral
flexibility. This more nuanced understanding of the potential mechanisms underlying the benefits of
proactivity can provide important insights into how individuals cognitively construct their roles.
Practical Implications
These studies can provide insight to developing interventions to promote educational or career
motivation and persistence. Prior research has firmly demonstrated the associations between proactive
mindset and a variety of career-related outcomes (e.g., positivity, number of promotions; Fuller &
Marler, 2009), yet little research has examined contextual antecedents of proactivity or how proactivity
might heighten perceived role affordances. An implication of the current research is that organizations
need not recruit “proactive people” but, rather, can focus on how to promote more expansive views of
roles among existing organizational members. For example, what policies or structures can
communicate that individuals have the ability to shape their roles?
Particularly promising is that this research provides novel evidence about a contextual root of
proactive mindset. Put simply, proactivity is not solely a property of individuals; proactivity can also
emanate from particular contexts. Traditionally, proactivity has been treated as a feature of a person,
PROACTIVE MINDSET 29
and measures have assessed levels of proactive personality (Bateman & Crant, 1993; Fuller & Marler,
2009; Seibert et al., 1999). The current work also draws attention to proactivity as a feature of
situations. Certain contexts are more likely to elicit proactive responses than others. Students who
considered growth contexts (vs. fixed contexts) expressed more proactivity, which, in turn, was
associated with positive career attitudes. Students who recalled instructional settings that emphasized
growth and development reported higher levels of proactive responses in those contexts. These findings
build on the accumulating evidence about the consequences of organizational mindsets (e.g., Canning et
al., 2020; Emerson & Murphy, 2015; Fuesting et al., 2019) by demonstrating proactivity as a novel
benefit of growth-focused contexts.
Limitations and Future Directions
The current studies investigated how proactive mindset aligns with beliefs about available
opportunities in current or future roles. The correlational nature of these data does not allow us to
speak definitively to causation in one direction or another; indeed, goal congruity theory maps out
several cyclical relationships in which role experience shapes cognitions and motivations and vice-versa
(Diekman et al., 2017). The foundations of this line of inquiry in goal congruity theory led us to start
from the demonstrated effect of perceived affordances on role attitudes, and then to ask how
proactivity might align with variation in affordances. We anticipate that the relationships among
proactivity, role experience, and affordance beliefs are reciprocal and cyclical. Experiencing a role that
affords both communal and agentic goals might lead to the development of proactivity, for example.
Although fully mapping these different causal pathways is beyond the scope of the current paper, we
see value in documenting the associations between proactivity and perceived affordances. We hope
that the current research can lay the groundwork for research programs that investigate these multiple
processes.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 30
Another limitation of the current research is that these data did not examine behavioral
outcomes or decisions. The present research cannot speak to how college students will ultimately
perceive their careers once they occupy them, but it lays a clear foundation to predict that perceived
goal opportunities in roles are key to understanding any benefits of proactive mindset. Despite the
reality that college decisions set the trajectory for future opportunities, little research has examined
proactive orientation within student populations. Because proactivity is associated with both perceiving
communal and agentic opportunities, a focus on proactivity in students might inform understanding of
developmental trajectories, similar to theories that consider shifts in fundamental motives across the
career trajectory and lifespan (e.g., Carstensen et al., 1999).
The present research demonstrated that proactive mindset is associated with greater positivity
toward majors or careers via differential cognitive construction of roles. Yet, this work focuses on
perceived goal opportunities of a context, rather than actual goal opportunities. Studying the sequelae
of actual goal fulfillment or frustration can elaborate potential ramifications of proactivity. One
possibility is that proactive individuals are especially frustrated by contexts that thwart their proactivity.
For example, a biology department might rigidly distinguish between basic and applied science, perhaps
signaling that the pursuit of communal goals is not acceptable in that context. In such cases, proactive
individuals’ ability to pursue communal opportunities, even if they are seen as distally possible, may be
hindered by the local culture. Such goal frustration can have negative consequences for well-being:
Indeed, when valued goal fulfillment is thwarted in occupational and familial roles, people experience
lower positive affect and greater depressive symptoms (Talley et al., 2012). Proactive individuals who
feel constrained might thus experience particular detriments to well-being.
Finally, a clear priority for future research is examining how proactivity-role associations vary
across group memberships. Drawing from prior evidence, one hypothesis is that proactivity is shaped by
socioeconomic status. Cultural analyses suggest SES-based variation in the expression of agency (Snibbe
PROACTIVE MINDSET 31
& Markus, 2005): Middle and upper class subcultures manifest characterizations of agency as self-
expression, whereas working-class subcultures manifest agency as resistance to pressure. The
conceptualization of proactivity in the current literature may be inherently limited because it reflects
higher-SES models of agency. If so, the benefits of proactivity may be less available to low-SES students,
thus constituting another form of cultural mismatch between higher education and working-class
students (Stephens et al., 2012, 2018). A key step for future research is understanding whether
cultivating more expansive construals of roles particularly benefits students from working-class
backgrounds. For students whose proactivity is constrained by the social structure, contexts that
promote growth and development may be especially important.
Conclusion
Proactive mindset aligns with the construal of a range of possible opportunities in one’s roles.
Understanding the potential antecedents and consequences of proactive mindset provides insight into
how people might differentially perceive their current and their future roles. More proactively-oriented
individuals and contexts can align with thinking about roles in ways that highlight opportunities to fulfill
fundamental motives: Part of the “power of the situation” may reside in perceiving what might be
possible.
PROACTIVE MINDSET 32