Coping During Covid-19
Workbook
A CBT approach to coping with COVID-19
related anxiety & depression
Dr. Keith Gaynor
Acknowledgements
2020 was a year where solidarity and community spirit were on show everywhere
we looked. I would like to mention just three examples here. I want to thank Eamon
Aswad for his exceptional hard work in helping put together this workbook. I am
very grateful for the community spirit of all the staff of Saint John of God Hospital
throughout this time. Finally, I would like to acknowledge the courage and creativity
of all the people with anxiety and depression during this pandemic. People endured
the unendurable, and developed new ways of living and seeing the world. The
people that I met, most often through Zoom, were an extraordinary inspiration.
PREFACE: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Contents
Introduction to Coping During COVID-19 4
Module 1: The Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis 8
Module 2: How Our Bodies Respond to Anxiety 16
Module 3: Worry and Rumination 20
Module 4: Thoughts - The Impact of Negative Beliefs 26
Module 5: Behavioural Experiments
- Putting the Theory into Practice 32
Module 6: Ever-Changing Demands 38
Module 7: Identity 44
Module 8: Review and Ending 50
© February 2021 Saint John of God Hospital clg
Saint John of God Hospital, Stillorgan, Co Dublin.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright holders.
This document is for personal use by an individual only. Individual must not be taken to mean an incorporated or unincorporated body.
PREFACE: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Introduction
to Coping During COVID-19
What is this workbook? What is CBT?
2020 saw the world affected by an unprecedented This workbook uses Cognitive Behavioural Therapy
pandemic. Alongside the health risks, COVID-19 (CBT). Over the last 30 years, CBT has been shown
has created mental health difficulties for a large to be an approach that is helpful in reducing
number of people. Many people are feeling anxious anxiety and depression.
or depressed, in ways that they might never have
We present a specific model of how anxiety and
before. There are many causes but we suggest that
depression related to COVID-19 works. Each module
there are four critical reasons why people might
is designed to tackle one component of this model.
feel low or anxious at this time:
The cognitive part (the ‘C’ part of CBT), looks at
(i) The significant health risk.
the thoughts and beliefs people have in anxiety
(ii) The isolation and disconnection from friends, provoking or depressing situations. The behavioural
family and supports. part (the ‘B’ part of CBT) looks at what people do
when they’re feeling anxious or low.
(iii) The economic threat to many people’s
livelihoods.
(iv) The diminishment of our identities.
In the middle of this international health
emergency, it is clear the risks are real and
very serious. If we haven’t been affected
medically, then probably we have been
affected economically or socially. It is
natural for us to feel frightened or low.
We all have ways of coping during
stressful times. Unfortunately, COVID-19
has robbed us of access to many of our
supports and ways of coping.
This eight module workbook is designed
to support those who are struggling with
symptoms of anxiety and depression
because of the COVID-19 crisis. This
workbook has been created to give you
some tools to help. It doesn’t replace
formal psychological or medical support
but may be an additional resource.
INTRODUCTION: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
As you can imagine, two people might think about This workbook includes a variety of behavioural
a situation in different ways (C – cognitive), and this strategies, including; relaxation, gradual exposure
will have a big impact on how they feel about it and to feared situations, muscle relaxation exercises,
what they do (B – Behavioural) when faced with that reducing unhelpful behaviours that contribute to
situation. The two have a direct reciprocal effect on anxiety (e.g. avoidance), and testing out our beliefs
each other. If I have depressed thoughts, I’m likely to using experiments.
have behaviours that reinforce those thoughts.
All of these strategies acknowledge the real risks
CBT includes strategies designed to help individuals that exist. In a COVID world, we have to be safe
identify and challenge negative thoughts or and we don’t suggest any behavior that might put
interpretations that are maintaining anxiety. you at risk of contracting COVID-19.
The goal of CBT is not to “think happy thoughts” or
How to use this workbook
“be positive”; instead, the goal is to shift negative
thinking so that it becomes more balanced. It is also It is recommended that this workbook can be
to help us to notice when we get lost in negative or completed by anyone who is over the age of
unhelpful thinking and gently move us out of this eighteen and is willing to engage with tackling
thinking pattern. CBT includes strategies to change anxiety and depression that may have arrived or
unhelpful behaviours. increased a result of the COVID-19 crisis.
(continued next page)
INTRODUCTION: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
The COVID-19 crisis has taken a toll on many You are likely to get the most out of the book if you
people; this workbook can provide some relief to can practice and use the techniques. The more you
those who are feeling particularly anxious or low, engage in the process, the more likely you are to
by providing step-by-step instructions on how to reap the benefits.
achieve important goals like reducing worry.
• At the beginning of each module, we present a
There is no recommended amount of time to be significant quote relating to the theme of that
allocated for the workbook, as everyone may move module. This provides a gentle introduction into
at their own pace. The workbook has also been each module and may also serve as a reminder
designed in a manner in which you can repeat a for you in remembering that specific module.
module, if it would be helpful.
• Each module contains some information about
psychological ideas that might help you to better
understand and cope with COVID-19 related
anxiety and depression.
• Following the information there are some
exercises to practice.
• Each module has a certain ‘Homework Task’,
which has been designed to challenge you in a
specific way by using the information and tools/
techniques.
• Every module is created with the intention of
increasing your understanding or learning. This
may be learning more about yourself, anxiety/
depression or the way in which the world or
people behave.
• We have included a ‘Summary of Learning
Points’ section in all modules, which we would
encourage you to complete to enhance your
own understanding/learning.
• Move at your own pace and repeat chapters or
exercises as you feel fit.
INTRODUCTION: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Key Message
It is important to understand that anxiety or low mood is something you do,
NOT who you are.
In the English language, we say “I am anxious”.
In the Irish language, we say “Tá imníoch orm”. The anxiety is on me.
It is not who I am, it is something which is on me for the moment and will pass.
Through this workbook, we hope to help people maintain a positive quality of life,
despite all the challenges in the world.
Module 1:
The Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis
Coronavirus will be imprinted on the personality of
our nation for a very long time”
- Dr Anthony Fauci
Module Aims:
1. To raise awareness of CBT and Biopsychosocial models of anxiety and depression.
2. To learn about your own anxiety/low mood and their triggers.
3. To reflect on the impact the COVID-19 crisis has had on you.
What values are important to you?
Please take a moment to write down some of the values which are important to you.
Staying in touch with these values, despite the pandemic, is the goal of this course.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Now, what steps may you need to take in order to keep these values alive during the pandemic?
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 1: The Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis
How COVID-19 can affect us: The Biopsychosocial Model
Module 1:
The Biopsychosocial model describes how biological, psychological and social factors interact. For instance,
I might be socially isolated and feel lonely and this might affect my sleep. Or I might feel a racing heart, feel
The Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis
panicky, and stop going to the shops or other public places. These factors don’t operate on their own but in a
cycle. If we can make one positive change, it will have a positive impact on all the other areas.
Diagram 1.
The biological has an impact on the psychological and on the social and vice versa. Please take a moment to
examine the Biopsychosocial model. This incorporates biological, psychological and social factors.
Example: Biopsychosocial Impact
Please take a look at Diagram 2 overleaf. This is an example of how the biopsychosocial model displays the
impact of the COVID-19 crisis. In the biological you can see the components that disrupt your biology. In
the psychological the factors that cause stress or worry. In the social it contains factors that cause possible
interpersonal or social issues.
Diagram 1
Psycho
Bio
The
Biopsychosocial
model
Social
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Diagram 2
Psycho
Bio
Worry
Loss
Sleep Routine
Catastrophic
Diet
thinking
Example of
Exercise
bio-psycho-social
Movement
model
Social
Increased work stresses
Reduced social contact
Increasing financial pressure
Complete a Personal Biopsychosocial Model
Think about the biological, psychological and social factors that may be impacting you during the COVID-19
crisis. Then complete the personal biopsychosocial model below (Diagram 3).
Diagram 3
Bio
Complete a
personal
bio-psycho-social
Psycho
model
Social
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 1: The Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis
CBT Model of Anxiety and Depression
Researchers have identified three clear causes of anxiety and depression during the pandemic: the impact
of isolation, risk to our health and the financial and family impact. I would like to add another cause: the
impact on our identity. When we can’t do our normal things or see our normal friends and family, it has a
significant impact on us. Not being able to play five-a-side on a Wednesday or attend an amateur dramatic
society might not seem like much but when it is an integral part of our identity then we feel a great sense
of loss when it’s not there.
Diagram 4
A CBT model of COVID-19 anxiety and depression
Threat from Health Threat to Financial
isolation threat identity threat
Sense of
Emotion Cognitive
threat
Anxiety load:
Sadness
Rapid
Loss
decision making
Loneliness
Physical
Anxiety Worry
Symptoms
‘Safety’
Negative
Behaviours
Beliefs
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
A CBT Model of COVID-19 Anxiety and Depression
As you can see from the CBT model of anxiety and depression, the key theme is a sense of threat. This sense
of threat may come from many different avenues: isolation, health, financial/practical or identity.
CBT teaches us that how we react to this sense of threat can
make it better or worse. We often can’t control the things that
threaten us but we can control how we react to them. In this
workbook we are going to work through the 6 reactions that
can increase the sense of threat.
Anxiety occurs in response to perceived threats.
In humans it can also be triggered by the threat of loss. These
questions might be helpful to understand your own triggers to
COVID-19.
These reactions are: emotional, physical, negative thinking,
behaviour, worry, and cognitive load. We will to try to give you
the resources to manage your own reactions.
In order to understand the best way to manage your own
anxiety, it is important to understand your own triggers. A trigger can range from a sight, smell or situation
that sets off your thoughts, behaviours feelings or emotions.
Please write down your triggers to the questions below.
When do I become anxious or low?
Why do I think I become anxious or low?
Do I have any external triggers? (e.g. news, conversations, lack of activity)
Do I have any bodily sensations that act as a trigger?
Do I have any thoughts that act as a trigger?
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 1: The Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis
A CBT Model of COVID-19 Anxiety and Depression
(cont’d)
What aspect of COVID-19 do you find threatening?
Has it caused/or has it the potential to cause a loss in your life?
Practice Task - Diary
In order to use the information from this module, over the course of the next week, keep a diary of when the
following things occur (please complete the diary on the following page).
1. Triggers (What trigger? When? Why?)
2. How does my body feel?
3. Any thoughts or beliefs about COVID-19?
4. Is my sense of self/identity challenged?
5. How often do I worry?
6. What do I worry about?
7. When do I feel lonely or isolated?
8. Do I do anything unnecessary to keep myself safe?
Module Summary: Learning Points
1. The COVID-19 crisis has created a sense of threat and resulted in many losses in our lives.
2. We can understand the impact of these through the Biopsychosocial model or the CBT model.
3. If we can make one change, it will have a positive impact on other aspects of the models.
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Diagram 6
Diary of features of anxiety and depression
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
Triggers
What trigger?
When? Why?
How does
my body
feel?
Thoughts
Thoughts or
beliefs about
COVID-19
Identity
Is my sense of
self/identity
challenged?
How often
do I worry?
What do I
worry
about?
When do I
feel lonely or
isolated?
Do I do
anything
unnecessary
to keep
myself safe?
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 1: The Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis
Notes
Use this space for any extra notes or thoughts you have on your progress through the Workbook so far.
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module 2:
How Our Bodies Respond to Anxiety
Sometimes the most important thing in a whole day is the
rest taken between two deep breaths”
- Etty Hillesum
Module Aims:
1. Gain an understanding of the Fight or Flight response of anxiety.
2. Start using strategies for tolerating physical anxiety, such as: body-orientated
coping strategies, grounding, breathing and body scan exercises.
3. Practice, Practice, Practice!
During the COVID-19 pandemic, it can feel
like we are constantly anxious. Our bodies
are constantly on edge. Hopefully we’ll be
through the pandemic by the end of 2021
but in the meantime we have to make sure
we don’t have feelings of panic every time
someone coughs or sneezes.
So many of our normal supports aren’t
available to us but we always have our
bodies, whether that is a quick run, a deep
breath or a nice long bath. Our body always
has the ability to make us feel better.
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 2: The How Our Bodies Respond to Anxiety
Fight, Flight or Surrender
What is happening in our body when we have anxiety? Our heart rate increases. Our breathing speeds up. The
blood is pushed to our hands, feet and sometimes our cheeks (this is why we blush when we are embarrassed).
This is called the Fight or Flight response. There are a few good things to know:
• It cannot harm you.
• If you are faced with a perceived threat, it triggers our body’s natural anxiety response system.
• It’s designed to protect us, not harm us.
• It was very important to stone-age humans. If you faced a ferocious animal, you must fight or run! It’s the
system we require to evade threat e.g. if a bus is about to run us over, it helps us quickly jump out of the way!
Sometimes it can feel like this natural reaction can last forever. This is also because of how intense fight and
flight is. But it won’t last forever. In fact, unless we do something to prolong it, typically, it only lasts for about
1 hour.
The fight or flight response naturally comes down over time.
Diagram 7
Fight and Flight Response
10 mins 45 mins
What helps to tolerate anxiety?
The fight and flight response wants to go down. If we can tolerate anxiety, the fight and flight response will
gradually go down itself. The strength and duration of the anxiety will reduce the more we get accustomed
to it. Here are some things it is helpful to know:
Know that the anxiety has a time course and it will end.
We must move away from worrying thoughts and get into the practical.
Accept that ‘this is what it is’, for the moment.
Engage with where we are and be present in the moment.
MODULE 2: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Coping strategies
Another way to deal with anxiety is by using coping strategies. Remember there are many different forms of
coping strategies or resources. Resources can be: Psychological, Relational, Somatic (in the body), Emotional,
Intellectual, Artistic/Creative, Spiritual, Nature, Material.
Unfortunately, Covid-19 may have robbed us of access to many of these resources, however, but not access to
our own bodies. Body-oriented coping strategies are resources that you already have, so you can use them to
help you in managing anxiety.
The following are four body oriented coping strategies that I find helpful.
• What happens physically? What happens to your
Breathing Exercise
heart rate? Do you feel more present or less
The following exercise just asks you to
present in your body? Is it easier or harder to
breathe normally and to notice, not to
breathe? What happens to your posture?
change your breath. Close your eyes
and start to notice your breath coming
in and your breathing coming out. Allow
Grounding Exercise 2
this to continue for five minutes or so.
(The same as Grounding Exercise 1
but standing up)
Grounding Exercise 1
Stand with your feet on the floor.
The following exercise is a grounding
• Paying attention to how your whole
exercise. ‘Grounding’ is a technique
body feels when you make a point of
that allows you to cope with your
firmly grounding your feet to the floor.
anxiety, by grounding or reconnecting
you with the earth.
• What then happens to you physically?
Do you feel more or less present in your body?
Read the instructions down below and
acknowledge the sensations and feelings of your
• Is it easier or harder to breathe? What happens to
body. Gently ask yourself some of the questions
your posture?
included and explore how you feel.
(Moving your body)
Whenever you feel the need you can always come
• What happens if you sit and collapse your head
back and use these exercises or maybe even get
and shoulders?
to the point where you may be able to learn and
• What happens to your breath? How easy is it to
memorise the steps.
turn your head left and right?
• Sitting in your chair, first take a moment to feel
• What happens if you then lengthen your posture,
the floor under your feet.
as if you wanted to tower over someone or even
• Then gently push your feet into the ground,
intimidate someone? What happens to your
against the floor.
breath? Your posture? Your mood?
• Experiment with finding just the right amount of
• Lastly, what happens if you try and sit normally?
pressure so it feels good. Notice the difference
Allow your body to find its natural stance, and
with more or less pressure. Play with the amount
then very slowly lengthen your spine (from the
of pressure or with stomping your feet against
bottom of your back up to your shoulders).
the ground.
MODULE 1: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 2: The How Our Bodies Respond to Anxiety
Body Scan Exercise
This next exercise is an example of a body scan exercise. You can use it to increase day-to-day awareness.
• When sitting or lying quietly, just close your eyes or let your eyes lose focus slightly.
• Then pay attention to your body. Starting from the tip of your head, working slowly downwards
through your head, your neck, shoulders, arms, chest, stomach, buttocks, legs, feet.
• Pay attention and notice where where you may feel more or less tension.
• Then what would it be like to gently breathe into the space that you feel the tension.
• See what it’s like to gently move the area where you feel the tension.
• Place one hand on your heart, and one hand on your belly.
• Slowly bring your awareness to what that feels like.
• Notice the feeling of your hands. The weight of your hands. The warmth or coolness of your hands.
• Notice the feeling of your breath meeting your hands. Notice what happens inside when you focus all of
your attention on your two hands.
Remember, using these techniques appropriately often takes some time and practice. If you feel that you are
getting frustrated or one does not suit you, focus on using the exercises that you feel you get the most benefit
from. (For example, if you prefer breathing exercises to grounding exercises.)
The great thing about these exercises is that the only resource that is required is your time. Whenever you
feel the need to use them to help manage your anxiety or have some free time, try to incorporate one or more
into your daily routine.
Practice Task - Diary
Use the space below to jot down some learning points from Module 2: How Our Bodies Respond to Anxiety.
Practice one of the body exercises: grounding, breathing or body scan each day
Keep a note or diary of how you found the practice.
Module Summary: Learning Points
1. Anxiety is our body’s natural response to threat.
2. Anxiety naturally wants to come down.
3. We can use body-focused techniques to help our bodies relax.
MODULE 2: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module 3:
Worry and Rumination
You don’t have to control your thoughts. You just
have to stop letting them control you.”
- Dan Millman
Module Aims:
1. Understand and learn about the circular nature of worry; how worry motivates
us to take action but how inaction can be debilitating.
2. Implement the 8 steps to reduce worry and the associated behaviours
(checking, seeking reassurance, procrastination, distraction and avoidance).
Worry
We all know what worry is... but it is difficult for us to exactly put our finger on it.
Here are some aspects of worry:
• It is mental - our minds think of something stressful.
• It is emotional - we feel unpleasant anxiety.
• It is physical - we feel it in our bodies.
• It is repetitive - it repeats and repeats and repeats…
However, worry has a function:
• It is problem solving for a future problem. Worry must have been really very useful for our ancestors. People
in the Stone Age were probably great worriers!
• Even the awful feeling of anxiety has a function. This common function is that it pushes or motivates us to
do something to remove that terrible feeling.
So, what is the issue with worrying?
• Pre-empting future problems and doing something about them is a good idea.
• However, worry without action is not a good idea… it just leaves us worried.
• Worry can make us agitated.
• Worry can push us into over-checking and reassurance seeking.
• We get so worried that we don’t even want to think about the problem (avoidance).
• We end up in an ever-escalating cycle of worry and avoidance.
MODULE 3: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 3: Worry and Rumination
Diagram 8
Module 3:
Worry is Circular
Worry and Rumination
‘I shouldn’t...’
‘But what if...’
‘I should...’
‘Then I definitely should...
Or maybe I shouldn’t...’
‘What if...’
Positive Beliefs About Worry
One of the reasons people worry is because they think it’s helpful.
For example:
• ‘I need to worry about COVID-19, because I don’t want to get ill’.
• ‘I need to worry about my children, I don’t want anything bad to happen them’.
• ‘I need to worry about work because there is a recession and my job is under risk’.
Whilst these things are really important, the question is whether it is useful to worry about them or not.
We certainly need to act on them: wash our hands, wear the mask and socially distance, but there is no
advantage to worrying about them.
Negative Beliefs About Worry
On the opposite end, people also worry because they are worrying.
For example:
• ‘The stress of this will kill me’.
• ‘I just don’t want to think about it’.
• ‘This stress is ruining everything’.
This type of worrying is a vicious circle.
• Worrying is a bad idea.
• Worrying about worrying is very bad idea.
MODULE 3: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
We do lots of things when we worry. Here are some typical examples. Do any of them seem familiar?
Procrastination/Avoidance
• Seek excessive amounts of information before making a decision (procrastination).
• Overlook positive or neutral information (focusing on the negative online).
• Put-off making a decision (procrastination).
• Over-analyse problems (excessive worrying).
• Fail to delegate and taking on everything yourself.
• Avoid thinking of the problem (avoidance).
• Become highly ‘busy’ (distraction/ avoidance).
• Take on different projects (distraction).
Reassurance seeking
What’s the problem with reassurance seeking?
• The problem is it works. It makes us feel better…
until we worry again.
• The more we seek reassurance, the less well it
works.
Checking
Checking behaviours can also lead us to feel more
worried/anxious as opposed to less. ‘Google-itis’
(using Google to check everything) is a particular
issue in the age of COVID-19.
For example:
• We can check the news every couple of minutes.
• Then check the scientific, the epidemiological, the
political responses.
Worry is a habit but you can
• Continue checking the economic impact.
choose to break it.
• Check the symptoms, the outcomes and personal
Every day we worry less
stories.
we’ll be happier.
All of this will increase our feeling of anxiety and
depression, when our intention was to reduce it.
On the following pages you will find eight steps which
will help reduce anxiety.
MODULE 3: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 3: Worry and Rumination
8 Steps to Stop Worrying
Step 1: Commit to worrying less.
• Most people readily agree to this step. They hate their worry. They would love to worry less
• But if you ask them to worry less about their children, their parents or their job, they struggle with that.
‘But my children are important’, ‘My job is important’.
• We have to recognise that we worry about important stuff. Worry is just a useless response to important
stuff.
For example:
NASA didn’t land Apollo 13 by worrying about it. No one ever passed their Leaving Certificate, got driving
lessons, went out on a date, got a promotion, bought a house or kept their family safe by simply worrying
about it.
• Worrying is something internal, private and passive.
• Any situation in the real world needs something external, public and active.
That’s what important issues need.
Step 2: Measure the problem
Take a diary and mark in with an asterisk (*) every time and place
you worry and a guess about how long you worried for.
• Primarily, it makes you aware of a process that may have
been automatic until now, when you marked all of those
times. We need to notice how frequently we worry
and most people will be a little shocked at what
they see.
• Secondly, we need to pinpoint those
occasions when we worry the most
because these are the times we are
going to target.
(Continued next page).
MODULE 3: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Diagram 9
Step 3: Solving Problems
A decision making tree
Decision-making is a core skill to combat worry.
• It challenges procrastination.
• It challenges mental avoidance.
The next thing you need to do is pick up a pen and paper. If you
try to problem-solve mentally, this can quickly spin off into worry.
• Write down the problem or the question.
Ring
• Now write down every solution you can think of.
Estate
Agent
Don’t
• Now write down the first action you can take for each solution.
Act
Sell
• Pick the best option.
House
• Do it. Ring
Bank
Ring
• The key now is to take the action. Sometimes you will do all Parents
Mortgage
three options e.g. call the bank, ring your parents and look to
Holiday
Get
sell, because they are immediate, medium-term and long-term Loan
solutions.
• In every situation, sometimes we cannot act. We can worry
about a child but we cannot make them well. But we still have
to take the steps we can and then work hard so our worry
doesn’t get in the way of making the next important decision
I don’t have
enough money to
pay my mortgage
Step 4: Starve worry of time and space.
• Our long-term memory is amazing. We can remember tens of thousands of memories but our attention span
is quite small.
• Often worriers will give themselves time and space to worry!
• If we want to reduce worry, we need to starve it of time and space. At key times, we need to add extra levels
of stimulation and learn how to shift our attention from the internal to the external.
• We don’t have to be busy 24/7 but when we want to relax that we actually engage in activities that are
going to relax us (and not worry instead of relaxing).
• Don’t drift into ourselves and stop engaging with the world around us (be present).
Step 5: Flashlights and Polar Bears
• When people worry they often ask how to stop thinking. Sadly, the human brain won’t ‘stop’ thinking. It is
like a flashlight, always pointed at something.
• With worry, we have to point the flashlight away from the worry and towards something else.
• For example: If I ask you to think of a pink polar bear, your brain is going to think of a pink polar bear - even if
you don’t want to.
• You must learn to point it at things that are external, specific and here and now, i.e. the real world!
• Often, people can confuse this with distraction. We are not trying to distract ourselves from the worry.
• We are trying to engage in the real, concrete world around us: people, places, activities and interests.
MODULE 3: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 3: Worry and Rumination
Step 6: Reducing checking/ Step 8: Challenge positive beliefs
reassurance-seeking about worry
How do I know I am doing the right thing?
• Checking and reassurance-seeking makes you feel
better in the short-term but keeps the worry alive • You have to make your best guess.
in the long-term.
• This challenges lots of anxious beliefs that
• It means we are not engaged in our real life, worriers have, for example:
we are too busy trying to check or seeking
‘I should never make a mistake’.
reassurance.
‘If I make a mistake, it will be catastrophic’.
• It means we are becoming dependent on people or
‘If I make a mistake, it will hurt the people I love’.
processes that will fail us (Google will not always
‘It is better to be safe than sorry’.
give us the answer we want to hear).
What do non-worriers
Step 7: Night Time
believe?
Lots of worry happens at night time because it is
A second philosophy, of non-worriers:
when you have the fewest things to occupy your
• ‘I’ll do the best I can’.
mind.
• ‘We’ll muddle through’.
All the same rules apply:
• ‘I’ll tackle each problem as it comes along’.
• You have to choose not to focus on worry.
• ‘I can only do what I can do’.
• You have to reduce the time spent on worry.
COVID has given us a lot to worry about. But if
• You have to choose what you are going to focus
we can reduce the time we spend worrying, we’ll
your mind on.
feel happier and will be able to make better, safer
• You may have to problem solve (for example: keep
decisions
a notepad by the bed).
Practice Task
Try putting the new philosophy into place.
Pick one of the eight steps and give it a go.
Test it for a week.
Module Summary: Learning Points
1. Worry has a role but worry without action just leaves us... worried.
2. We often worry because we believe it is helpful.
3. If we can spend less time worrying, we’ll feel better and be better able to manage
the challenges in our lives.
MODULE 3: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module 4:
Thoughts - The Impact of Negative Beliefs
Our notions about happiness can prevent us from actually being happy.
We fail to see the opportunity for joy that is right in front of us when we are
caught in a belief that happiness should take a particular form”
- Thich Nhat Hanh
Module Aims:
1. Examine how and why interpretations matter.
2. Gain better insight and understanding of our own beliefs around the COVID-19 crisis.
Imagine this scenario:
Four people are waiting at a bus stop. Three people are socially distanced, the fourth isn’t.
• The first person in line begins to jump up and down waving her fists in the air and shouting – they’re angry.
• The second person in line bursts into tears – they’re distressed.
• The third person walks away rolling their eyes – they’re amused.
The same thing has happened to all of them but they had three very different reactions.
What was each of them thinking?
A basic principle of CBT may help us understand the different reactions in this imagined scenario: a thought is
not a fact. This means that the interpretation we make of a situation determines our emotional response.
Our interpretations are influenced by:
• Our previous experiences.
• Aspects of our personality.
• Our feelings about ourselves.
• Our relationships with others.
• Our world view.
MODULE 4: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 4: Thoughts - The Impact of Negative Beliefs
Think about your own unhelpful anxious thoughts
How has your previous
Module 4:
around the COVID-19 crisis. Then take a look at
experience influenced your
some of these typical responses or thoughts to the
Thoughts - The Impact of Negative Beliefs reaction to COVID-19? impact of COVID-19 crisis, which include:
• Fear of contamination and becoming ill
The way you think matters. Some events may be
(i.e. spreading the virus to those close to you).
realistically dangerous, unpleasant or uncomfortable
• Negative experiences of social or economic
but we add to these by our thought processes, for
situations.
example, by focusing on only negative aspects of a
situation. • Experiences of trauma related to COVID-19
(i.e. someone close to you getting sick or dying).
We have individual thinking styles and in certain
• OCD-style responses (i.e. Obsessive compulsive
situations these can be helpful or unhelpful.
disorders like checking).
For instance, being very detailed-focused may
be helpful in work but may mean we become
Do any of these apply to you?
overwhelmed when we have to deal with something
COVID-19 has thrown up a range of fears that we
out of our control like a pandemic.
may never have had to face before:
Identifying unhelpful thoughts is the first step in
• We may be afraid of becoming sick.
understanding how we are thinking or what we are
• We may afraid of making a loved one sick.
focusing on.
• We may be frightened because we are cut-off
from the people we love and we feel alone.
Example:
• We may have constant decision making and so we
A grandparent who supports her daughter are never settled on one response or action.
by minding her grandchildren may be really
It is important to first recognise these fears and
struggling. She needs to bring them with her
then next understand how they can be triggered,
to the supermarket to do the weekly shop.
and finally, how they are affecting you.
Other than this trip, the three of them are
only leaving the house to go for walks and
play in parks, but not in playgrounds. She
does not want to take them with her to the
supermarket, but recognises that they need
food and she has no other option, but she
is anxious about the risk this trip involves.
When arriving at the supermarket, she
sanitises their hands, and the supermarket
trolley. The children are not allowed to hold
on to the railing on the escalator and they
are not allowed to touch any food goods
unless they are wearing gloves. Each time
she takes this trip, she comes back exhausted
and incredibly anxious. She thinks if ‘I get any
more anxious than I won’t be able to cope, or
look after the children.’
MODULE 4: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
It can be beneficial to recognise that beliefs can vary. Take a look at some of these below and the associated
thought process.
• Danger - ‘I will be hurt’.
• Vulnerability - ‘In certain situations, I’m weak/powerless’.
• Embarrassment - ‘If I do something it will be humiliating’.
• Lack of control - ‘I have to manage this’.
• Anxiety itself - ‘If I get too anxious I will get overwhelmed/get ill etc.’
Practice Task
Write down your beliefs by finishing the following sentences:
I am frightened that
I get down when I think
The world is
The future is
My anxiety will
Your Beliefs - Diary
On the following page, we present a ‘Negative Belief Diary’. The purpose of this is to examine what happens
when you balance the evidence. Our beliefs often keep going because we only look at one side of the
evidence, the side that confirms those beliefs.
We would encourage you to try it for at least a week.
How to complete the ‘Negative Belief Diary’:
In the ‘Negative Belief’ column - write the belief.
In the next column rate from 0-100% how much you believe this belief (e.g. 89%).
After that write the evidence ‘For’ - the evidence for why you believe this.
Then write the ‘Evidence Against’- the evidence why this belief may not be true.
What is your ‘Balanced Belief?’
MODULE 4: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 4: Thoughts - The Impact of Negative Beliefs
Diagram 10
Negative Belief Diary
Negative Evidence Evidence Balanced
(1-100%)
belief for against Belief
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
MODULE 4: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module Summary: Learning Points
Use the space below to jot down some learning points from Module 4
Practice Task
Along with tracking your beliefs by using the ‘Negative Belief Diary’, start examining to see whether
your beliefs are true or not.
Did you find any evidence that contradicted the belief?
Are your reactions always in-line with your balanced belief?
MODULE 4: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 4: Thoughts - The Impact of Negative Beliefs
Notes
Use this space for any extra notes or thoughts you have on your progress through the Workbook so far.
MODULE 4: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module 5:
Behavioural Experiments - Putting the Theory into Practice
Without fear there cannot be courage.”
- Christopher Paolini
Module Aims:
1. Understand and implement the Theory A/B technique for analysing your beliefs.
2. Utilise the steps for planning a behavioural experiment and use this in real-world practice.
3. Examine your negative beliefs in light of this new experience.
Theory A/B
One technique for balancing risks is by using the ‘Theory A/B’.
This involves three steps.
Step 1: What’s my Theory A/B?
Step 2: Testing out the belief
Step 3: Examining what does it mean about me, the world and the future?
Consider the following steps and we can show you how to use this technique yourself.
Theory A: ‘If I touch something, that someone else has touched, I’ll contract COVID-19.’
Evidence for Theory A = A lot of people have COVID-19, maybe this person has COVID-19 also and by being
in contact I will also.
Theory B: ‘I am going to take reasonable precautions, but I can touch something, that someone else has
touched and stay well.’
Evidence for Theory B = Not everyone has COVID-19. However, I can use hand sanitiser before I touch
anything else or before and after touching the object that someone else has touched, just to be safe.
Theory A/B - Try it out
What is your Theory A? What is a potential Theory B?
Evidence for Theory A? Evidence for Theory B?
MODULE 5: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 5: Behavioural Experiments - Putting the Theory into Practice
Theory A/B Step 1: Example
Module 5:
Acting safe or escaping from a dangerous situation is a sensible thing to do. It immediately reduces anxiety,
but it has a drawback. It strengthens fear in the long run.
Behavioural Experiments - Putting the Theory into Practice
The more things we do to keep us safe from COVID-19, the more anxious we will become.
It was the right choice to have a lockdown, not go to parks, restaurants etc., in order to reduce the virus and
‘flatten the curve’. However, as we start going back, we are going to be more anxious than we ever were
before.
It is generally known that avoidance can grow and generalise.
Being afraid of touching something that someone else has touched, like a phone, can grow to not making calls.
Fear of being in a crowded workplace can grow to become fear of being in the workplace at all, which could
have serious consequences.
Balancing Risks:
In the age of COVID-19, we have to balance risks and try to make choices from our own best rationale rather
than from our naturally anxious reaction.
Theory A/B Step 2: Testing Out Negative Beliefs
For Step 2 we use behavioural experiments. This is testing our evidence for or against our anxious beliefs. A
behavioural experiment asks us to go and live like Theory B and see what happens; not rash, not unsafe but
allowing our behaviour to follow our balanced thought.
‘If I think it is reasonably safe to go back to work, I will try going back to work.’
Theory A/B: What should I do?
Theory A:
Evidence for Theory A:
What I should do:
Theory B:
Evidence for Theory B:
What I should do:
MODULE 5: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Planning Your Behavioural Experiments
Consider the following four steps for planning your behavioural experiments:
1. What is your anxious or negative thought? (Just pick one at a time to work on).
2. What is your balanced thought?
3. What does evidence for and against tell you?
4. What would happen if your balanced thought was true?
• How can I test this out in the real world?
• What can I observe?
• What has my prior experience taught me?
• What can I do?
• Is this realistic?
• Do I need support?
• How can I record the outcome so that I remember it?
• How am I going to treat myself afterwards?
What would I do if my Theory B was true?
1. Write down all of the things you would do if your Theory B was TRUE.
2. Make a list of the easiest and hardest things to do.
3. Start doing the easiest things (go at your own pace but challenge yourself) and try it
for the next day or week.
4. Do I have any new evidence from my testing? (Use this to inform other Theory A/B beliefs)
MODULE 5: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 5: Behavioural Experiments - Putting the Theory into Practice
Theory A/B Step 3:
What does it mean about me, the world and the future?
Theory A: Theory B:
Evidence for Theory A: Evidence for Theory B:
What I should do: What I should do:
What does this mean for me? What does this mean for me?
What does it mean about me, other people, or the future? Perhaps it means I can cope better than I thought;
or other people are a little kinder than I thought; or that the future is more hopeful than I thought.
MODULE 5: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Theory A/B
When we arrive at new evidence from using the Theory A/B technique, it is seminal to test out your fears. We
the other side. This will help display your predictions of your beliefs along with the results and how strongly
you now hold that belief post-test
Diagram 11
New evidence: testing out my fears
What is my
anxious
belief?
How strongly
do I believe it
(0-100%)
How can I
test it?
My
prediction
Result of
the test
How strongly
do I believe it
now?
MODULE 5: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 5: Behavioural Experiments - Putting the Theory into Practice
Practice Task
Before beginning the next module. Attempt to challenge at least two to three beliefs using the steps (1-3) of
the Theory A/B technique. You can use or reuse the templates that we have provided
Module Summary: Learning Points
Use the space below to jot down some learning points from Module 5: Behavioural Experiments - Putting the
Theory into Practice.
MODULE 5: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module 6:
Ever-Changing Demands
The universe doesn’t allow perfection.”
- Stephen Hawking
Module Aims:
1. Understand the difference between the ‘old standards’ and the ‘new’, how this affects
decision making and the stress we experience in a time of COVID-19.
2. Implement strategies that allow you to ‘Challenge the Inner Critic’, along with
adjusting rigid, inflexible or unrealistic standards that you may hold.
COVID-19 Related Stress
We all have standards and expectations for ourselves and the world. We might feel that it is important to
work hard, or to be good parents, or to keep contact with our friends
Along with the old standards (before COVID), we now have to make many new decisions (due to
changing Government guidelines) and face many new demands (e.g. home-working or lack of work, social
distancing, isolation etc.). When these new demands and decisions clash with old standards it often leads
to increased stress and potentially self-criticism.
Take a look at the diagram below - the diagram outlines how the ever-changing demands of COVID-19
can lead to increased stress and self-criticism.
Diagram 12
How decision making can
lead to increased stress
Frequent
Old
decision
standards
making
Increased Self
stress criticism
New demands
MODULE 6: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 6: Ever-Changing Demands
COVID-19 has demanded that we make repeated, Some typical advice
rapid changes to our lives. around decision
making is:
For example:
• Build habits into your
• Should we be in work/out of work/partially in
schedule.
work?
• Make a choice and
• Should our children be in school?
decide it’s the right
• Can I go to the shops?
one.
• Can I visit my parents?
• Keep decisions that
• Can I hug someone I love?
bring you joy - cut
what you can.
The answers to these questions were different
throughout 2020. Changing guidelines can cause • Choose a role model.
both confusion and uncertainty, especially if you
• Use ‘expert friends’.
want to try to do the right thing.
None of these apply
Decision making with the COVID-19
crisis:
Decision making is deeply stressful.
• It implies that there is a right decision
Think how long it takes to buy a pair of jeans or to
(when it may be unknown).
change role in a job.
• That we can make a decision and stick to it
• As humans we make decisions slowly, weigh up
(with changing information, we may not be able
the pros and cons, talk to people, ask opinions
to stick to it).
and play through scenarios in our minds. As such,
• That we can spend a lot time thinking about it
rapidly making decisions makes us unsure and
(in many circumstances, there is little time to
stressed.
think about it).
Decision making is tiring.
Here are some tips for COVID-19
• Think about how tired you are at the end of the
related decision making:
day and someone asks you if you want tea or
1. It’s ok. No one has a clue.
coffee? It can often be hard to make even a basic
decision, let alone decisions around a crisis (e.g. Is 2. We don’t really have control.
it safe to go there? Who should I meet?).
3. There is no one right decision.
The more decisions we have to make the 4. You are going to feel stressed by having to
more stressed we get. make decisions. A lot. This is one of the biggest
challenges with COVID-19.
• If we have to operate without our normal process
of checking/talking etc., then we find this really
5. Whatever decision you make now, you’ll
stressful because we feel less able to weigh the
probably change later and that’s ok.
pros and cons.
6. Try to have some support in your decisions. It
We experience a huge amount of stress now,
helps if friends and family think so too.
having to make decisions about ordinary life events
7. If someone thinks the opposite, that’s ok too.
again and again.
MODULE 6: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Challenging the
Inner Critic
COVID-19 has shifted how we work, how
we socialise, our personal relationships,
our friendships and our family life.
It is demanding that we are very, very
different from how we used to be,
but sometimes people (our family, our
employer, our partners or ourselves) are
expecting that we be the same as we always
were. For example: we used to have an office
– now we work in the back bedroom with a
pullout desk, while the children bang on the door.
But our workload hasn’t decreased.
• Equally, other people have changed but not in the same way as
us. Some people are meeting indoors, others outdoors. Some with
face masks, some without.
• This creates an intolerable pressure for many people.
The inner critic is the part of us that nags away and is never satisfied with our
performance – it is the voice that says ‘you aren’t good enough, working hard
enough, clever enough, educated enough’. These new changes to our world
often leaves us criticising ourselves for not being able to meet ‘the standard’.
The inner critic is never satisfied and leaves us in a no win situation.
There are many reasons why we should challenge this ‘inner critic’ and combat self-criticism. Here are some
examples:
• Self-criticism paralyses and makes you feel bad.
• Self-criticism is unfair.
• Self-criticism blocks learning.
• Self-criticism ignores reality.
• Self-criticism kicks you when you are down.
• Self-criticism is often the reason that we can’t say something nice about ourselves. ‘It doesn’t feel right’, ‘It
isn’t true’, or ‘I don’t deserve it’.
MODULE 6: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 6: Ever-Changing Demands
Change the ‘tyranny of the shoulds’
Often the inner critic comes in a series of ‘Shoulds’. These are all the rules and standards that we hold
ourselves to, often despite the reality of a situation.
These are also known as the ‘tyranny of the shoulds’:
‘I should always…’,
‘I should never…’
Shoulds are:
Learned
Part of the culture that we grow up in
Linked to powerful emotion
Unreasonable
Rigid
COVID-19 doesn’t respect any of these rules. It is making alterations to our lives and identities whether we like it
or not. As such, it is important that to be able to change the rules that constrict us and limit our ability to grow.
What are your shoulds?
Complete the following using your own words:
• ‘I should...’
• ‘If I should never...’
• ‘I should always...’
• ‘Other people should always...’
Take a moment to think about what happens if you’re not able to do this? Typically during the COVID
pandemic there has been a range of things we would like to be able to do, that we ‘should’ do but haven’t
been able to.
MODULE 6: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
COVID-19 doesn’t know all
the things you should do.
It doesn’t care. It won’t
adapt, so we have to.
Break the Rules!
Answer the following, in relation to the shoulds you have just written down.
• Are they really true?
• Are they true all the time?
• Would you expect anyone else to follow these?
• What is stopping you from leaving them behind?
Experiment with viewing yourself
more positively
There’s another way to do it. Can we ask:
• Are my expectations possible in this situation?
• Are they reasonable?
• Am I able to meet my standards?
• What are new ways of working?
• What are new ways of achieving my goals?
MODULE 6: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 6: Ever-Changing Demands
Practice Task
Write some new Coulds for yourself for the COVID-19 world. (I could go for a walk on Tuesday.)
I could
I could
I could
I could
I could
I could
I could
Module Summary: Learning Points
1. The pandemic doesn’t respect our old rules and expectations.
2. Often others, or we ourselves, demand that we stay the same. This creates an intolerable pressure.
3. Can we gently adapt and create more flexible guidelines for ourselves?
Key Message
The world won’t change so maybe your standards have to.
Can my standards be shifted to guidelines? This way it is less rigid and easier to
follow. These guidelines can be something that I am happy if it happens, but it
doesn’t have to.
You can’t criticise yourself for what you can’t control.
Are there some things that I have to accept, even if I don’t like them?
MODULE 6: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module 7:
Identity
Be yourself; everyone else is
already taken.”
- Oscar Wilde
Module Aims:
1. To understand the importance of identity.
2. To understand the impact of losing some or all of your identity.
3. Develop steps and strategies to build confidence and self-acceptance
(positive self-statements, praise, self-compassion).
Loss of Identity
Our identity is the qualities, beliefs and personality that make us up. Our identity is made up of our many
different roles: in our job, among our family, with our friends, through our interests and hobbies. The
COVID-19 crisis has attacked many of the aspects that define us. I might be a brother, father, rugby fan,
psychologist. But if I don’t see my brother, can’t watch rugby, can only conduct psychology through Zoom,
am I still those things? A loss of identity is intrinsically anxiety provoking. We will often defend, hold onto
or struggle to maintain our old sense of identity, even if it no longer makes sense. If a form of our identity is
ripped away without anything replacing it, it causes a huge feeling of loss and sadness.
What does a loss of identity impact?
• My beliefs about myself.
• My day-to-day behaviour.
• My emotions.
• My body state.
• My performance at school, work or home.
• Personal relationships.
• My motivation for leisure activities.
• My self-care.
MODULE 7: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 7: Identity
Diagram 13
Different aspects of identity
Work Family
Routine Friendship
Identity
Body State Hobbies
Other
Has a loss of identity impacted you in any way?
Fill in any area where a loss of identity has impacted you.
My beliefs about myself:
My day-to-day behaviour:
My emotions:
My body state:
School or work:
Personal relationships:
Leisure activities:
Self-care:
MODULE 7: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
New Identities
COVID-19 is making a lot of demands of us. Often we can underestimate our ability to manage them. We
make predictions of not coping, of not being able to take anything else on. We can fall into a sort of paralysis.
COVID-19 has chipped away at so many things that we do but not who we are.
Who else are you?
Remember we are more than what we do. Even when everything else is stripped away, we are still made up
of our passions and interests, personalities and histories. The first step is accepting who we are beyond the
things that we do.
You are more than what you do
Sometime our self-acceptance is conditionally based on performance, achievement, external validation…
but you are more than this. Accepting ourselves in theory seems quite easy, although it may take some work
for you to get to that place. Self-acceptance is a way of thinking, feeling and acting that implies you accept,
respect, trust and believe in yourself. Self-acceptance means you can live comfortably with your own strengths
and weaknesses without lots of criticism. Self-acceptance also means you treat yourself the way you treat
a friend - with care and support. Accepting yourself means you feel you deserve good things in life and are
happy to fulfil your personal needs unconditionally.
Diagram 14
We are more than what we do.
Our roles
Sometimes our self-acceptance is
conditionally based on performance,
achievement, external validation…
Who we are
Enhancing Self-Acceptance
In order to enhance your level of self-acceptance, you must identify and recognise your strengths.
• Praise yourself - even for little achievements, every step is important. Praise every achievement, small or
large.
• Learn to be your own best friend - you have to learn to give yourself support and encouragement.
• Be kind to yourself when you don’t do as well as you’d have liked: how would you respond to someone else
in that situation?
• Continue to congratulate and reward yourself for your effort as well as your successes (we may not always
succeed, but trying is always the most important).
MODULE 7: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 7: Identity
What music
do I love?
Diagram 15
We are more than What do I know What’s my
about me that no one favourite
what we do.
else knows?
TV show?
What do these things
tell me about myself?
What is my
What are some
favourite memory?
aspects of who I am?
What really
makes me laugh?
If I could only wear
one thing what
would it be?
What foods
do I love?
Where is my
favourite place
in the world?
The voice in our head can be like two different coaches: one aggressive and critical
and one reassuring and supportive. Which coach do you want to be to other people?
Or to yourself? If you choose this coach now, is that how you always treated yourself?
New Identities
COVID-19 throws up logistical challenges but activities are still possible.
What can you do to build up your self-esteem? Here are some examples:
• Take on something new.
• Re-start something old.
• Push the boundaries a little.
• Enjoy yourself.
• Change the routine.
• Contact someone.
• Delete someone.
• Build yourself up.
Try some of these out before beginning the next module and see if they help build
some self-esteem or confidence.
MODULE 7: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Building Positive Beliefs about Yourself
Please write down five positive words to describe yourself.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Now, please write down five balanced beliefs that you have about yourself by completing the sentences below
(not entirely positive, not entirely negative e.g. ‘I am great at getting work done, but only in the morning’).
1. I am
2. I am
3. I am
4. I am
5. I am
Pulling all of this together means?
You are good enough.
MODULE 7: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 7: Identity
Practice Task
Answer the following questions.
What can you say about the situation (a situation in which you would normally self-critique) that allows you
to accept it?
What can you say about yourself that allows you to accept yourself in the situation?
Module Summary: Learning Points
1. COVID-19 has taken away so much, it has been easy to lose a sense of who we are.
2. We are more than what we do.
3. We can remind ourselves who we really are and bring warmth and appreciation to that person.
MODULE 7: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Module 8:
Review and Ending
There is no real ending It is just the place
where you stop the story”
- Frank Herbert
Module Aims:
1. As part of this review module, we would like to acknowledge some important concepts such as:
practice, setbacks and failure.
3. Reflect on the progress you have made since Module 1.
Keep the Practice Going:
Some people find it difficult to keep practicing their new skills. This may be because:
• They don’t think that they are making any progress, even though others see a change.
• Progress can be slow and may not always seem noticeable.
• They underrate their achievements: It is really important to praise yourself for your efforts. You are living
through a pandemic and you are surviving. What you are doing is EXTRAORDINARY.
• You are facing all the fear in the world and coping. This is EXTRAORDINARY.
Setbacks and Difficulties:
• Setbacks are inevitable. They happen to everyone.
• When they occur people can sometimes become alarmed or lose motivation.
• A setback can be seen as devastating because the person has put a lot of effort into recovering.
• No matter how badly you feel during a setback, you have been building and building (don’t let this setback
destroy your amazing work).
• Setbacks often occur at times when you face additional stresses in your life, as well as trying to manage
anxiety or low mood. Understand this and try to encourage self-acceptance and compassion.
MODULE 8: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
MODULE 8: Review and Ending
Fail, Fail Again, Better:
Module 8:
• Even if you slip back a little due to a setback, it isn’t a catastrophe; you moved forward once,
you can do it again.
Review and Ending
• Ups and downs in anxiety and depression are the rule rather than the exception.
• Coping successfully with setbacks actually builds your confidence, and you are less likely to stumble over the
same problem in the future.
• It is part and parcel of learning and growing.
• Being too afraid of failing, may stop you from achieving.
What to do:
Keep a record of what you are doing right. This can be used as evidence to yourself even if a setback occurs.
Managing Setbacks:
If you do experience a setback read through the hand-outs from this workbook again and follow these
recommendations.
• Review your thought-challenging strategies and check for thinking errors.
• Be alert for ‘Shoulds’ and unhelpful expectations of yourself.
• Give yourself plenty of support and encouragement (this can be key and is often times the most
forgotten about).
Practice Task
Allocate yourself some time to reflect on the progress you have made since you began Module 1 of this workbook
MODULE 8: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Winding Down and Closure
The COVID-19 pandemic turned the world upside down and it turned many people’s lives upside down.
There is nothing surprising if you have felt anxious, stressed or low because of it.
The reality is that people have been managing incredibly, often while also managing feelings of
depression or anxiety.
Congratulate yourself. What you are doing is amazing. You are living through history and surviving. None
of this is easy. We hope that some of the exercises in this workbook resonate with you and work for you
and that every day becomes a little more hopeful.
MODULE 8: Coping with Covid 19 Workbook
Stillorgan, County Dublin
t + 353 1 277 1400