Do disasters trigger protests? A conceptual view and review of the
connection between disasters, injustice, and protests – the case of
COVID-19
Sara Vestergren1†*, Mete Sefa Uysal2†, and Selin Tekin3†
1 School of Psychology, Keele University, Keele, UK
2 Department of Social Psychology, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, Germany
3 School of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of St Andrews, Fife, UK
†These authors have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship
*Correspondence:
Sara Vestergren
s.vestergren@keele.ac.uk
Keywords: protest, disaster, COVID-19, pandemic, injustice, inequality
Abstract
People around the globe were and are affected by the highly contagious virus SARS-CoV-2
(Coronavirus, COVID-19) far beyond the virus itself. Despite the high viral transmission,
people did not stop acting collectively. Sometimes these collective actions were against
government regulations to health and safety (e.g., anti-lockdown), or to deal with systemic
injustice and inequality affecting specific groups (e.g., Black Lives Matter). In this
conceptual paper, we discuss the relation between protests and disasters. More specifically
we discuss the crucial element of perceived social injustice and inequality for protest to
emerge during or in the aftermath of disasters. We review literature related to disasters and
protests before moving on to the COVID-19 pandemic to discuss how the context of COVID-
19 can have influenced protests as well as protests’ potential impact on viral transmission.
We demonstrate that protests during or in the aftermath of disasters are not uncommon.
Furthermore, we suggest a direct link between emergent or increased perceived injustice and
inequality and protests during/after disasters.
1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic, as other disasters previously, forced people to change their
everyday lives and made old habits questionable. In disasters and mass-emergencies people
are more likely to engage in collective action and cooperative behaviours than to panic and
engage in selfish behaviours (e.g., Drury, 2018; Grimm et al., 2014). Similar patterns have
been observed during the COVID-19 pandemic, where people join mutual aid groups to help
others in their communities with for example dog-walking, shopping, and other things to
facilitate reduction in virus transmission (see Fernandes-Jesus et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2021).
Research on collective action in the form of cooperation and mutual aid during and after
disasters have increased in the last decade, demonstrating that in disasters a shared fate often
develops which facilitates for a shared identity to emerge (e.g., Drury et al., 2009a, 2009b).
Through shared fate, people come to see themselves as part of the same group or community,
which functions as a base for solidarity, cohesion, and empowerment to emerge (Drury and
Reicher, 1999, 2009). In their studies of mass-emergencies and disasters, Drury et al. (2009a,
Disasters and Protests
2009b; for review see Drury, 2018) show how the shared experience create unity as social
relations between the victims/survivors are created or amplified. The unity and shared
identity that emerges increases both the likelihood of supporting others perceived to belong to
the same shared identity, and the expectation of support from other group/community
members (Drury et al., 2016). When people act in solidarity, they do not only share a
common fate and come together, but they are also empowered to take strategic steps to cope
with the disaster. For example, solidarity can reach across group boundaries, and aid in
mobilisation. The process of collective empowerment can be achieved with strategic steps,
these steps include reaching out to wider groups of supporters who are not directly affected
by the disaster (Tekin Güven and Drury, 2020), hence mobilising solidarity and support
further. As demonstrated above, it is not uncommon that collective action, in the form of
cooperation, emerges during and after disasters (e.g., Aldrich, 2013 Alfadhli and Drury,
2018; Drury et al., 2016; Ntontis et al., 2018, 2020).
Nardulli et al. (2015) argue, based on studies of rapid-onset climate change disasters (e.g.,
storms and floods), that collective action after disasters can take one more path, in addition to
cooperation, the path of conflict. While identifying that capacity to generate solidarity creates
cooperation after disasters, Nardulli et al. suggest that fear, scarcity, and uncertainty can
create conflict. However, the literature exploring the conflict path in the aftermath of
disasters mainly focus on civil war, conflict between an armed large group against the
authorities, as a consequence of a disaster (Slettebak, 2013). Additionally, most of the
conflict studies focus on the national level, which neglects that disasters can impact smaller
areas and collective actions occur locally within nations. What is less known in the ‘conflict
path’ is the connection between disasters and other types of ‘conflictual’ collective actions,
such as local protests, rallies, and demonstrations. In this paper, we synthesise previous
research on disasters and collective action (in the form of protests and collective activism)
and use the COVID-19 pandemic as a case study to theorise about protests in the aftermath of
the pandemic. Before addressing protest in relation to COVID-19 we start by outlining
predictors of unrest after disasters and emphasise a few cases where protests have been linked
to the aftermath of disasters.
2. Predictors of political unrest after disasters
Although Nardulli et al. (2015) identify human threats as predictors of conflict, they
emphasise that these alone are not sufficient for conflict to arise. They argue, as seen
elsewhere, that there is a plethora of social and societal mechanisms involved in the
emergence of conflict. It should also be emphasised that only a small portion of disasters
have been related to subsequent conflict. For example, Nardulli et al. (2015) found that only
15% of storms and floods had resulted in increased intensity in political violence. Using a
longitudinal perspective on disasters in India (1956-2002), Slettebak (2013) explored whether
disasters had an impact on the likelihood of violent politically motivated collective action.
Similar to Nardulli et al. (2015), Slettebak did not find a link between natural disasters and
widespread politically motivated violence. Slettebak (2013) explains the findings through a
broader discussion suggesting that the likelihood of protests is lower in authoritarian regimes
violently suppressing collective actions.
The importance of societal factors, such as a country’s ruling system or economical level
have been identified as predictors for emergence of unrest after disasters. For example,
exploring the risk of violent civil conflict in the aftermath of disasters, Nel and Righarts
(2008) found that there was a risk for violent civil conflict both in the short- and medium-
term after a disaster. Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions could introduce a larger risk of
Disasters and Protests
creating conflict due to their rapid onset (as opposed to slow onset) as well as widespread
consequences. Furthermore, they identified that the risk of conflict was increased in countries
with high inequality, low or middle income and slow economic growth, as well as if the
disaster was earthquake or volcanic eruption. However, due to systemic injustices, even
though a country’s ruling system is identified as democratic or the country is considered a
rich country, unrest can still emerge in relation to disasters (Tierney et al., 2006; Solnit,
2009). The unrest is likely to emerge from the authorities lack of consideration that different
groups will have different levels of needs and require varied disaster support for survival
before, during, and after a disaster. Hence, the state response and preparation also need to be
emphasised in the disaster-conflict relationship. The response of the state has a large impact
on whether conflict arises, regardless of whether there are other factors, such as scarcity, that
influences the public to challenge authority (Nel and Righarts, 2008). The effect of disaster
properties as well as societal factors have also been emphasised in more recent models.
Ide et al. (2021) studied flood-related political unrest in Africa, Asia and the Middle East
between 2015 and 2018, and identified five intertwined conditions for disaster related
political unrest. The first condition is connected to impact in terms of loss of lives, livelihood,
or assets etcetera. The second condition is the area’s economic development (GDP). GDP
affects, for example, whether people have the privilege to move to less disaster-prone areas,
as well as their ability to prepare for disasters. Restrictions in mobility and preparation can
lead to frustration which in turn elicits political unrest (Ide et al., 2021). Furthermore, Koren
et al. (2021) argues, in a study on climate disaster in Kenya, that in cases where both food
and water insecurity occur, reinforcing each other, so does social unrest. Ide et als’. (2021)
third condition is linked to the size of population. The impact in densely populated
communities is greater. Additionally, large population areas are more likely to be
heterogeneous, which increases the likelihood of some people being in opposition to the state
as well as having time to protest. Relatedly, the fourth condition, democratic system, can
have an impact through leadership as well as repression. Ide et al. (2021) suggest that in
democratic societies where the risk of repressive consequences is lower, along with the
likelihood of responsive leaders/authorities, the risk of protests might be higher compared to
repressive autocratic societies. Conversely, they also emphasise that the government’s
response to the disaster, such as repressive measures, can be a factor in eliciting political
unrest. The last condition relates to societal inequality and exclusion and refers to certain
groups being excluded from the political power (ethnopolitical exclusion), and less likely to
receive support before and after disasters. Taken together, societal factors often overweigh
the disaster properties in relation to risk of unrest in the aftermath of disasters. Importantly,
the above-mentioned studies focus on a widespread civil conflict or unrest and neglect the
more common type of conflict/collective action such as protest marches or rallies. In the next
section we will outline some examples of disasters that have elicited national and local
protests activities, after addressing the social psychological framework for collective action
emergence.
3. Cases of protest linked to previous disasters
Social psychological models identify three key psychological antecedents for participating in
protests. First, a sense of shared identity, an identification with a relevant group, predicts
collective action participation (e.g., Drury and Reicher, 2000; Tajfel and Turner, 1979; van
Zomeren et al., 2008). The shared identification could for example be as a minority
community member, a woman, a union member, or an environmentalist. Second, perceived
collective injustice, illegitimacy and collective anger as a result of inequalities, predict
Disasters and Protests
engagement in collective action (e.g., Becker et al., 2011; Drury and Reicher, 2005;
Runciman, 1966; Walker and Smith, 2002; van Zomeren et al., 2008). The perceived
collective injustice can be in relation to one’s own group, or in solidarity with another group
(e.g., Subašić et al., 2008). Last, collective efficacy beliefs, a sense of control, agency,
strength, and collective effectiveness to challenge the existing power relations predict
participation in collective action (e.g., Blackwood and Louis, 2012; Klandermans, 1984; van
Zomeren et al., 2004). We argue that disasters can offset or increase already existing
perceived group-based injustice (e.g., Templeton et al., 2020), create a shared social identity
(e.g., Drury et al., 2009a,b), as well create or increase perceived collective efficacy through a
perception that ‘we’ can be effectful in toppling the power or changing power relations (e.g.,
changing policy around cladding, increasing transparency in state communication, or shifting
the political governance).
Most protests, both disaster-related and others, regardless of the cause or concern, have a
focus on fighting perceived societal injustice or inequality, seeking justice or truth. For
example, after the horrific events at the Hillsborough stadium where 96 people lost their lives
the victims’ families were campaigning to seek truth and justice for the victims (Cronin,
2017). For 27 years the fans were blamed for causing the crush, before it was acknowledged
that the police had lied and kept pushing the lie.
On the 11th March 2004, four bombs went off on trains in Madrid, killing 192 people and
leaving many others injured (Flesher Fominaya, 2011). After the disaster, the government
was quick to blame ETA (Euskadi Ta Askatasuna) even though there was information
pointing elsewhere. On the 14th March 2004, Spain was about to have its political election.
The day before the election, protests and flash mobs named M-13 by the activists occurred.
These protests were mainly fuelled by the perception that the government, still blaming ETA,
was withholding the truth about the bombings, and were involved in a media blackout
(Flesher Fominaya, 2011). Activists protested in front of the ruling party’s headquarter in
Madrid, and quickly grew to become 3000-5000 in the crowd. Later that night, similar
protests emerged in other cities across Spain. Whether or not related to the protests against
the government coverup – it was later proved that the bomb attacks were executed by Al-
Qaeda – the opposition party won unexpectedly, and the voter turnout was extraordinarily
high. These protests were kept alive, by mainly young people, for several years, organising
protests and flash mobs under the name of 15-M protesting austerity (Flesher Fominaya,
2011).
After the Hurricane Katrina disaster, in and around the city of New Orleans in the US, in
August 2005, several grassroot movements and social movements emerged along with
strengthening of already existing movements. These movements were mainly focusing on
creating a community, while emphasising the inequalities, injustice and restrictions to human
rights (Luft, 2009). The relation between systemic injustice and disaster was particularly
clear in Hurricane Katrina. Poorer areas, with a majority Black population, were affected
more during the disaster than richer (Whiter) areas. Additionally, while people with more
financial funds could both prepare for and acquire disaster support, the authorities responded
very late with disaster support and relief to the poorer areas. The late response, led to people
having to find resources and materials to survive where available, for example from shops,
which in turn led to them being described as looters and criminals by some media outlets
(Tierney et al., 2006; Solnit, 2009). For at least two years after Hurricane Katrina there were
protests, against social injustice, on Gretna Bridge – where the police stopped people from
evacuating the disaster area (Heldman, 2010). Furthermore, The People’s Hurricane Relief
Disasters and Protests
Fund organised a demonstration in December 2005 with a focus on human rights and the
right to return (Luft, 2009).
The Bangkok floods of 2011 in Thailand was a slow onset disaster - the government had a
period of about three months to spend on disaster management and preparation (Marks et al.,
2020). The government decided to protect the inner city by building floodwalls, resulting in
outer areas of the city being worse off than if the water had been allowed to flow freely
(Marks et al., 2020). In the case of the Bangkok floods, there was, as with Hurrican Katrina, a
clear difference in the government’s treatment of the rich (inner city) and poor (outer city)
areas, demonstrating flood injustice and societal inequality. Based on the injustice, non-
violent protests emerged from about 20 communities outside the floodwall (Marks et al.,
2020). The protesters demanded that the government should see and treat them as citizens of
Bangkok too and started to question the right of defining justice.
In 2011 an earthquake-triggered tsunami caused a shut-down of the cooling systems at
Fukushima nuclear plants in Japan, causing a meltdown in three of the plant’s six reactors.
The tsunami killed 20 000 people (Ikegami, 2012) and devastated coastal towns, shut down
business and communication (Funabashi and Kitazawa, 2021). On the backend of this, the
Fukushima meltdown caused more than 300 000 people to be evacuated, and many of them
faced not being able to return home for a very long time (Aldrich, 2013). There was already
an existing anti-nuclear movement in Japan, however, the disaster prompted more people to
question the lack of peoples’ influence on policy. The disaster mobilised further support for
the anti-nuclear movement while also creating an emerging movement where citizens started
measuring the radiation on their own devices as well as organising marches and protests
outside the PM’s home and the national parliament (Aldrich, 2013; Ikegami, 2012). The
mobilisation of the anti-nuclear movement and people’s science movement stemmed from
discontent with the government’s handling of the disaster, lack of transparency,
misinformation and supressing both information and data (Aldrich, 2013; Ikegami, 2012).
Hence, once again it was not the disaster itself that caused the protests but rather the
government’s handling of the disaster along with spreading lies and misinformation.
In June 2017 a fire broke out in the Grenfell Tower block in West London, UK. Along with
building a community and support, campaigners started protest campaigns in the aftermath of
the disaster to challenge negative stereotypes and injustice through government inaction
(Tekin Güven and Drury, 2020, 2021). The Grenfell community campaigners self-organized
and engaged in non-violent protest activities such as petitions and regular silent walks, still
ongoing to seek justice while this paper is written.
Apart from the connection to disasters, the protest and collective action events described
above have in common the feature of social injustice and inequality, and state inaction and
mistrust. They have a narrative of group-based injustice, distinct outgroups (indicating shared
identity) as well as shared social group membership as victims or survivors. Hence, it is not
the disaster itself that mobilises various protest movements – it is the lack of preparation,
response and management from the authorities and other state actors that provide a platform
for the three key predictors (shared identity, group-based injustice, collective efficacy) of
collective action to emerge or accelerate. Based on what we know from previous disasters
and research on collective action, how can understand the protests during the global COVID-
19 pandemic? In the next section, we will discuss a few of the protest events occurring during
COVID-19.
4. Protests during the COVID-19 pandemic
Disasters and Protests
As demonstrated above, protests during or in the aftermath of disasters is not uncommon and
has a direct link to emergent or increased social injustice as a result of the disaster. The
COVID-19 pandemic has like other disasters disproportionately affected already
marginalised communities (see Templeton et al., 2020). At the beginning of the pandemic, a
decrease in protests could be observed around the world. However, during 2020 the total
number of protests increased by 3% compared to 2019 (Kishi et al., 2021). Furthermore,
compared to 2019, 2020 saw an increase in peaceful protests, and a decrease in the number of
protests met with authority intervention as well as a decrease in the number of fatalities
related to protests (Kishi et al., 2021).
During the pandemic, several areas of protest causes were observed. We will use two
movements to discuss the protests during the pandemic; Black Lives Matter (BLM) and anti-
governmental measures enforced to decrease viral transmission (e.g., anti-lockdown). For
example, BLM protests1 have been a recurring feature worldwide during the pandemic,
similarly, anti-lockdown protests have been reported from various areas around the globe
such as Italy2, Germany and France3, and the US4 to name a few. At the core of both these
protest movements is the perception of protesting perceived injustice in relation to human
rights. It is important to emphasise that social injustices and inequalities have increased or
been made more visible through the COVID-19 pandemic (Iacoella et al., 2021; Templeton et
al., 2020).
The worldwide BLM protests, after the killing of George Floyd (May 25th 2020), coincided
with the early stages of global outbreak and enforcement of national measures to try to
manage the transmission of the corona virus (SARS-CoV-2). During the week after the
killing of George Floyd more than 8700 protests were recorded across 74 countries (Kishi
and Jones, 2020). In total in the US, over 10 600 protests were recorded between 24th May
and 22nd August 2020 (Kishi and Jones, 2020). In line with general patterns of protest, more
than 90% of the protests were peaceful (Kishi and Jones, 2020). In America, 11 Americans
were killed while participating in political protests, 9 of these were from BLM and 2 from
pro-Trump protests, and an additional 14 were killed in related events (Beckett, 2020).
In the light of a global pandemic, the big questions are; why did people risk getting infected
and spread the virus and did the protests increase viral transmission? The legitimacy of the
protests during the pandemic became the subject of heated discussions. On the one hand, the
protests were described as events that accelerated the spread of the coronavirus and were
discussed as a public health threat. On the other hand, governments and state actors (e.g.,
police) were accused of attacking the right to protest by using lockdowns and pandemic
measures as excuses to clamp down on protesters.
The global spread of the virus with accompanying measures to reduce viral transmission put
public health and public welfare (societal inequality) at odds. The restrictions to reduce viral
spread affected people’s freedom of movement, assembly, and expression. ‘New’ legislation
to protect public health also provided authorities with more ground to strike down on protests
(Kampmark, 2020). For example, in the UK during the early stages of the pandemic (until the
end of May 2020) assemblies outdoors of more than three people were unlawful, it was later
Disasters and Protests
changed to allowing six people to gather (Kampmark, 2020). Similarly, in New South Wales,
Australia, police tried to block demonstrations demanding justice for the deaths of indigenous
people in custody. Police threatened potential protesters with fines for breaching health
orders, based on the arguments (with no evidence) that BLM protests had led to high
infection rates (Kontominas, 2020). Drawing on the restrictions in mobility allowing only
‘essential activity’ police in both the US (NCAC, 2020) and Australia (O’Sullivan, 2020)
dispersed or fined protesters even though they were socially distancing (e.g., being inside
their cars). The added public health legislation might also be a factor in police use of force
during protests. In 2020 the US authorities intervened in 9% of all protests, compared to 2%
in 2019 (Kishi and Jones, 2020). It should also be noted that authorities intervened in 9% of
all BLM protests in the US, compared to 2% for other protests, with 5% of BLM protests
being met with force compared to less than 1% for other protests (Kishi and Jones, 2020).
This disproportionality, in turn, can further fuel the perception of inequality and societal and
racial injustice.
One strong driver of the argument that protests increased viral transmission (without
evidence) was the media. For example, the Herald Sun (Australia) blamed the BLM protests
for the spike in infections (Tavan, 2020). When it was later shown that there were no new
infections related to the protests the accusation changed to the argument that protests
encouraged people to come out of their homes – argued to spread the virus (it was later
shown that the spike was related to companies failing to report positive cases within
employee groups) (Tavan, 2020). Conversely, there have been arguments that not protesting
societal inequality and racial injustice can be an even larger public health risk than the
COVID-19 pandemic and therefore the protests need to continue even in the context of the
pandemic (see Kampmark, 2020; Langton, 2020; Ramsden, 2020). Others take a more
nuanced route by arguing that protests should be facilitated, in ways that makes pro-health
behaviours possible (O’Sullivan, 2020). One clear indication of the extent of the argument
that protests are needed even during a pandemic, is the number of articles focusing on staying
safe while protesting (see e.g., Aubrey and Gomez Sarmiento, 2020; Russo, 2020). The
existence of these articles could be understood as some issues need to be continued and
emphasised even through periods of global disasters – one disaster does not make another go
away. The protective measures suggested in guides for safe protesting during COVID-19 are
described as being outdoors, wearing masks, keeping social distance, and keeping up proper
hand hygiene (Aubrey and Gomez Sarmiento, 2020) – hence the same measures as in all
other contexts. There were also reports of protesters urging other protesters to get tested after
participation (Russo, 2020). Despite the increased police powers and the widespread media
accusations that protests were potential ‘super spreaders’ why did people protest during
COVID-19?
5. How did COVID-19 cause protests?
People will take collective action and participate in protests for causes that resonate with their
values and worldview. Choma et al. (2021) surveyed people across the political (and
ideological) spectrum and found that participants less supportive of protective measures and
compliance in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic scored high on Right Wing
Authoritarianism (RWA) and Social Dominance Orientation (SDO), but neither RWA nor
SDO predicted collective action. However, scoring high on empathy and group-efficacy
predicted collective action tendencies. Rather than focusing on political and ideological
dimensions, Bartusevičius et al. (2021) explored the association between the psychological
burden of COVID-19 and several dimensions of political unrest in the US, Denmark, Italy
Disasters and Protests
and Hungary. They found that the psychological burden from COVID-19 was associated with
antisystemic attitudes and intentions for both non-violent political activism and intentions to
engage in political violence. Bartusevičius et al. (2021) also found an association between
self-reported use of violence during BLM protests and counter protests and COVID-19
burden in the US. However, neither political, ideological, nor burden dimensions are likely to
make someone protest on its own. It could be suggested that for protest to emerge in relation
to the above dimensions there also need to be an exposure and opportunity to protest.
With global lockdowns and stay at home restrictions, people had more time to spend on
social media (e.g., Grant and Smith, 2021). The increased time on social media increased the
exposure to messages highlighting social inequalities (Grant and Smith, 2021; Ramsden,
2020). The exposure to social inequalities via social media during the pandemic might
increase people's sense of perceived injustice and illegitimacy, in turn, collective anger.
Importantly, protests are useful in raising awareness (e.g., Bugden, 2020) as well as
mobilising and motivating people in other places to take similar action (e.g., Drury et al.,
2020), providing an opportunity for more people to get involved (Ramsden, 2020). Seeing
others take action, or when there is a perception of many taking action has an impact on the
perceived collective efficacy (e.g., Haugestad et al., 2021). Furthermore, the more people that
join, the more inclusive the shared category gets, which allows for more people to identify
with the group and the causes (Louis et al., 2016). Hence, some elements of the pandemic
might have allowed for increased mobilisation and collective action activity through exposure
to the common predictors of collective action (see e.g., Van Zomeren et al., 2008).
Consequently, the increased frustration and perception of injustice, and sense of a shared
identity through shared struggle, along with the sense that we can challenge the existing
power relations (e.g., authorities) can increase the likelihood of people taking collective
action and joining protests, even during a global pandemic.
The pandemic exposed already existing unequal societal systems, and increased inequalities
further in already marginalised communities (Templeton et al., 2020). Iacoella et al. (2021)
argues that in the US, counties with existing high inequality were more likely to experience
protests in relation to negative consequences of the pandemic. Marginalised communities are
often characterised by an existing lack of trust in governmental measures (see Murphy and
Cherney, 2017; Williams, 1998). Additionally, enforcement of strict pandemic measures,
leading to increase in protest, hit marginalised communities hardest as they are less likely to
have financial and social buffers, hence restrictions limit their access to basic survival means
(Iacoella et al., 2021). People that had lost their jobs or had other financial issues because of
the pandemic were more likely to participate in the BLM protests, through a wider
framework of opposing inequality and police brutality (Arora, 2020). Furthermore, of their
surveyed participants, Arora (2020) found that 52% had been affected negatively financially
by the pandemic. In terms of ethnicity, 69% of black participants, compared to 46% of white
participants, reported financial hardship caused by the pandemic. Although all participants
agreed with the wider cause of the protests (i.e., racial injustice), Arora (2020) emphasised
that the pandemic was the factor that made them take to the streets.
To sum up, inaction and failures by governments to manage the pandemic have functioned to
increase existing social injustice, thereby fuelling protests (Kishi et al., 2021). In the next,
and final section, we address the common critique directed toward protests during the
pandemic – the argument of protests as ‘super-spreaders’.
6. Protests and Virus Spread
Disasters and Protests
During the pandemic protests around the world, such as BLM protests in the US, farmer
resistance in India, protests against violence towards women in the UK, and Boğaziçi
resistance in Turkey were subject to heavy-handed policing or police brutality, justified by
citing COVID-19 pandemic and health measures (e.g., Stott et al., 2021). However, when
focusing on the evidence for viral transmission during protests, the picture becomes different
to that painted by state actors, media and opposers to the protest causes (e.g., Kampmark,
2020).
In relation to the BLM protests, it has been argued that there is no clear evidence of a protest-
related increase in the transmission of the coronavirus (Berger, 2020). There have even been
suggestions that the large BLM protests resulted in a decrease in viral transmission (e.g.,
Dave et al., 2021a). The lack of viral transmission during protests has been related to for
example protests being held outdoors, often in sunny weather, and in a context where most
people were wearing masks and physically moving (Berger, 2020). Using cell-phone data and
coronavirus data to assess the viral transmission in relation to BLM protests in large cities in
the US, Dave et al. (2021a) suggests that the viral transmission and the growth of the virus,
for 35 days post-protests (measured in 242 cities), decreased. They explain the decrease
though protesters mainly adhering to mask-wearing and socially distancing coupled with
expected behaviours the protesters would have engaged in if not protesting (e.g., meeting up
in restaurants or other indoor areas etc.). In cities where there were large protests, indoor
venues (e.g., restaurants and smaller shops) closed, and locals not involved in the protests
stayed at home rather than going about with their normal day-to-day behaviours which would
have been riskier in terms of viral spread. Furthermore, Dave et al. (2021a) noted that in the
surrounding areas of the cities with protests, there were no increase in the viral spread –
hence, the BLM protest, as well as other protests with similar features, cannot be considered
as super-spreader events, or even spreader events.
However, some protests (or collective events) have been found to increase viral transmission.
Anti-lockdown protests in Germany (‘hygiene demo’) increased the viral transmission across
the protesters' residential areas post-protests (Lange and Monscheure, 2021). Lange and
Monscheuer (2021) explain the increase in viral transmission through the protesters (e.g.,
COVID-deniers) being less likely to adhere to protective health measures. Similarly, in mid-
August 2020, about 500 000 motorcycle enthusiasts gathered in Sturgis, South Dakota, US
for a motorcycle rally. Dave et al. (2021b) found that the event was mainly characterised by
non-mask wearing and non-adherence to other protective guidelines, as well as a general
opposition to the pandemic “we’re being human once again. Fuck that covid-shit” (p. 770).
Through cell-phone data, Dave et al. (2021b) found that indoor venues such as restaurants in
the area had an increase in customers by 30-90%. In the month following the rally, viral
transmission and positive COVID-19 cases increased substantially in the counties with large
numbers of rally participants.
How can we explain how some protests become ‘super-spreaders’ while others reduce viral
transmission? A key difference between the events described above (BLM, ‘hygiene demo’
and the Sturgis rally) is the behavioural norms within the groups. During the BLM protests,
most participants were wearing masks and socially distanced (Berger, 2020; Dave et al.,
2021). Conversely, during the German anti-lockdown protest as well as the Sturgis rally, the
crowd was mainly characterised by opposition to COVID-measures, as well as lack of mask
wearing and social distancing (Dave et al., 2021b; Lange and Monscheure, 2021). In crowd
events such as protests and rallies a shared social identity often emerges (e.g., Reicher, 1984).
The social identity, shared with other protest participants, provides us with definitions of
Disasters and Protests
possible and appropriate conduct, and enables people to act collectively in normative ways
according to ingroup norms (see Drury and Reicher, 2000; Neville et al., 2021). When a
social identity is salient, people will view themselves as a member of that group identity and
act according to the identity norms and values. Hence, if part of your social identity is to
oppose COVID-restriction, or deny the very existence of COVID-19, then you are less likely
to take protective measures while in the protest context of anti-lockdown measures.
Conversely, if part of your identity is to protect vulnerable or minoritised people/populations
such as the BLM protests (or climate protests which are also characterised by protective
measures5,6,7), then you may be more likely to wear a mask and keep social distance during
the protest. Importantly, based on the studies provided above, although still very limited in
numbers, and the social identity framework of protest participation (see e.g., Drury and
Reicher, 2000; Vestergren et al., 2019) we argue that protests with norms of protective
behaviours (e.g., mask wearing and social distancing) are unlikely to become ‘super-
spreader’ events, or even spreader events. However, if a group norm is to oppose all COVID-
19 protective measures, then the protest has a great potential to contribute to widespread viral
transmission due to participants acting according to the group norms.
Consequently, protests in themselves should not be seen as ‘super-spreaders’ – contextual
factors and the salient social identity (with ingroup values and norms that guide behaviour)
determine whether a protest increases or decreases the spread of the coronavirus.
7. Conclusion
Disasters, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, often create, or accelerate, the predictors of
collective action participation. Perceived collective injustice is often in relation to state
actors’ inability to prepare, manage and respond to the disaster, and spreading
misinformation. As disasters often have the prerequisites for collective action participation –
maybe the question that should be asked next is ‘why do protests not occur after disasters?’.
One potential factor to the lack of, or lack of research and reporting on, disaster-related
protests could be the need to prioritise the cooperation route (see e.g., Drury et al., 2009a,b)
to ensure one self’s and others’ survival in the aftermath of disasters.
Slettebak (2013) notes that a storm (or other mass-event) is only a storm until it has human
consequences/costs, then it becomes a disaster. We would argue, based on previous research,
that for the ‘storm’ to become a disaster, it often needs to have a disastrous preparation and
response from state actors, leading to the human costs. The state response, or lack thereof, to
the disaster can in turn mobilise protests. The political dimension of disasters has also been
noted in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has become highly politicised,
as well as changed patterns for protests around the globe (Kishi and Jones, 2020). Through
exposing and accelerating social inequalities, the pandemic offered more opportunities to
exposure and mobilisation to movements. Even though it has been widely argued that
protests are ‘super-spreaders’, this argument cannot be generalised to all protests. We suggest
that the shared social identity in the crowd, with accompanying values and behavioural
norms, is a large factor in whether a protest becomes a ‘super-spreader’.
To sum up, disaster-related protest follows the same pattern of predictors as non-disaster
protests, however disasters are likely to accelerate and amplify those predictors through state
Disasters and Protests
inaction. There is a need for research to focus on the relation between protests and disaster, as
protests are a way of raising voice against systemic injustices emerged or increased in the
case of an emergency or disaster. Furthermore, protestors or people and their actions affected
by the disasters are often blamed or criminalised, delegitimising their aims and actions, for
example by blaming them for virus spread or portraying them as looters. Future research
should focus on how these systemic injustices occur and how people take an action to fight
them or survive in an unjust system amplified by poorly managed disasters. For example,
focus on the kind of strategies people use for public safety and seeking justice.
Reference list:
Aldrich, D. (2013). Rethinking civil society-state relations in Japan after the Fukushima
Alfadhli, K., and Drury, J. (2018). The role of shared social identity in mutual support among
refugees of conflict: An ethnographic study of Syrian refugees in Jordan. Journal of
Arora, M. (2020, August 5). How the coronavirus pandemic helped the Floyd protests
become the biggest in U.S. history. The Washington Post.
helped-floyd-protests-become-biggest-us-history/
Aubrey, A., and Gomez Sarmiento, I. (2020, June 5). Coronavirus FAQs: How to stay safe
while protesting, when you go out after recovery. NPR.
how-to-stay-safe-while-protesting-when-to-go-out-after-recovery
Bartusevičius, H., Bor, A., Jorgensen, F., and Petersen, M. B. (2021). The psychological
burden of the COVID-19 pandemic is associated with anti-systemic attitudes and
political violence. Psychological Science. Advance online publication.
Becker, J., Tausch, N., and Wagner, U. (2011). Emotional consequences of collective action
participation: Differentiating self-directed and outgroup-directed emotions. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 1587-1598.
Beckett, L. (2020, October 31). At least 25 Americans were killed during protests and
political unrest in 2020. The Guardian.
unrest-acled
Berger, M. (2020, July 8). Why the Black Lives Matter protests didn't contribute to the
matter-protests-didnt-contribute-to-covid19-surge
Disasters and Protests
Blackwood, L., and Louis, W. (2012). If it matters for the group then it matters to me:
Collective action outcomes for seasoned activists. British Journal of Social Psychology,
Bugden, D. (2020). Does climate protest work? Partisanship, protest, and sentiment pools.
Socius: Sociological Research for a Dynamic World, 6, 1-13.
Choma, B., Hodson, G., Sumantry, D., Hanoch, Y., and Gummerum, M. (2021). Ideological
and psychological predictors of COVID-19-related collective action, opinions, and
health compliance across three nations. Journal of Social and Political Psychology,
Cronin, M. (2017). Loss, protests, and heritage: Liverpool FC and Hillsborough. The
International Journal of the History of Sport, 34(3-4), 251-265.
Dave, D., Friedson, A., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J., and Safford, S. (2021a). Black Lives Matter
protests and risk avoidance: the case of civil unrest during a pandemic. National Bureau
Dave, D., McNichols, D., and Sabia, J. (2021b). The contagion externality of a
superspreading event: the Sturgis motorcycle rally and COVID-19. Southern Economic
Drury, J. (2018). The role of social identity processes in mass emergency behaviour: an
integrative review. European Review of Social Psychology, 29(1), 38-81.
Drury, J., and Reicher, S. (1999). The intergroup dynamics of collective empowerment:
substantiating the social identity model of crowd behaviour. Group Processes &
Drury, J., and Reicher, S. (2000). Collective action and psychological change: The
emergence of new social identities. British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 579–604.
Drury, J., and Reicher, S. (2005). Explaining enduring empowerment: A comparative study
of collective action and psychological outcomes. European Journal of Social
Drury, J., and Reicher, S. (2009). Collective psychological empowerment as a model of
social change: Researching crowds and power. Journal of Social Issues, 65, 707–725.
Drury, J., Brown, R., González, R., and Miranda, D. (2016). Emergent social identity and
observing social support predict social support provided by survivors in a disaster:
Solidarity in the 2010 Chile earthquake. European Journal of Social Psychology, 46(2),
Disasters and Protests
Drury, J., Cocking, C., and Reicher, S. (2009a). Everyone for themselves? A comparative
study of crowd solidarity among emergency survivors. British Journal of Social
Drury, J., Cocking, C., and Reicher, S. (2009b). The nature of collective resilience: survivor
reactions to the 2005 London bombings. International Journal of Mass Emergencies
Drury, J., Brown, R., González, R., and Miranda, D. (2016). Emergent social identity and
observing social support predict social support provided by survivors in a disaster:
solidarity in the 2010 Chile earthquake. European Journal of Social Psychology, 46(2),
Drury, J., Stott, C., Ball, R., Neville, F., Bell, L., Biddlestone, M., Choudhury, S., Lovell, M.,
and Ryan, C. (2020). A social identity model of riot diffusion: from injustice to
empowerment in the 2011 London riots. European Journal of Social Psychology, 50(3),
Fernandes-Jesus, M., Mao, G., Ntontis, E., Cocking, C., McTague, M., Schwarz, A.,
Semlyen, J., and Drury, J. (2021). More than a COVID-19 response: sustaining mutual
aid groups during and beyond the pandemic. Frontiers in Psychology.
Flesher Fominaya, C. (2011). The Madrid bombings and popular protest: misinformation,
counterinformation, mobilisation and elections after '11-M'. Contemporary Social
Funabashi, Y., and Kitazawa, K. (2012). Fukushima in review: a complex disaster, a
disastrous response. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 68(2), 9-21.
Grant, P., and Smith, H. (2021). Activism in the time of COVID-19. Group Processes &
Grimm, S., Lemay-Hérbert, N., and Nay, O. (2014). ‘Fragile States’: introducing a political
concept. Third World Quarterly, 35(2), 197-209.
Haugestad, C., Duun Skauge, A., Kunst, J., and Power, S. (2021). Why do youth participate
in climate activism? A mixed-methods investigation of the #FridaysForFuture climate
protests. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 76.
truths-of-katrina/
Iacoella, F., Justino, P., and Martorano, B. (2021). Do pandemics lead to rebellion? Policy
responses to COVID-19, inequality, and protests in the USA (WIDER Working Paper
No. 2021/57). World Institute for Development Economics Research.
paper/PDF/wp2021-57-pandemics-rebellion-policy-responses-COVID-19-inequality-
protests-USA.pdf
Disasters and Protests
Ide, T., Kristensen, A., and Bartusevičius, H. (2021). First comes the river, then comes the
conflict? A qualitative comparative analysis of flood-related political unrest. Journal of
Ikegami, Y. (2012). People's movement under the radioactive rain. Inter-Asia Cultural
Kampmark, B. (2020). Protesting in pandemic times. Contention, 8(2), 1-20.
Kishi, R., and Jones, S. (2020). Demonstrations and political violence in America: New data
for summer 2020. Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project.
data-for-summer-2020/
Kishi, R., Pavlik, M., Bynum, E., Miller, A., Goos, C., Satre, J., and Jones, S. (2021).
ACLED 2020: The year in review. Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project.
Klandermans, B. (1984). Mobilization and participation: Social-psychological expansions of
resource mobilization theory. American Sociological Review, 49(5), 583–
Kontominas, B. (2020, July 20). NSW police try to block Sydney Black Lives Matter protest
in Supreme Court due to coronavirus concerns. ABC News.
matter-protest-in-court/12474464
Koren, O., Bagozzi, B., and Benson, T. (2021). Food and water insecurity as causes of social
unrest: evidence from geolocated Twitter data. Journal of Peace Research, 58(1), 67-82.
Lange, M., and Monscheuer, O. (2021). Spreading the disease: protest in times of pandemics.
Langton, M. (2020, August 5). Why the Black Lives Matter protests must continue: an urgent
black-lives-matter-protests-must-continue-an-urgent-appeal-by-marcia-langton-143914
Louis, W., Amiot, C., Thomas, E., and Blackwood, L. (2016). The “activist identity” and
activism across domains: A multiple identities analysis. Journal of Social Issues, 72,
Luft, R. (2009). Beyond disaster exceptionalism: social movement developments in New
Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. American Quarterly, 61(3), 499-527.
Marks, D., Connell, J., and Ferrara, F. (2020). Contested notions of disaster justice during the
2011 Bangkok floods: unequal risk, unrest and claims to the city. Asia Pacific
Disasters and Protests
Mao, G., Fernandes-Jesus, M., Ntontis, E., and Drury, J. (2021). What have we learned about
COVID-19 volunteering in the UK? A rapid review of literature. BMC Public Health,
Murphy, K., and Cherney, A. (2017). Policing marginalized groups in a diverse society:
Using procedural justice to promote group belongingness and trust in police. In D.
Oberwittler & S. Roche (Eds.), Police-citizen relations across the world: Comparing
sources and contexts of trust and legitimacy (pp. 153-174). Routledge.
Marks, D., Connell, J., and Ferrara, F. (2020). Contested notions of disaster justice during the
2011 Bangkok floods: unequal risk, unrest and claims to the city. Asia Pacific
Nardulli, P., Peyton, B., and Bajjalieh, J. (2015). Climate change and civil unrest: the impact
of rapid-onset disasters. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 59(2), 310-335.
NCAC. (2020, August 7). The right to protest during the pandemic. National Coalition
Nel, P., and Righarts, M. (2008). Natural disasters and the risk of violent civil conflict.
Neville, F., Templeton, A., Smith, J., and Louis, W. (2021). Social norms, social identities
and the COVID-19 pandemic: Theory and recommendations. Social and Personality
Ntontis, E., Drury, J., Amlôt, R., Rubin, J.G., and Williams, R. (2018). Emergent social
identities in a flood: Implications for community psychosocial resilience. Journal of
Ntontis, E., Drury, J., Amlôt, R., Rubin, G.J., Williams, R. and Saavedra, P. (2020b),
Collective resilience in the disaster recovery period: Emergent social identity and
observed social support are associated with collective efficacy, well‐being, and the
provision of social support. British Journal of Social Psychology, 60(3), 1075-
O'Sulllivan, M. (2020, April 20). Is protesting during the pandemic an 'essential' right that
during-the-pandemic-an-essential-right-that-should-be-protected-136512
Ramsden, P. (2020, June 15). How the pandemic changed social media and George Floyd's
death created a collective conscience. The Conversation.
floyds-death-created-a-collective-conscience-140104
Reicher, S. (1984). The St. Pauls’ riot: an explanation of the limits of crowd action in terms
of social identity model. European Journal of Social Psychology, 14(1), 1-21.
Runciman, W. (1966). Relative deprivation and social justice: a study of attitudes to social
inequality in twentieth-century England. University of California Press.
Disasters and Protests
Russo, T. (2020, June 4). How to protest during a pandemic and still keep everyone safe from
pandemic-and-still-keep-everyone-safe-from-coronavirus-139978
Slettebak, R. (2013). Climate change, natural disasters, and post-disaster unrest in India.
Solnit, R. (2009). A paradise built in hell: The extraordinary communities that arise in
disaster. Penguin.
Stott, C., Radburn, M., Pearson, G., Kyprianides, A., Harrison, M., and Rowlands, D. (2021).
Police powers and public assemblies: learning from the Clapham Common ‘Vigil’
during the Covid-19 pandemic. Policing: A journal of Policy and Practice, paab060.
Subašić, E., Reynolds, K., and Turner, J. (2008). The political solidarity model of social
change: dynamics of self-categorization in intergroup power relations. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 12(4), 330-352.
Tekin Güven, S. and Drury, J. (2020). How do those affected by a disaster organize to meet
their needs for justice? Campaign strategies and partial victories following the Grenfell
Tekin Güven, S., and Drury J. (2021). Silent walk as a street mobilization: campaigning
following the Grenfell Tower fire. Journal of Community & Applied Social
Tajfel, H., and Turner, J. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In W. G.
Austin and S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 33-
48). Brooks/Cole.
Tavan, L. (2020, July 3). Who's to blame for Victoria's COVID-19 spike? Redflag - a
Templeton, A., Tekin Guven, S., Hoerst, C., Vestergren, S., Davidson, L., Ballentyne, S.,
Madsen, H., and Choudhry, S. (2020). Inequalities and identity processes in crises:
recommendations for facilitating safe response to the COVID-19 pandemic. British
Tierney, K., Bevc, C., and Kuligowski, E. (2006). Metaphors matter: Disaster myths, media
frames, and their consequences in Hurricane Katrina. The Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science, 604(1), 57-81.
van Zomeren, M., Spears, R., Fisher, A., and Leach, C. (2004). Put your money where your
mouth is! Explaining collective action tendencies through group-based anger and group
efficacy. Journal of Persoanlity ans Social Psychology, 87(5), 649-664.
Van Zomeren, M., Postmes, T., and Spears, R. (2008). Toward an integrative social identity
model of collective action: A quantitative research synthesis of three socio-
Disasters and Protests
psychological perspectives. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 504-535.
Vestergren, S., Drury, J., and Hammar Chiriac, E. (2019). How participation on collective
action changes relationships, behaviours, and beliefs: an interview study of the role of
inter- and intragroup processes. Journal of Social and Political Psychology, 7 (1), 76-
Walker, I., and Smith, H. J. (Eds.). (2002). Relative deprivation: Specification, development,
and integration. Cambridge University Press.
Williams, M. S. (1998). Voice, trust, and memory: Marginalized groups and the failings of
liberal representation. Princeton University Press.