Cultural similarities and specificities of finger counting and
montring: evidence from Amazon Tsimane’ people
Krzysztof Cipora1,2,3*, Venera Gashaj 2,4, Annabel S. Gridley1, Mojtaba Soltanlou2,5, & Hans-
Christoph Nuerk2,3
1 Centre for Mathematical Cognition, Loughborough University, United Kingdom
2 Department of Psychology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany
3 LEAD Graduate School & Research Network, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany
4 Learning Sciences and Higher Education, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH)
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
5 School of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
* Corresponding author: Krzysztof Cipora, Centre for Mathematical Cognition,
Loughborough University, LE11 3TU. E-mail: k.cipora@lboro.ac.uk
This paper has been published in Acta Psychologica and is
available Open Access at
Please refer to this version of record.
Abstract
Numerical Cognition might be embodied, that is, grounded in bodily actions. This claim is
supported by the observation that, potentially due to our shared biology, finger counting is
prevalent among a variety of cultures. Differences in finger counting are apparent even within
Western cultures. Relatively few indigenous cultures have been systematically analyzed in
terms of traditional finger counting and montring (i.e., communicating numbers with fingers)
routines. Even fewer studies used the same protocols across cultures, allowing for a systematic
comparison of indigenous and Western finger counting routines. We analyze the finger
counting and montring routines of Tsimane’ (N = 121), an indiginous people living in the
Bolivian Amazon rainforest, depending on handedness, education level, and exposure to
mainstream, industrialised Bolivian culture. Tsimane' routines are compared with those of
German and British participants. Tsimane’ reveal a greater variation in finger counting and
montring routines, which seems to be modified by their education level. We outline a
framework on how different factors such as handedness and reading direction might affect
cross-cultural and within-cultural variation in finger counting.
175 Words
Keywords: embodied numerical cognition, finger counting, finger montring, Amazon
Tsimane’, cross-cultural
Introduction
Finger counting and montring
Fingers are the most natural tool for counting (Andres & Pesenti, 2015; Fischer, Kaufmann, &
Domahs, 2012) and using them for that purpose has been prevalent among humans across
millennia. According to archaeological data, the first evidence found for using fingers to count
is 27 thousand years old (see Göbel, Shaki, & Fischer, 2011; Roullion, 2006). Some other
authors claim that there is evidence for an even earlier use, over 30 thousand years ago (Wiese,
2003). Finger counting has been prevalent across different cultures and communities
(Butterworth, 1999; Ifrah, 1985), and it seems to have played a role in shaping how we think
of numbers: Most cultures are using a base-10 system, which probably originates from the use
of fingers. In many languages, several words for numbers are directly associated with words
referring to hands or fingers. For instance, the words five and fist have the same roots in several
languages, including English (Ifrah, 1985)
• fünf [five] and Faust [fist] in German,
• pięć [five] and pięść [fist] in Polish,
• pet [five] and prst [finger] in Bosnian-Croatian-Montenegrin-Serbian,
• panj [five] and panjeh [hand] in Farsi,
• pesë [five] in Albanian,
• cinque [five] in French and Italian (pronounced differently),
• cinco Spanish and Portuguese (pronounced differently),
Albanian, French/Italian, and Spanish/Portuguese derived from Proto-Indo-
European *pn̥ kʷ-sti-s and/or Proto-Italic *kʷenkʷe, [fist] may go back to a
verbal stem *penkʷ [to take in hand, to handle] (Sihler, 2008).
In several African languages, e.g., Zulu or Sotho most of the number words are closely related
to finger counting (Zaslavsky, 1999) and the same is true for several native languages of
America (Closs, 1996).
However, the role of fingers in the development of mathematics should not only be
considered in a historical / cultural perspective but also in the ontogenetical perspective of the
acquisition of numerical skills by modern humans (Moeller, Martignon, Wessolowski, Engel,
& Nuerk, 2011 for a review).
Use of fingers to handle numbers seems not to be just a co-incidental development, but
rather to be playing a functional role, which has been explored in the studies of embodied
numerical cognition (see Andres, Olivier, & Badets, 2008; Di Luca & Pesenti, 2011; Gashaj,
Oberer, Mast, & Roebers, 2019; Morrissey, Liu, Kang, Hallett, & Wang, 2016; Roesch &
Moeller, 2015). At the same time, studies testing congentially blind children question the
natural occurrence and functional role of finger counting for development of numerical
representation (Crollen, Mahe, Collignon, & Seron, 2011; Crollen, Seron, & Noël, 2011), so
the functional role of finger counting is still a subject of a debate.
Many educated adults in Western societies still use fingers for supporting calculations
(e.g., counting working days before my vacation starts, counting syllables in a sentence) and
communicating numbers to others, i.e., finger montring; for instance, spreading two fingers in
the bar whilst saying “two beers please!” (Hohol, Wołoszyn, Nuerk, & Cipora, 2018; Lucidi &
Thevenot, 2014; Pika, Nicoladis, & Marentette, 2009). A study among Polish university
students (Hohol et al., 2018) shows that around 50% of participants declares to often or very
often use fingers when presenting arguments, and listing elements, and around 40% declares
using fingers for calendar calculations. Lucidi and Thevenot (2014) report that all their
participants were using fingers to count syllables in a phrase. About 30% of the participants
tested by Hohol et al. (2018) declares using their fingers often or very often to communicate
numbers.
Crucially, the way of communicating numbers with fingers might differ from the way
of counting: it is not always the case that demonstrating a number reflects a “snapshot” of the
counting sequence. For instance, people in some cultures communicate number three by
extending index, middle and ring fingers, while they extend thumb, index, and middle fingers
for finger counting (Pika et al., 2009). Moreover, people engage in finger counting mostly for
themselves, whereas the goal of finger montring is to communicate the number to other people
(Wasner, Moeller, Fischer, & Nuerk, 2015).
Despite the wide prevalence of using fingers for handling numbers, there are
considerable cultural differences in how specifically finger counting and montring are
performed. Current literature provides a relatively broad account of finger counting and
montring routines in several countries and cultures (e.g. Bender & Beller, 2011, 2012). Even
when considering simple, one-dimensional systems, where numbers are linked to fingers based
on one-to-one correspondence (see Bender & Beller, 2011, for a classification of other body
part counting systems; 2012), there is still some space for variation in finger counting: (a)
whether the palm is turned toward oneself or toward others, (b) whether the fingers are
extended or bent, (c) whether the starting hand is right or left, (d) whether the switch between
hands is based on anatomical symmetry or spatial continuation, (e) which finger starts the
sequence. In all these areas variation has been observed both between and within cultures.
In most Western cultures finger counting starts with closed palms and the extension of
the fingers (e.g., Hohol et al., 2018), while in Japan the counting starts with an open palm and
fingers are bent successively (Nishiyama, 2013). Another aspect is that in most European
cultures people count with their palms facing toward oneself. However, this aspect of finger
counting has not been thoroughly investigated yet.
One of the most thoroughly investigated aspects is the starting hand, which according
to early claims follows reading/writing direction (for a review see Zago & Badets, 2016).
Consequently, one could expect that a majority of Western participants count from left to right,
while right-to-left readers (e.g., Arab, Farsi, & Hebrew speakers) should more often start with
their right hand (see Lindemann, Alipour, & Fischer, 2011). However, later studies have shown
that even within Western cultures variability exists: there are more left starters in the UK (e.g.,
Fischer, 2008), while in Belgium and France the majority starts with their right hand (e.g., Sato
& Lalain, 2008) and in Poland there is a relatively equal split between left-starters and right-
starters (Hohol et al., 2018). This shows that even within a single culture there might still be
some variation (see also Morrissey et al., 2016). Another factor that should be considered when
it comes to the starting hand is participant’s handedness with left-handers being more likely to
start with their left hand, while in case of right-handers there is a more equal share of left- and
right-starters (Hohol et al., 2018; Morrissey et al., 2016)
After reaching number five, one typically needs to switch hands, and can continue
counting with the other hand either by anatomical symmetry (e.g., start with the same finger of
the other hand), or by spatial order (continue with the spatially closest finger). The vast majority
of Western participants uses anatomically symmetric continuation (Hohol et al., 2018;
Lindemann et al., 2011), while the prevalence of the spatial continuation is slightly higher
among Middle Eastern participants (Lindemann et al., 2011). Nevertheless, in both groups the
anatomical symmetry remained more prevalent.
In most Western cultures participants start the counting sequence with their thumb
(Hohol et al., 2018) but there are several cultures such as in the Middle East where people start
counting with their pinkie (Lindemann et al., 2011) or as it is common in China – starting from
their index finger, then middle finger, ring finger, pinkie, and ending with the thumb (Domahs,
Moeller, Huber, Willmes, & Nuerk, 2010).
When it comes to montring, systematic data are more scarce (Di Luca, Granà, Semenza,
Seron, & Pesenti, 2006; Di Luca & Pesenti, 2008, 2011). However, even within Western
cultures there is a variation in how finger montring is executed, and how it differs from finger
counting. For instance, French-speaking Canadians tend to use their thumb to represent
numeral 1 when counting to 10, but when asked to gesture number 1 only they use their index
finger. At the same time, Germans would rather use their thumb for montring 1 (Pika et al.,
2009). The observed discrepancy between finger counting and montring patterns and cultural
variations in finger montring call for testing both counting and montring while investigating
how fingers and numbers are linked in different cultures.
The literature on finger counting mostly covers Western Europe, North America, to
some extent the Middle East (but it is mostly represented by Iran), and East Asia: China and
Japan. In addition to that, there is a number of reports of indigenous tribes showing very
specific and elaborated finger / body part counting systems (see Bender & Beller, 2012 for a
review; Closs, 1996; Overmann, 2021; Zaslavsky, 1999). Other than that, non-industrialized
cultures remain massively underinvestigated, which reflects the sample representativeness
problems in psychology (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010). For this reason, it is important
to widen the literature coverage of as many indigenous cultures as possible, not only the ones,
which present apparent and very atypical patterns. What we find particularly important is
ensuring (as much as possible) that one can directly compare the results from indigenous
samples with the ones from Western cultures.
One might expect that because of being relatively isolated from globalization (e.g.,
presence of global mass-media culture, industrialization), indigineous cultures might offer
novel insights into the nature of finger counting and montring and its variety among humans.
For instance, while several cultures developed very elaborate body part counting systems (see
Bender & Beller, 2012; Saxe & Esmonde, 2012), there is evidence for cultures not using fingers
and other body parts to communicate numbers at all (e.g., Butterworth, Reeve, & Reynolds,
2011; Everett, 2017). This shows that finger usage may not be taken for granted in every culture
and population.
Tsimane’ people
Tsimane’ people are an indigenous, non-industrialized group living in the Bolivian Amazon
rainforest. They are a population of about 8000 people (Piantadosi, Jara‐Ettinger, & Gibson,
2014). Their lifestyle differs considerably from the industrialized cultures: they engage in
demanding daily physical activity, including hunting-gathering and subsistence farming
(Godoy & Jacobson, 1999; Godoy, Jacobson, & Wilkie, 1998; Huanca, 2008). Moreover, they
differ in respect to several psychological variables, which include visual perception, health
locus of control (externalized in Tsimane’ i.e., they are more likely to attribute their health and
its changes to the external factors, including chance or the intervention of gods/spirits than to
their own health-related behaviors), or personality structure; Tsimane’ personality is better
described by two dimensions of leadership/prosociality and industriousness rather than the
supposedly universal big five model of extroversion, neuroticism, openness to experience,
conscientiousness, and agreeableness (van der Linden et al., 2018).
This population has also been found to have no or poor knowledge of arithmetic, which
could be due to adults receiving no formal education, as early education for Tsimane’ children
is not prioritized (Piantadosi et al., 2014). Technically, each community has its own school,
which is led by a teacher, who is nominated by the community, and who does not receive
formal teacher training. Schooling is not mandatory, and there is no strict division by grades,
meaning that the same curriculum is taught every year. Unlike in industrialized cultures,
children do not have access to TV or educational toys to support their learning. The lack of
mandatory education in practice leads to a very large heterogeneity within communities when
it comes to numeracy and literacy (Piantadosi et al., 2014). Less than 10% of their callory
intake comes from purchased products, so their daily experience with money is also relatively
limited (Blackwell et al., 2017). Interestingly, from a perspective of acquisition of number
concepts, Tsimane’ children follow the same pathway as their peers in industrialized countries,
but with a delayed and more variable timeline (Jara‐Ettinger, Gibson, Kidd, & Piantadosi,
2016).
Finger counting and numeral systems in Tsimane’ initial investigation
Before formal data collection with Tsimane’ participants, we asked our translators
(bilingual Tsimane’) on whether Tsimane’ count with their fingers and whether they would
understand the task. We learned that finger counting is indeed widespread. However, their
not go beyond the simple one-to-one correspondence (i.e., can be
finger counting routines do
classified as simple, one-dimensional system; Bender & Beller, 2011). Tsimane’ language is
using a base-10 system, the structure of multi-digit numbers can be considered transparent and
reflects the place-value structure. However, there are hints that they might have used a quinary
(base-5) system or a mixture of quinary and base-10 system
1.
This might suggest the role of
finger counting in formation on Tsimane’ language related to numbers, similar to other
languages where parallels between number words for five and names for hand/palm have been
described. At the same time, when we asked our translators whether there are any similarities
and explicit references between number words and words referring to hand, palm, fist etc, they
could not identify any. While Tsimane’ mostly count in their language when it comes to small
numbers, numbers larger than 50 are rarely used in Tsimane’ language, and if they use them,
they rather use Spanish number words.
Objectives of the present study
In the current study, we investigated finger counting and finger montring in Tsimane’
people. To further verify the reading/writing direction as a factor influencing finger counting,
we look at whether the finger counting pattern being in line with the typical reading and writing
direction is more prevalent among individuals, who are more exposed to schooling and the
industrialised Bolivian Spanish-language community. We assume that greater exposure to
reading / writing (and its left-to-right direction) is related to a greater prevalence of starting
finger counting sequence with the left hand. We also aimed at providing quantitative data on
prevalence of different finger counting and montring routines in Tsimane’. By looking at these
patterns, we aimed at further testing independence of finger counting and montring (i.e.,
whether different finger configurations are used to count up to a specific number, and to
communicate this number to others). Additionally we compare Tsimane’ to German and British
speakers tested using the same protocol. These groups, despite both being Western European
have been documented to differ from each other, especially in finger montring (Pika et al.,
2009).
Method
The research in Bolivia was conducted in the summer of 2018 in several villages near the city
of San Borja, Bolivia. We worked with the local research center, the Centro Boliviano de
Investigación y de Desarollo Socio Integral (CBIDSI), working with its members T. Huanca
and R. Godoy. CBIDSI coordinated logistics, participant recruitment and native translators.
They also served as experts in Tsimane’ culture. Our studies were approved by the Gran
Consejo Tsimane’ (Tsimane’ Grand Council) and by the MIT’s Committee on the Use of
Humans as Experimental Subjects (COUHES). Participants were compensated with gifts worth
around $20. The gifts were designated by T. Huanca at the CBIDSI.
Research in Germany was conducted in spring semester of 2019. Participants were
compensated with course credit or 4€. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the
Department of Psychology at the University of Tuebingen, Germany.
In the UK the data were collected in spring semester 2021. Participants performed only
tasks reported here and were not compensated for their participation. The study was approved
by the Ethics Review Sub-Committee of Loughborough University.
Participants
Tsimane’ Sample.
A total of 121 Tsimane’ (60 female, 53 male, in case of eight participants gender was not
recorded during the data collection), were tested (M = 34.54, SD = 15.14, range = 15-83 years).
Tsimane’ participants varied greatly in terms of their education, ranging from no schooling at
all to 15 years of schooling (M = 3.78, SD = 3.99 years). The exact data on number of years of
schooling is available in the shared datafile. For the analysis, we classified the participants into
three groups: (1) no schooling, n = 30; (2) 1 to 5 years of schooling n = 55; (3) more than 5
years of schooling, n = 282. Participants also differed with regards to the extent they travelled
to neighboring towns, and the extent of contact they had with Bolivian, Spanish speaking
society. On average, they travelled 3.89 (SD = 5.29) times per month (ranging from 0.08 to
42.9 times per month). Note that participants provided frequency and unit (per week / month /
year) and the frequency was scaled to number of travel / month, thus the minimum of 0.08
corresponds to 1 travel / year etc.). The frequency data are reported in the shared datafile. For
the purpose of this analysis, we categorized participants into two groups, of those travelling
less than twice a month (n = 47), and those travelling twice a month and more (n = 66)3. The
data on age, sex, education and travel frequency was not available for eight individuals.
2 Gibson, Jara-Ettinger, Levy, and Piantadosi (2017) found that the relation between education and other
numerical tasks in Tsimane’ disappears in participants having received between 5 and 6 years of schooling.
Moreover, this threshold allowed us to keep the group sizes relatively equal. However, we acknowledge that
others might have used some other threshold that might affect between-study comparisons. For instance,
Ferrigno, Jara-Ettinger, Piantadosi, and Cantlon (2017) used a binary split for more than vs. less than one year
of schooling.
3 Again, this cut-off is arbitrary. It allowed to form relatively equal groups and seemed reasonable to quantify
“frequent” travel and engagement with the mainstream Bolivian Spanish-language community. At the same
time, it simplified analytical approach, and given the overall distribution of travel frequency, with very few
participants travelling more than once a week allowed us to limit the effect of outliers on the overall pattern of
the results. Full data on travel frequency is available online and allows testing other cut-offs.
German Sample. A total of 60 (41 female, 19 male) German adults were tested. Fifty-
seven of which were students at the University of Tuebingen, while three were completing a
Voluntary Social Year (M = 23.5, SD = 3.1, range = 18-31 years).
British Sample. A total of 61 (34 female, 27 male) British adults were tested. Fifty of
them were university students, eight were employees, and three were retired (M = 28.4, SD =
16.7, range = 18-85 years).
Materials and Procedure
This study was part of a set of tasks looking into different aspects of magnitude representation
in Tsimane’ people. Other administered tasks were unrelated to finger counting and thus out of
scope for the present paper.
Session plan
Each session started with obtaining informed consent: verbal in case of Tsimane’,
written in case of German (paper form) and British (online questionnaire). Then demographic
data was collected. Subsequently, the handedness tasks were administered, followed by finger
montring, and finger counting tasks. Task order was kept constant to simplify the protocol of
testing Tsimane’ given the testing conditions in a more ecologically valid setting that differ
from regular controlled in-lab testing. The German and Tsimane’ participants completed other
tasks which are not reported here (taking up to 40 minutes in total), whereas the session ended
after the finger counting task for the British participants.
Tsimane’ group. Tasks were administered under supervision of the first author by a
trained translator, who was Tsimane’-Spanish bilingual, and responses were coded by the first
author. The translator was administering tasks in Tsimane’ based on written protocol translated
into Spanish by trained psychologists who are English-Spanish bilinguals. The translators were
trained in the administration of tasks prior to data collection.
German group. Data was collected, administered, and coded by a native German
speaker. The original protocol was translated into German by a trained psychologist who is a
native German speaker and fluent in English.
British group. Tasks were administered and responses coded by a native English
speaker. Data was collected online by means of a video call with the experimenter (in-person
data collection was not possible due to the COVID-19 pandemic). Prior to the experiment, the
camera was adjusted so that the experimenter could see the upper trunk of the participant and
their hands. Additionally, it was checked whether the image was mirror flipped.
Handedness assessment
As several Tsimane’ are unfamiliar with activities referred to in formal handedness
questionnaires, we used simple performance measures. First, the participants were given a
piece of paper and a pencil. The pencil was placed centrally on a tabletop on a distal side and
parallel to paper’s distal edge. Participants were then asked to draw three horizontal lines (task
1a). Subsequently, they were given (put centrally on the tabletop) a ball made of paper and
were asked to throw it (task 2a). Finally, they were given another piece of paper and a pencil
(as in task 1a) and were asked to draw a circle (task 3a). The hand they were using was recorded
for each of these tasks separately. The procedure was the same for German participants. For
the British participants due to the online nature of the experiment (video call), the tasks were
adjusted. First, they were asked, which hand they are using to throw a ball (task 1b), to write
(task 2b), and to brush their teeth (task 3b). The hand they were using was recorded for each
of these tasks separately.
In sum, there was handedness data from three situations for each participant. Participants were
classified as right-handers if they performed all three tasks with their right hand, as left-handers
if they performed all tasks with their left hand, and as non-right-handers if they performed
some of the tasks with the right and some of them with the left hand.
Finger montring
This task was the same for all groups. Participants were asked to show numbers 1, 8, 6, 4, 9
and 3 with their fingers. The order of numbers was fixed for all participants. The fingers being
used were recorded by the experimenter.
Finger counting
This task was the same for all groups. Participants were asked to count aloud and by using their
fingers up to 10. The starting hand, starting finger, as well as which finger of the other hand
they continued the counting on were recorded.
During data collection in Tsimane’, it occurred that several participants were bending
their fingers while counting (unlike the typical European technique of extending them). Only
after spotting that we started recording it systematically, so this data are only available for a
limited number of Tsimane’ participants (n = 23). However, it is available for German (except
1 participant) and British participants who were tested afterwards. The counting technique was
categorized as “extend” (participant starts with closed palm and extends fingers), “bend”
(participant starts with open palm and bends fingers), or “keep out” (participant keep the palm
open and uses another hand to touch the fingers being counted).
Data analysis
In the first step we investigated cultural differences in finger counting patterns, and its relation
to handedness. Furthermore, we looked into Tsimane’ to see whether their finger counting
routines differed depending on their education and frequency of travel to the town. Eventually,
we analysed within participant similarity of finger pattern being used to for counting and
montring number 1 as using this number can give an impression on how potentially observed
group-level differences between finger counting and montring correspond to within-subject
similarities of patterns used for counting and montring a given number. Due to the nature of
the data (categorical), non-parametric tests were used (2), and Cramer’s V was used as a
measure of effect size. Bayesian equivalent of 2 was also used so that both evidence for
between group difference or a lack thereof could be obtained. Analyses were conducted in R
language, using packages dplyr (Wickham, François, Henry, & Müller, 2020), jmv (Selker,
Love, & Dropmann, 2020), and jsq (Love, Selker, & Dropmann, 2021). Raw data (in .csv
format) and R analysis scripts are openly available at
our analyses as well presents raw (pre-categorisation) data on education and travel frequency.
Results
Between group comparisons
Handedness
In all three groups, the majority (87%) of participants were right-handed. Proportions of right,
left-, non-right-handers did not differ between groups, 2 (4, N = 242) = 3.72, p = .445,
British German Tsimane’
Starting Hand Starting Hand Starting Hand
Right Left Right Left Right Left
Handedness N % N % N % N % N % N %
Right-Handed 36 59 18 30 43 72 7 12 43 36 62 52
Left-Handed 0 0 6 10 0 0 5 8 4 3 3 3
Non-Right-Handed 1 2 0 0 0 0 5 8 6 5 2 2
Total 61 60 120
Not recorded 1
Note. Not recorded refers to the participants that were not available for this particular observation.
Finger counting
Starting hand. Starting hand data was not available for one Tsimane’ participant. There
was a between group difference as regards to the starting hand, 2 (2, N = 241) = 13.22, p =
.001, Cramer’s V = .23, BF = 88.47. While the majority of Tsimane’ started finger counting
with their left hand, the majority of German and British participants started with their right
handedness was not associated with the starting hand, 2 (2, N = 120) = 30.35, p = .135,
Cramer’s V = .18, BF = 1.94, but in the light of Bayesian analysis this result remains
inconclusive. Also, in terms of descriptive statistics the split between right-, non-right- and left-
handers was relatively similar with left- and right-starters.
The effect was large both in German, 2 (2, N = 60) = 30.35, Cramer’s V = .71, p <
.001, BF = 90365.17, and British, 2 (2, N = 61) = 10.72, p = .005, Cramer’s V = .49, BF =
10 10
14.29, samples: none of the left-handers started finger counting with their right hand. In both
groups a majority of right-handers started with their right hand. All non-right handers in the
German sample started with their left hand too, in the British sample there was only one non-
right-hander who started from their right hand.
British German Tsimane’
N % N % N %
Counting pattern
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
RT RI RM RR RP LT LI LM LR LP 27 44 42 70 2 2
RT RI RM RR RP LP LR LM LI LT 2 3 0 0 2 2
RT RI RM RP RR LT LI LM LP LR 1 2 0 0 0 0
RI RM RR RP RT LT LI LM LR LP 3 5 0 0 0 0
RI RM RR RP RT LP LR LM LI LT 0 0 1 2 0 0
RP RR RM RI RT LT LI LM LR LP 3 5 0 0 29 24
RP RR RM RI RT LP LR LM LI LT 1 2 0 0 20 17
LT LI LM LR LP RT RI RM RR RP 15 25 17 28 4 3
LT LI LM LR LP RP RR RM RI RT 5 8 0 0 4 3
LI LM LR LP LT RT RI RM RR RP 1 2 0 0 0 0
LP LR LM LI LT RT RI RM RR RP 1 2 0 0 40 34
LP LR LM LI LT RP RR RM RI RT 2 3 0 0 18 15
Total 61 100 60 100 119 100
Not recorded 2
Starting hand
Right 37 60.7 43 71.7 53 43.8
Left 24 39.3 17 28.3 67 55.4
Total 61 100 60 100 120 100
Not recorded 1
Starting finger
Thumb 50 82.0 59 98.3 12 10.1
Index 4 6.6 1 1.7 0 0.0
Pinkie 7 11.5 0 0.0 107 89.9
Total 61 100 60 100 119 100
Not recorded 2
Technique
Extend 53 86.9 59 100 12 52.2
Keep out 8 13.1 0 0 0 0.0
Bend in 0 0.0 0 0 11 47.8
Total 61 100 59 100 23 100
Not recorded 1 99
Note. Counting pattern: The hand (L and R for left and right hand respectively) and finger (T = thumb, I =
index, M = middle, R = ring, P = pinkie) used to represent the specific number in the counting sequence (top
row). The most prevalent (frequency > 20% in any group) patterns are highlighted.
Finger counting patterns. Starting finger and finger counting sequence data was not
available for two Tsimane’ participants. A summary of finger counting patterns is presented in
hands to count up to 10. By “continuation” we mean which finger of the second hand is being
used to count 6. There was a remarkable difference in finger counting patterns between
Tsimane’, German and British participants; In case of Tsimane’, the most prevalent pattern was
starting with their left pinkie and continuing with the right thumb. Other prevalent patterns
were starting with the left pinkie and continuing with the right pinkie or starting with the right
pinkie and continuing with the left pinkie or left thumb. For German and British participants,
starting with a thumb and continuing with the thumb of the other hand were by far the most
prevalent strategies. Interestingly, the continuation of the finger counting sequence (i.e., which
finger was used when counting six) differed between groups; While most German and British
participants were using their thumb (i.e., following anatomical symmetry), Tsimane’ showed
more variation. In case of participants starting with their right pinkie, the continuation with the
left thumb was slightly more prevalent than continuation with the left pinkie. In case of
individuals starting with the left pinkie, continuation with right thumb was way more prevalent
than the continuation with the right pinkie. This means that while anatomical symmetry was
present in most German and British participants, it was observed only in a minority of
Tsimane’. The latter in fact followed neither symmetry nor spatial continuation.
The less prevalent patterns, observed in fewer than 20% of each sample were: (1)
starting with a right thumb and continuing with a left pinkie, (2) starting with a right thumb,
continuing with a left thumb, using left pinkie as 9 and left ring as 10, (3) starting with right
index, 5 with right thumb, and then continuing from left thumb, (4) starting with right index, 5
with right thumb, then from left pinkie, (5) starting with left thumb, and continuation from right
pinkie, (6) starting with left index, 5 with left thumb, continuation with right thumb.
There was a large between group difference with regards to the starting finger, 2 (4, N = 240)
= 176.39, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .60, BF > 1042. While the majority of Tsimane’ started with
Figure1. Starting finger used when counting to 10
Finger counting technique. The data on whether the participants were counting by
bending or extending their fingers are only available for a limited number of Tsimane’ (cf.
.001, Cramer’s V = .50, BF > 108. While about half of Tsimane’ started with an open palm
1 0
B r i t i s h G e r m a n T s i m a n e '
P i n k i e I n d e x T h u m b
and bent their fingers when counting, the other half extended their fingers starting with a closed
palm. The latter was the only technique observed in German participants and was by far a
majority in British participants. The second technique observed in British participants was the
“kept out” technique, that is the palm remained open and the participant was using a finger of
the other hand as a pointer touching the counted fingers.
Finger Montring
Number 1. One Tsimane’ participant showed this number incorrectly. Other than that, there
a large between group difference, 2 (12, N = 241) = 120.65, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .50, BF
> 1017. Most prevalent patterns in Tsimane’ were lifting index finger (right or left), or left
pinkie. In German participants the split between right thumb and right index finger was almost
equal, while in British the vast majority of participants used their index finger.
Number 3. All Tsimane’ participants showed this number correctly. In total there were
seven different patterns of how participants showed number three. There was a large between
group difference, 2 (12, N = 242) = 306.76, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .80, BF > 1059. A vast
majority of Tsimane’ were extending fingers from pinkie to middle of either right (more
prevalent) or left hand (slightly less prevalent). Germans most frequently extended thumb,
index and middle finger of their right hand (or less frequently their left hand), while the vast
majority of British participants extended index, middle, and ring finger of their right hand.
Number 4. One Tsimane’ participant showed this number incorrectly. Other than that,
there were four different patterns of how participants showed number four. The most popular
pattern across all groups was extended fingers from index to pinkie. There was a between group
difference, 2 (6, N = 241) = 22.82, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .22, BF = 11.98; using the right
hand was more frequent altogether: slightly more in Tsimane’, and way more frequent in
German and British.
Number 6. A total of 9 Tsimane’ participants showed this number incorrectly. Other
than that, there were seven different patterns of how participants showed number six. The
between group difference reached significance, but the Bayesian analysis still strongly favored
the null hypothesis model, 2 (12, N = 233) = 21.19, p = .048, Cramer’s V = .21, BF = 8.15.
The most popular patterns were having one hand open and a thumb of the other hand in addition
to it.
Number 8. A total of 12 Tsimane’ participants showed this number incorrectly. Other
than that, there were seven different patterns of how participants showed number eight. There
was a between group difference, 2 (12, N = 230) = 58.63, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .36, BF >
109. The most popular patterns in Tsimane’ were having either left or right ring and pinkie
fingers folded. The majority of German participants folded pinkie and ring fingers of either
right or left hand. In British participants, the most prevalent pattern was left pinkie and ring
fingers folded.
Number 9. A total of 17 Tsimane’ participants showed this number incorrectly. Other
than that, there were four different patterns of how participants showed number nine. There
was a between group difference, 2 (6, N = 225) = 25.16, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .24, BF =
1132.59; in Tsimane’ all patterns had roughly equal share. In German and British, patterns with
folded left or right thumb were most prevalent.
Analyses within Tsimane’ – links to education and travel frequency
Finger counting
Starting hand. Finger counting in Tsimane’ depending on their education and frequency of
There was a between group difference, 2 (2, N = 112) = 8.70, p = .013, Cramer’s V = .28,
BF = 17.77. A majority (63%) of individuals with no schooling started with their right hand.
Among individuals with 1 to 5 years of schooling proportion of right starters was 42%, whereas
among individuals with more than 5 years of schooling there were only 25% of right-starters..
In case of travel frequency, the effect was not significant, 2 (1, N = 112) = 3.56, p = .059,
Cramer’s V = .18, BF = 2.58, but seems to suggest that there were more left-starters among
those, who travelled to the town more often.
Starting finger. At the same time, starting finger was neither associated with education, 2 (2,
N = 111) = 2.67, p = .264, Cramer’s V = .15, BF = 3.41, nor with travel frequency, 2 (1, N
= 111) = 0.081, p = .776, Cramer’s V = .03, BF = 3.47.
Educational Travel
Level Frequency
Counting pattern E1 E2 E3 T1 T2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
RT RI RM RR RP LT LI LM LR LP 1 0 1 0 2
RT RI RM RR RP LP LR LM LI LT 0 1 1 2 0
RP RR RM RI RT LT LI LM LR LP 9 15 3 13 14
RP RR RM RI RT LP LR LM LI LT 9 7 2 10 8
LT LI LM LR LP RT RI RM RR RP 1 2 1 2 2
LT LI LM LR LP RP RR RM RI RT 0 1 2 1 2
LP LR LM LI LT RT RI RM RR RP 8 19 11 14 24
LP LR LM LI LT RP RR RM RI RT 2 8 7 4 13
Total 30 53 28 46 65
Note. Educational Level E1 = no schooling; E2 = 1 to 5 years of schooling; E3 = more than 5 years of
schooling. Travel Frequency T1 = less than twice a month; T2 = twice a month and more. The most prevalent
(frequency > 20% in any group) patterns are highlighted.
Finger montring
Incorrect responses were excluded from this analysis and were looked at separately. There were
no associations between education or frequency of travel and the way in which participants
Supplementary Material). Distribution of errorous responses provided for each number are
While the frequentist test did not show an association between education and the way
participants presented number 9, the Bayesian test suggested that there was a between group
difference, 2 (6, N = 96) = 8.58, p = .198, Cramer’s V = .21, BF = 4.29. This was most likely
driven by the fact that the majority of participants with 1 to 5 years of schooling were folding
their left thumb, while the majority of participants with more than 5 years of schooling were
folding their right thumb (which to a certain degree reflects the observations for counting, that
is, more educated individuals seem to start counting on their left hand). In case of travel
frequency there was no such effect.
Errors. Tsimane’ participants made a total of 40 finger montring errors, which totals to 5.90%
of all trials. The error rate in the E1 group was 11.67%, in the E2 group it was 5.15% and in
the E3 group it was 1.19%. Comparison using the 2 test revealed that the proportion of errors
differed significantly between groups, 2 (2, N = 678) = 17.83, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .162,
BF = 65.55. Note that N stands for all trials conducted by all participants.
When we looked at travel frequency, the proportion of errors in the group travelling more
frequently was larger (7.58%) than in the group travelling less frequently (3.55%). The
difference was significant, however the Bayesian analysis shows that the result is inconclusive,
2 (1, N = 678) = 4.82, p = .028, Cramer’s V = .08, BF = 1.01.
Counting and montring: within-participant analyses
Another way of looking into the finger counting and montring data was checking whether the
counting-montring pattern is the same within individuals. We run this analysis for the number
1, as this is the number, for which several differences have been reported in earlier studies (e.g.,
Pika et al., 2009). Shared data allows conducting similar analyses for all other numbers. We
looked whether the pattern for counting and montring is the same considering (1) hand being
used; (2) finger being used; (3) exact pattern (hand and finger being used).
Hand being used. Among Tsimane’ participants, 65% individuals used the same hand for
counting and montring number one. In case of British participants, 72% individuals used the
same hand for number one with both montring and counting. In case of German participants,
87% individuals used the same hand and 8 used different hand. Proportions differed
significantly between groups 2 (2, N = 241) = 8.74, p = .013, Cramer’s V = .19, BF = 9.16.
Finger being used. Among Tsimane’ participants, 21% used the same finger for counting and
montring number one. In case of British participants, 8% individuals used the same finger for
number one with both montring and counting. In case of German participants, 65% individuals
used the same finger. Proportions differed significantly between groups 2 (2, N = 240) = 54.55,
p < .001, Cramer’s V = .48, BF > 1010.
Same pattern being used. Among Tsimane’ participants, 18% used exactly the same pattern for
counting and montring number one. In case of British participants, 8% individuals used the
same pattern for number one with both montring and counting. In case of German participants,
58% individuals used the same finger. Proportions differed significantly between groups 2 (2,
N = 240) = 47.63, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .45, BF > 108.
Discussion
Overview
We investigated the similarities and differences in how finger counting and montring are used
in Tsimane’, German, and British adults. Finger counting and montring is prevalent across all
three groups. Performing the tasks was easy and natural for our participants and they did not
express any confusion when hearing the instructions – this also holds true for Tsimane’
participants who made mistakes in montring. While they presented wrong number, they did not
have problems with understanding the task of demonstrating numbers using fingers. All groups
used simple one-dimensional systems (i.e., based on one-to-one correspondence) and were only
using their fingers rather than other body parts. However, groups differed in starting hand,
starting finger, counting pattern, and technique used. Moreover, finger counting and finger
montring differed, with a range of configurations between groups. The thumb of the right hand
was the most common starting point for counting in German and British adults. In Tsimane’
no hand preference was observed and the pinkie was preferred starting finger. A range of
gestures were also used in the finger montring task, where numerals 1 and 3 showed the largest
variety between groups. More specifically finger counting in Tsimane’ was influenced by
educational levels and most probably in more general, numeracy and literacy. The proportion
of left-starters was larger in individuals who had higher educational level. This observation
may add up to the discussion on the role of reading direction in the starting hand. Specifically,
higher education level may be related to greater exposure to written language (which is written
left-to-right in Tsimane’ / Spanish). At the same time such a difference was not present in case
of finger montring.
Finger counting
The majority of the German and British participants started counting with their right-
hand, which was significantly aligned with handedness. This replicates previous findings
suggesting a preference to start counting with the dominant hand (Di Luca et al., 2006; Hohol
et al., 2018; Morrissey et al., 2016; Sato, Cattaneo, Rizzolatti, & Gallese, 2007; Sato & Lalain,
2008), and left-handers being less likely to start with non-dominant right hand than right-
handers to start with their left hand. However, still a considerable proportion of participants
started with their non-dominant left hand. Importantly, there were two most prevalent finger
counting patterns overall; starting from a thumb of one hand and continuing with a thumb of
the other hand.
Contrary to the German and British samples, the Tsimane’ sample showed no clear
preference nor a link between starting hand and dominant hand. This may be due to the
nature of hand dominance in indiginous groups in general. Tribal groups tend to only have
strong handedness preference when using tools but not for any other activities (Marchant,
McGrew, & Eibl‐Eibesfeldt, 1995). However, our handedness assessment did not show that
there were more non-right-handers among Tsimane’ in our sample than in German and
British samples. A vast majority of Tsimane’ participants started their sequence from their
pinkie. Interestingly, unlike German and British samples, in Tsimane’ there were four most
prevalent finger counting patterns: starting from pinkie of one hand and continuing with
either pinkie or thumb of the other hand. Interestingly, in case of the most prevalent pattern in
Tsimane’ the continuation neither followed the anatomical symmetry nor spatial continuation
as number one was counted with pinkie and the sequence was continued with the thumb of
the other hand. Such a pattern, to the best of our knowledge was not widely reported in other
cultures / language communities (e.g. Lindemann et al., 2011). At the same time, the
sequences, which were observed most commonly in Tsimane’ within each hand were
following the same direction (from left to right in case of participants, who started with right
pinkie, or from right to left in those starting from left pinkie. This pattern deserves further
investigation in future studies.
To sum up, we can conclude that Tsimane’ apart from noticeable differences from
both German and British samples were characterized by larger heterogeneity in finger
counting routines. However, even though Tsimane’ differed from German and British, the
differences were confined to different order of fingers being used and different technique, but
in all groups counting was similar in terms of retainig one-to-one correspondence and being
limited to fingers rather than other body parts, unlike some other indigenous groups
(Butterworth et al., 2011; Everett, 2017). These other systems have often been described as
developed in response to specific environmental and cultural needs.
Finger Montring
The hand arrangements, the used hand, and the used fingers often differed between
counting and montring in all three groups (see also Crollen, Mahe, et al., 2011). Specific
patterns varied between groups as well. For number 1, the majority of British and Tsimane’
participants used their right index finger - with a minority using their left index finger. This
result is consistent with data on North American groups (Pika et al., 2009). Another variant
was shown by some Tsimane’ participants who used their left pinkie to show number 1. Even
though this finger montring pattern was present in Tsimane’ only, it was not very prevalent in
this group (around 20%). However, its presence is in line with the observation that majority of
Tsimane’ started finger counting from pinkie (cardinal finger montring matched their ordinal
finger counting; Wasner et al., 2015). The German participants on the other hand, mainly used
their right thumb to represent this numeral confirming earlier reports (Pika et al., 2009).
Additional within-subject analysis for the number one shows that only a minority of
Tsimane’ (18%) and British (8%) participants used the same finger / hand for counting and
montring number 1. Such a consistency was much more prevalent across German participants
(58%) even though it only slightly exceeded half of the sample. This also shows the importance
for investigating both counting and montring, and their relative independence.
Tsimane’ started from their pinkie (similarly to their counting sequence). Germans tend to start
with their thumb and at the same time, British participants used their index, middle and ring
finger.
For other numbers such as 4, 6, and 9 most participants, independent of the language
community, used very similar finger configuration, which most probably was the most
comfortable or easiest one – due to dexterity and physical difficulties. This replicated findings
of previous studies (Wasner et al., 2015).
Furthermore, for number 6, participants showed this numeral using a sub-base 5 system
i.e., they presented one palm open and one finger of the other one4, a common finding in
German adults (Moeller et al., 2011). This configuration was also used for number 8. However,
for this number the variation among German participants was considerably smaller (most
participans revealed one of two patterns, with pinkie and ring finger of one of the hands closed,
while variation in the British and Tsimane’ was larger). In the case of 9 it was necessary that
one hand needs to be fully open, and either pinkie or thumb of the other hand are closed. At
the same time, similar to finger counting, group differences were limited to different finger
arrangements, but still the overall form (one-to-one correspondence and sticking to fingers
only) were similar between groups.
Another striking observation was that there was a considerable proportion of errors in finger
montring among Tsimane’. Majority of these errors were numbers smaller or larger by 1 than
4 The sub-base 5 system may present in simple, one-dimensional finger counting systems as it only refers to
whether in numbers greater than 5 one hand is used to denote 5 and fingers of another hand denote the
remaining number.
of errors differed considerably depending on education level. This shows that in case of several
participants, who mastered the counting sequence, the problems with cardinal numbers
remained present. This seems to reflect the developmental trajectories of number concept
acquisition that counting list is acquired before mastering the cardinality (Sarnecka, Goldman,
& Slusser, 2015). At the same time, we do not have a plausible explanation on why more errors
appeared in the group more often visiting the town. Noteworthy, the corresponding effect size
was small, and this observation may also be a false positive and may need future systematic
investigation.
Finger counting technique
Group differences were observed with regards to the finger counting technique. While
a vast majority of German and British participants counted by extending the fingers, half of the
Tsimane’ participants started with palms open, bending fingers in. Despite its scarcity in
Western countries, this technique is frequent in other parts of Latin America (Closs, 1996),
several parts of Africa (Zaslavsky, 1999), or Japan (Nishiyama, 2013). Nevertheless, as we
only recorded the technique for a small proportion of Tsimane’ participants we only mention
this observation here.
Outlook: Making sense out of cultural differences in finger counting
Having demonstrated differences in finger counting and montring between Tsimane’
and other groups, one may ask whether there might be some cognitive factors driving these
differences as it has been suggested in previous literature (Bender & Beller, 2011; Domahs et
al., 2010). In our work, we were unable to pinpoint such mechanisms. They might be identified
in the future studies, as the differences have now been documented. At the same time, here it
might be worth asking on whether all variation in finger counting has specific cognitive
underpinnings, which can be reduced to a single factor.
Functional role of the link between fingers and numbers but not specific finger-to-number link
Considering these – and previously reported cultural differences, raises the question of the
functional role of these differences both between groups and, more importantly, between
individuals (Hohol et al., 2018). What do these differences imply, and what do they tell us
about embodied numerical cognition? Reading direction—although previously suggested—
cannot explain the differences, as people in predominantly left-to-right reading cultures often
start counting with their right hand. In the following section we try to propose a more
comprehensive answer by referring only to systems where the one-to-one correspondence
between numbers and fingers is preserved.
What seems clear from multiple studies conducted across different cultures and
countries is that fingers are used for counting (Bender & Beller, 2011, 2012). Moreover,
counting with fingers might play a functional role for numerical cognition (e.g., Andres &
Pesenti, 2015). However, given the evidence, there is no specific finger-to-number mapping
that plays a specific functional role (at least in adults). However, there is some evidence that to
a certain degree finger counting direction might be functionally related to Spatial-Numerical
Associations (SNAs) (Pitt & Casasanto, 2020), that is varied phenomena showing that
numerical information might be associated with specific directions in space (Cipora, Schroeder,
Soltanlou, & Nuerk, 2018). We think that specific finger-to-number mappings are defined by
multiple factors that may play a role for prevalence of some finger counting routines observed
in different cultures, but cultural differences may not be explained by means of simple
mechanisms.
How can we count with our fingers?
If we think of simple finger counting systems, in which the one-to-one correspondence between
fingers and numbers is preserved and no other body parts are used in the counting sequence,
the potential pool of finger counting sequences equals 10! (i.e., 3628800). If the mapping was
completely random, most of us would never meet another person who uses the same sequence
(and existing studies would not document two people revealing the same sequence). However,
we know that this is not the case, normally we observe relatively few sequences. This is most
probably determined by a few simple constraints, which seem to be followed across cultures:
(1) Starting from “outer” fingers – we do not start the sequence from a finger in the middle
of the hand (i.e., middle or ring) but rather from one, which is outer: thumb, pinkie, and
index (outer among the four fingers, if we treat thumb as somehow separate).
(2) Using consecutive fingers within the same hand (sometimes thumb at the end as the
exception)
(3) Starting using the other hand only when we “run out” of fingers of the hand we started
with. However, note that this constraint may not be the case in several African systems,
which would be using both hands with symmetrical arrangements of fingers for
numbers larger than 5 (e.g., number 6 would be extending three fingers of each hand,
number 7, would be three and four etc. (Zaslavsky, 1999)). Nevertheless, such systems
require more finger rearrangements than just adding a single finger to the current
number and might be more linked to finger montring.
These three constraints (not considering exemptions mentioned in point 3) cut down the
number of possibilities – from 3628800 to 18 only: 2 (Starting hand: left vs. right) * 3 (starting
finger: thumb vs. index vs. pinkie) * 3 (continuing finger: thumb vs. index vs. pinkie). One of
these 18 patterns would be used by the majority of individuals across cultures5. We postulate
several factors determining which of these sequences would be used;
Finger dexterity. Individual differences in finger dexterity, especially when it comes to the
precision of operating pinkie and ring fingers, present either due to minor anatomical
differences or more exercise with using specific fingers might also be noticeable at the group
level (see Chui, Ng, Fong, Lin, & Ng, 2007). Such differences might explain larger prevalence
of starting with pinkie across some cultures. However, this requires further investigation.
Hand dominance. Both earlier work (Hohol et al., 2018) and our current results show that
handedness affects the finger counting sequence. While among right-handers we can see a split
between right- and left-starters, vast majority of left-handers are left-starters. Less established
hand dominance in some cultures might lead to greater variation of the finger counting routines
within these cultures (Marchant et al., 1995).
Observational learning and enculturation. Witnessing the typical finger counting sequence
used within the culture can shape one’s own use of fingers for counting. Like in case of other
spatial/directional routines, individuals may learn the typical pattern of the routine from their
environment by observation. In numerical cognition, similar mechanisms have been
demonstrated in case of counting direction (see Shaki, Fischer, & Göbel, 2012).
Reading and writing direction. As shown in earlier studies (Cipora, Soltanlou, Reips, & Nuerk,
2019, supplementary material; Lindemann et al., 2011), in right-to-left readers starting the
finger counting with the right hand is more prevalent. Importantly, both observational learning
as well as reading and writing direction could explain the increase of left-starters with
increasing education in Tsimane’. Even though most likely they have not been exposed to right-
to-left script, it is possible that education was related to greater exposure to left-to-right script
compared to individuals who had less schooling.
Presence of specific Spatial-Numerical Associations (SNAs) Associating numbers with specific
directions in space can be liked to finger counting routine (Pitt & Casasanto, 2020). However,
the direction of the causal link between the two remains unknown. Despite individual
5 In we consider patterns leading to keeping the finger pattern symmetrical we end up with 96 additional
patterns: 2 * (starting hand) * 3 (starting finger for the numbers 1-5) * 16 unique patterns for counting from 6 to
10 and keeping the finger pattern symmetrical when starting with outer fingers and using consecutive fingers.
Together with the 18 patterns listed in the main text, it sums up to 144, which is still dramatically fewer than
number of possible permutations.
differences in SNAs (Cipora, van Dijck, et al., 2019), the presence of the SNAs might be related
not only to direction of the finger counting sequence, but even more to its stability. Hohol et
al. (2018) reported that about half of the participants claim that their finger counting routine is
stable. When looking at test-retest data, they observed that 75% of participants were stable in
their starting hand. This is in line with the self-reported data so that 50% of participants are
indeed stable, and out of remaining 50%, half of the participants happen to start with the same
hand as in the first measurement, and half with the other hand. In another, yet unpublished
dataset we found that out of 425 (mostly German) participants only 29% declared to always be
starting their finger counting with a specific hand, and over 50% to be mostly using the same
hand. At the same time, recent data (Hohol, Wołoszyn, & Cipora, 2021) shows that there is no
connection between finger counting stability and SNAs (as indexed by the SNARC effect).
According to recent data of Pitt et al. (2021), Tsimane’ do not show directional bias for any
domain on any spatial axis, meaning that there was no left-to-right mapping of numbers. This
might to some extent account for a larger variation of finger counting techniques we observed
in this group. However, this requires further investigation.
Situated effects. Hohol et al. (2018) have shown that despite preferring a finger counting
sequence, the flexibility to use another hand or technique in case the preferred hand is busy
with holding an object or doing another task remains. This might have caused some artefacts
in the existing literature (for similar arguments see Lucidi & Thevenot, 2014; Wasner et al.,
2015).
We believe that the factors listed above provide a more comprehensive account on
cultural similarities and differences in finger counting routines both within and between
cultures and can help guide further investigations on the topic. Importantly, not all these
factors should be considered cognitive, and given variance both between and within groups,
none of them seems to be highly dominant.
Limitations
Although the proportions of left-handers in our sample are representative of the general
population, the absolute numbers were small and observations regarding this group should be
treated with caution. However, the results were broadly consistent with those of Hohol et al.
(2018). Similarly, not coding the technique in most Tsimane’ prevents us from drawing
conclusions. Additionally, we did not have a possibility to test non-Tsimane’ Bolivians as a
reference group, so we cannot directly say how finger counting routines in Tsimane’ match the
people they encounter when visiting towns etc. This should be addressed in future studies.
Given the specificities of the tested groups, and the fact that testing Tsimane’ particiants
had to follow the established TSBIDSI protocol, the general circumstances of the testing were
not equivalent between Tsimane’ and German / British participants. At the same time, the
testing protocol was to a large degree the one that was familiar to participants in each group.
We acknowledge that the compensation varied between groups, however, it was in line with
local protocols, and given that the task was neither long, tedious, nor cognitively demanding,
or accuracy based, it is unlikely that this might have introduced biases in the observed results.
Another potential limitation is that sample sizes and educational background differed between
groups. At the same time the effects / differences between groups we observed seem to be
pronounced and there seem not to be any power issue. The categorical nature of the data implies
that the effects are not affected by outliers, so we do not believe that this introduces any
systematic bias in the data.
When it comes to educational background, we do not aim at comparing cognitive
performance between groups, but habits. At the same time, it would be good if future studies
aimed at recruiting WEIRD samples with relatively low education or possibly among children
who have not experienced much schooling to ensure better matching.
The general cognitive skills such as working memory or IQ of the participants were not
controlled for and matched between groups. As this can be considered a problem in quasi-
experimental studies in general, even putting aside potential validity problems of such
measures in non-WEIRD samples we think that despite being a limitation of this study, it does
not undermine the conclusions. We were not judging the performance, and the task was in
general probing activities the participants do in their daily lifes. Based on the general
performance pattern, and high overall accuracy, the participants in all groups were familiar
with finger counting and understood the instructions. There was no additional cognitive load
applied either. We are also not aware of studies showing systematic differences in finger
counting routines within specific cultures being dependant on demographic variables. This
might well be that specific cognitive capabilities are determining the finger counting patterns,
however, to the best of our knowledge such a finding was not reported in the literature, with
studies showing that finger gnosia (but not specific finger counting patterns) may be linked to
mathematical skills (Barrocas, Roesch, Gawrilow, & Moeller, 2020). This is an important
question on its own, and can be pursued in any culture in the future.
Conclusion
In this study we present finger counting and montring routines among non-
industrialised Tsimane’ people. Even though the general picture of using fingers for counting
and comminucating numbers was consistent between groups, we have also observed some
differences. Apart from differences from finger counting and montring used by German and
British groups we show that Tsimane’ are characterized by a larger variability in their finger
counting and montring. We also provide further evidence for finger counting and montring
being distinct from each other. We outlined multiple factors such as finger dexterity, hand
dominance, observational learning and encultiration, presence of SNAs, and situated
influences, which might influence finger counting routines both between and within cultures.