Running head: PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 1
Hard Feelings?
Predicting Attitudes Toward Former Romantic Partners
David J. Grüning
Department of Psychology, Heidelberg University
Annalena M. Loose
University of Mannheim
Joachim I. Krueger
Cognitive, Linguistic & Psychological Sciences, Brown University
(Words in main body: 3,002)
Correspondence:
David J. Grüning
Heidelberg University
Hauptstraße 47
Heidelberg, 69117
Phone: +49 (0163) 8705625
E-mail: david.gruening@stud.uni-heidelberg.de
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 2
Abstract
Most research on relationship quality addresses ongoing involvements. Departing from this
trend, Athenstaedt et al. (2020) explored attitudes toward former romantic partners in an Austrian
sample of heterosexual respondents. While the authors focused on gender as a predictor of
attitudes, there were two stronger predictors. In two studies conducted in Germany and the USA,
we replicate the finding that perceived social support before and continued friendly relations
after the breakup are associated with a positive ex-partner attitude. As a new theoretical
contribution, we also find that regret over having started the relationship predicts a negative ex-
partner attitude. We note implications and directions for future research.
Keywords: ex-partner, attitude, regret, friendship, social support, Germany, USA!
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 3
Introduction
Research has extensively explored the psychological factors contributing to the formation and
maintenance of romantic relationships (Finkel et al., 2017; Rusbult & Van Lange, 2003). Much
less is known about post-breakup judgments. How do people feel about their former partners?
This question is significant for a number of reasons. First, relationship dissolution implicates
individual differences in personality. Depending on personal characteristics such as attachment
style or self-esteem, individuals might cope differently with a romantic loss (McCarthy et al.,
1997; Perilloux & Buss, 2008). The way people manage breakups offers insights into their
coping strategies during other stressful life events, and especially events in the social domain.
Second, many ex-partners still share important resources (e.g., possessions, friends, or children),
thereby prolonging interdependence (Rusbult & van Lange, 2003). Attitudes toward the ex-
partner may affect how resources are distributed and conflicts are managed. These attitudes thus
play a critical role in ongoing self- and social regulation efforts. Lastly, the attitude toward an ex-
partner may affect romantic prospects and efforts (i.e., behavior) as well as hopes and aspirations
(i.e., other attitudes) in the broader domain of social connectedness (Spielmann et al., 2012). It is
therefore important to explore the psychological sources of people’s attitudes toward their former
partners.
Predictors of ex-partner attitude
Athenstaedt et al. (2020) initiated the study of ex-partner attitudes with a sample of
heterosexual adults in Austria. While the authors focused on gender as the main predictor
variable of interest, several other psychological variables showed strong associations with ex-
partner attitude regardless of gender. The strongest two of these predictors were the degree of
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 4
social support respondents said they had received from the partner before the breakup, β = |.55|,
and the degree of reported friendly relations after the breakup, β = |.46|. We may now ask
whether there are other, hitherto unexplored, psychological predictors of ex-partner attitudes. We
propose the concept of post-decisional regret as a candidate, a concept that has a rich history in
social-cognitive psychology (Brehm, 1956) and the economics of rational choice (Loomes &
Sugden, 1982). We hypothesize that the more a person regrets having entered the relationship in
the first place, the more negative their perception of the ex-partner will be.
Regret in judgment and decision making
Regret is a post-decisional affect arising from counterfactual thinking, that is, from ideas
of what could have been (Ortony et al., 1990; van Dijk et al., 1999; Zeelenberg et al., 1998).
Inasmuch as any choice brings to mind unchosen alternatives, regret pervades the aftermath of
choice (Kierkegaard, 1843/2004; Pieters & Zeelenberg, 2007; see also Kahneman & Miller,
1986). It is difficult to make any decision (e.g., for a romantic partner) without opening the door
to regret. Regret is prevalent in mental life (Shimanoff, 1984), but it is not always evaluated
negatively. The utility of regret lies in its potential to guide future decisions so that mistakes are
not repeated (see Krueger, 2010, for a dissenting view). A regretful ex-partner may decide to
never get involved with a certain type of person again. Inasmuch as regret is seen as a useful
emotion (Saffrey et al., 2008), a correlation between regret and ex-partner attitude is unlikely to
reduce to a perceptual halo. Rather, it has its unique functionality, guiding social selection and,
therefore, increasing future payoffs.
Regret in ex-partner attitudes
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 5
Romantic relationships meet basic human needs such as being close to others, being
cared for, understood, and loved (Argyle, 1987; Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Epstein, 1990;
Krueger et al., 2022; Myers, 1999). A rewarding romantic relationship promotes happiness,
contentment, and life satisfaction (Berscheid & Peplau, 1983; Kansky, 2018). Romantic
relationships are thus fertile ground for counterfactual regret; they involve complex interactions
requiring difficult decisions (e.g., in planning future projects or discussing present conflicts). The
most radical decision one can make in a romantic relationship is to terminate it. While regret can
arise from having ended a relationship, which will also have its effect on one’s attitude toward
the former partner, the present paper focuses on an individual’s regret of having entered the
relationship in the first place. It stands to reason that greater regret of having entered the
relationship is associated with a less positive attitude toward the ex-partner.
The simplest causal model assumes that post-decisional regret arises when the balance of
benefits and costs is reassessed and found wanting. A more negative attitude toward the object of
choice is the result. Alternatively, an attitude may have soured for reasons unrelated to such
calculations, and the judge retroactively generates the idea that a choice that had been made
should not have been made (Festinger, 1957), resulting in a negative attitude toward the former
partner as well.
A person rejecting a partner not only in the present, but also counter-factually projects
this rejection into the past seems to assert a freedom of having been able to choose differently;
and not having done so gives rise to the experience of regret. Such cognitions would be
internally consistent. Because, however, the person did choose the now-rejected partner in the
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 6
past, and presumably for good reasons at the time, the regret experienced now is likely
contaminated by an outcome bias (Baron & Hershey, 1988; Krueger & Acevedo, 2007).
Aims of the present study
We test three hypotheses. First, we expect regret about having entered the now-lost rela-
tionship to predict ex-partner attitude. Second and third, we hypothesize that social support and
friendship also predict ex-partner attitude, as shown previously by Athenstaedt et al. (2020). The
analytical purpose of the paper was to establish the basic relationships between these psycholog-
ical states ex-partner attitudes. We tested the relationships in two countries, namely, Germany
(Study 1) and the USA (Study 2).
Study 1
Method
Participants. Five hundred fifty-five German participants were recruited via social
media advertisement and a student mailing list, and the participation management platform of the
University of Mannheim. We set aside participants who did not identify as male or female, who
did not indicate heterosexuality, or who reported to have never been in a romantic relationship
that lasted longer than three months. The final sample comprised 446 participants (76.0%
female) with age ranging from 18 to 73 years (M = 26.82, SD = 9.12). A sensitivity analysis
(Faul et al., 2007) revealed that with the standard settings of α = .05 and 1-β of .80, an effect of β
≥ .11 is reliably detected in a fixed-effects multiple regression model.
Procedure. Following consent, participants completed an online survey. After reading the
general instructions, they answered questions regarding the following constructs in the given
order: prerequisites (i.e., age, gender, sexuality, and past relationships), ex-partner attitude,
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 7
regret, friendship, and social support. Afterward, participants were debriefed and thanked for
their participation.
Measures. The prerequisites for participation – age, gender, sexual orientation, and the
history of past relationships – were indicated by one item each. All measurement scales were
taken from Athenstaedt et al. (2020) and a one-item scale for regret was added. The full set of
view_only=541348e496cf40e4a18bfdbdaa1c30c3), including those (i.e., social support after the
breakup, cause of the breakup, physical attractiveness, and attachment style) that receive no
further consideration in the present paper. Before making their judgments, participants were
asked to remember when they were still in the relationship with their ex-partner and answer
questions regarding this past relationship.
At the beginning, we asked participants how many months had passed since the last
breakup and if they were in a relationship at the time of the survey. Then, participants indicated
their ex-partner attitudes with a 18-items scale (e.g., “My ex-partner has many qualities”) using a
6-point Likert scales, ranging from 1 - “Do not agree at all” to 6 - “Completely agree.” The
internal consistency of the scale was acceptable, α = .78. Respondents then reported their regret
measured by a single item (i.e., “How much do you regret entering the past relationship you were
thinking of?”) on another 6-point scale. Afterward, they answered 14 items about their ex-
partner’s social support before the breakup (e.g., “My ex-partner always took the time and
listened to me carefully when I wanted to have a talk”) with a high internal consistency of α =
.94 and two items about existing friendly relations between them after the breakup (i.e., “I
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 8
maintain a friendly relationship with my ex-partner” and “I have no contact with my ex-
partner”), which showed a satisfactory consistency, α =.83.
Results and Discussion
We tested the hypotheses non-parametrically when the assumptions of parametric tests
were not met, and we performed additional Bayesian tests where these offered additional
information. As expected, these diverse testing strategies yielded the same substantive
conclusions (see Krueger & Heck, 2018, for why this is generally so).
Psychological predictors of ex-partner attitude. As predicted by hypotheses 1, 2, and
3, regret (β = -.56), social support (β = .58), and friendship (β = .53), showed the expected
associations in bivariate linear ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analyses with ex-partner
attitude as the continuous criterion, Both frequentist (all ps < .001) and Bayesian (all BF ’s >
1.679e+30) analyses suggest that these effects provide strong evidence for these predictors’
substantive role in predicting ex-partner attitude. Stronger regret was associated with a more
negative attitude toward the ex-partner. Greater social support before the breakup and a closer
friendship after the breakup, as recalled by the respondents, was associated with more positive
attitudes toward their ex-partner.1
Multivariate prediction. A multiple regression analysis with ex-partner attitude as the
criterion and regret, social support, and friendship as the three predictors yielded R2 = .54.
Together these variables explained more than half of the variation in ex-partner attitude.2 The
Relating to Athenstaedt et al.’s (2020) main findings, we tested gender’s effect on ex-partner attitudes which was
A regression model with the standardized versions of these variables yielded the same result (i.e., only minimal
differences in the hundredths).
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 9
increments to the explained variance, expressed as ΔR2, were .07 for regret, .07 for social
support, and .10 for continued friendship. To test the robustness of regret, social support, and
continuous variable) and if respondents were in a current relationship (binary). All three
predictors’ standardized beta-weight remained unchanged.
Multivariate regression model of the four predictors of ex-partner attitude in the German
sample: regret, social support, and friendship controlling for time and current relationship
Predictors β t p
Regret -.29 -7.72 < .001
Social support .34 9.14 < .001
Friendship .34 9.80 < .001
Time since relationship .08 2.33 .020
Current relationship .08 2.23 .026
Note: For gender, 0 = woman, 1 = man. *p < .05, **p < .001. The two control variables showed a positive
relationship with ex-partner attitude. Respondents who reported having broken up a long time ago and those who
were in a current relationship showed more positive ex-partner attitudes.
As regret, friendship, and social support all remained strong predictors in a joined
regression model, we conclude that all three variables uniquely explained variance in ex-partner
attitude. Hence, their predictive contributions were not confounded with each other.
As the elements of romantic relationships such as passion (Gao, 2001), emotional support
(Burleson, 2003), communication (Ge et al., 2022), and approval (MacDonald et al., 2012) can
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 10
vary considerably across cultures, we sought to replicate our hypothesis tests in a second cultural
and linguistic context, namely the United States. We thus designed Study 2.
Study 2
Method
Participants. We recruited participants in courses at Brown University in Providence,
Rhode Island, and via the platform Prolific. We obtained data from 321 US-based participants,
applying the same criteria as in the German sample (gender, sexual orientation, past romantic
relationship). We excluded the data of participants who were neither born nor currently lived in
an English-speaking country to avoid language bias. The final sample consisted of 203
participants (58.05% female), with age ranging from 18 to 77 years (M = 31.21, SD = 13.67).
Assuming again an α error probability = .05, a 1-β (i.e., power) of .80, a sensitivity analysis for a
fixed-effects multiple regression model showed that effects of β ≥ .17 could be reliably detected.
Procedure and measures. The same procedure, after approval, was followed and the
same measures were completed as in the German sample. The internal consistencies of all
measures were satisfactory, with all αs > .81.
Results and Discussion
Psychological predictors. As predicted by the primary hypotheses 1, 2, and 3, linear
regression analyses with ex-partner attitude as the criterion showed the expected strong effects
for regret (β = -.56), social support (β = .56), and friendship (β = .49). Both Frequentist (all ps <
.001) and Bayesian (all BF ’s > 1.872e+30) analyses point to strong evidence for all three
predictors’ associations with ex-partner attitude. Stronger regret was associated with a more
negative attitude toward the ex-partner. As before, greater social support before the breakup and
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 11
a closer friendship after the breakup, as recalled by the respondents, was associated with more
positive attitudes toward their ex-partner.3
2 shows the individual contributions of all three predictors.4 In contrast, regret yielded a unique
increment of ΔR2 = .12, and social support and friendship added considerable amount with ΔR2 =
.09 and ΔR2 = .07, respectively. To again test the robustness of regret, social support, and
friendship as predictors we controlled for the time since participants had broken up the past
relationship (continuous variable) and if respondents were in a current relationship (binary). As
Multivariate regression model of the four predictors of ex-partner attitude in the U.S. sample:
regret, social support, friendship, and gender controlling for time and current relationship
Predictors β t p
Regret -.36 -7.04 < .001
Social support .33 6.25 < .001
Friendship .29 5.46 < .001
Time since relationship .12 2.35 .020
Current relationship .12 2.51 .013
Again, the effect of gender on ex-partner attitudes was small but robust, as shown in the supplementary materials:
A regression model with the standardized versions of these variables yielded the same result (i.e., only minimal
differences in the hundredths).
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 12
Note: For gender, 0 = woman, 1 = man. *p < .05, **p < .001. The two control variables showed a positive
relationship with ex-partner attitude. Respondents who reported to have broken up a long time ago and those who
were in a current relationship showed more positive ex-partner attitudes.
As regret, friendship, and social support all remained strong predictors in a joined
regression model, we conclude that all three variables uniquely explained variance in ex-partner
attitudes.
General Discussion
Supporting the Austrian-sample findings reported by Athenstaedt et al. (2020), our
German- and US-sample results show that the degree of social support provided by an ex-partner
before the breakup, and the friendly relations with this person after the breakup substantially
predict respondents!"attitudes toward this former partner. Going beyond the cultural replication of
earlier research, we find that regret is also a strong predictor of ex-partner attitude. The more that
people regret having entered the now terminated relationship, the more negatively they view
their former partner. These three psychological predictors explain more than half (i.e., 54%) of
the variation in people’s ex-partner attitude in both the German and the U.S. sample.
Critical considerations
There is a possibility that the correlation between ex-partner attitudes and regret signals
inferential constraints of endogeneity. Reported regret may be associated with ex-partner
attitudes simply because of shared desirability, and not because one variable predicts the other in
a causal sense. On this view, both the forward causal chain linking greater regret to a more
negative attitude and the backward causal chain linking attitude to regret are false. However, we
note that the attitude measure pointedly refers to the person with whom the respondent had been
involved, whereas the regret measure affords a broader construal of the past romantic
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 13
relationship. Regretting a past relationship leaves open the possibility that participants regret
mistakes they themselves had made independent of how the ex-partner had behaved. This
difference in object reference makes regret, as measured in the present research, conceptually
distinct from ex-partner attitude.
We anticipate the argument that assessing ex-partner attitude retrospectively raises
concerns about reconstructed memories. While it is true that an ex-partner attitude may change
over time and, due to the instability of memory, reflect the actual relationship less, its experience
and consequences for other psychological variables remain real and impactful. Otherwise, an
abundance of research on emotions could be disregarded. However, emotional states, be they
influenced by memory flaws or not, are a concept of interest at the moment of experience with
real consequences for well-being and behavior. The same is true for people’s attitudes toward
people and events of the past. This said, the present paper does not focus on the diagnosticity of
ex-partner attitudes in regards to the past relationship’s real condition but rather on the actual
attitude participants have toward a former partner.
Limitations and future directions
The measurement instrument of ex-partner attitude (Imhoff & Banse, 2011) warrants
further examination. In both samples, the instrument’s internal consistency was satisfactory.
There may, however, be latent dimensions to this attitude with differing connections to the tested
predictors. Further research on the scale’s psychometric properties should enhance measurement
resolution and efficiency, and potentially reveal hitherto unseen causal paths linking predictors
and ex-partner attitudes in more detail. Lastly, the present results, like the findings reported by
Athenstaedt et al. (2020), remain limited to their broader cultural context and the context of
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 14
heterosexual relationships. We encourage future research to attempt replications of the present
findings in other cultures and for different types of romantic involvements. In the same vein,
different types of regret regarding a romantic breakup and their effects on ex-partner attitudes
should be inspected- For instance, while regretting the initiation of the relationship, as researched
in the present studies, should reduce one’s ex-partner attitude, regretting the dissolution of it
might mean the opposite.
Conclusion
The breakup of a romantic relationship is a significant and generally stressful life event.
It is an experience of loss. Among its psychological outcomes is the evaluation of the now-
former partner. We show that ex-partner attitudes are highly predictable from three psychological
judgments: the social support received in the former relationship, the degree of friendly relations
after the breakup, and the experienced regret about having entered the former relationship. We
demonstrate their predictive power across cultures in Germany and the USA.#
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 15
Data Availability Statement
The presentation material and data that support the findings of the studies are openly available in
view_only=541348e496cf40e4a18bfdbdaa1c30c3.#
PREDICTING ATTITUDES TOWARD FORMER PARTNERS 16