SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 1
Socially Transformative Resilience:
A Conceptual Model and Research Agenda for a New Construct
a,b a c a
Katherine S. Leventhal, Vilas Sawrikar, Sumeet Jain, and Angus MacBeth
Department of Clinical Psychology, School of Health in Social Science, University of
Edinburgh, Doorway 6, Old Medical Building, Teviot Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, United
Kingdom
CorStone, 8 Market Place, Suite 300, Baltimore, MD, 21202, United States
Department of Social Work, School of Social and Political Science, University of Edinburgh,
Chrystal Macmillan Building, 15a George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9AG, United Kingdom
Author Note
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 2
We have no known conflict of interest to disclose. This work was supported by a College
Research Award, College of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Edinburgh.
Correspondence concerning this manuscript should be addressed to Katherine S.
Leventhal, School of Health in Social Science, University of Edinburgh, Doorway 6, Old
Medical Building, Teviot Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, United Kingdom,
kate.leventhal@ed.ac.uk.
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 3
Abstract
Marginalised individuals face significant and consistent adversities and injustices that
their dominant culture counterparts rarely or never face, such as discrimination, low resource
access, and violence. These challenges have been linked to poor wellbeing, both empirically and
in individuals’ lived experiences. An original approach to improving this situation is introduced
here via a novel transtheoretical construct: socially transformative resilience. Socially
transformative resilience is conceived as a type of resilience in which individuals not only
improve their psychosocial wellbeing in the face of challenge, but also resist, transcend, and/or
seek to change the status quo, increasing their liberation as well. The key components and
mechanisms of this new construct are described in detail, drawing on theoretical and empirical
evidence. Key propositions of the model include the dual importance of moral and emotional
initial responses to stressors, the centrality of a multidimensional reflection process, and the
utility of acceptability-control appraisals in choosing which actions and resources to activate in
service of wellbeing and liberation. An agenda for future research is presented, including
examining and refining the model, developing a measure, creating interventions, and
investigating relationships with psychopathology.
Keywords: resilience, social justice, marginalization, model, theory, socially transformative
resilience
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 4
Socially Transformative Resilience:
A Conceptual Model and Research Agenda for a New Construct
Marginalised individuals are disadvantaged by multiple entrenched socio-political
inequities and power structures [1]. Many groups of individuals worldwide are marginalised,
such as racial and ethnic minorities, sexual and gender minorities, refugees, low-income, and
homeless [2,3]. Such individuals face daily challenges that those in dominant cultures rarely
face. Compared to dominant cultures, there is a higher prevalence of discrimination, elevated
violence, poor access to resources, exploitation, and micro-aggressions within the experiences of
those identifying as members of historically marginalised groups [1].
These experiences intersect to affect psychosocial wellbeing for marginalised populations
[2,4,5]. For example, a recent systematic review of large-scale community-based studies reported
that eight out of nine studies identified associations between greater social disadvantage and
greater common mental disorder prevalence [6]. This linkage is well-documented among youth
and adult populations: for instance, youth facing socioeconomic disadvantage are two to three
times more likely than their advantaged peers to report mental health problems [7]. Further, those
experiencing multiple forms of marginalisation via multiple types of discrimination (e.g., racism
and heterosexism) may face even poorer outcomes. For instance, a systematic review of the
association between experiences of multiple discrimination and mental health in the United
States indicated that those facing multiple discrimination were at higher risk for psychopathology
[8]. This link also goes beyond quantitatively measured associations. As marginalised
1 Abbreviations used in this manuscript: Model of Psychological Liberation (MPL); Socially Transformative
Resilience (STR); Status Quo Resilience (SQR); Systematic Self Reflection Model (SSRM).
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 5
individuals describe, the lived experience of marginalisation itself is often inextricable from
“despair, pain, being driven mad, and losing the desire to live” [9]. Thus, if we are to consider
how marginalised individuals’ lives could be improved, we must consider ways to both improve
psychosocial wellbeing and to change the systems causing marginalisation that are detrimental to
this wellbeing in the first place.
In this article, we introduce a new approach that has potential to improve marginalised
individuals’ lives by improving psychosocial wellbeing and liberation from marginalising
systems, which we call socially transformative resilience or STR. We begin by discussing the
synergistic potential of resilience and social justice, which are two key frameworks concerned
with wellbeing among marginalised individuals that have not frequently been considered
together. We then introduce a transtheoretical model of STR, combining constructs from each of
these approaches, and describe its core components. Finally, we provide a set of potential
directions for future research on STR.
1 Potential for Integrating Resilience and Social Justice Approaches
Multiple frameworks are concerned with wellbeing for marginalised individuals.
Resilience and social justice represent two such prominent frameworks, yet take different
approaches [see, e.g., 10–12]. The combination of alignment of goals alongside differences in
approach provides potential for synergy, presenting a unique opportunity for each framework to
fill key gaps in the other. Examining resilience and social justice together thus could enable
generation of a transtheoretical model for improving wellbeing for marginalised individuals.
1.1 Resilience-Based Approaches
Resilience has been described as the ability to “bounce back better” in the face of
adversity or challenge [e.g., 13–16]. Though adversities, challenges, and traumas, such as those
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 6
faced daily by marginalised individuals, may be risk factors for poor psychosocial wellbeing,
there are multiple ways to achieve positive outcomes. The process of achieving positive
outcomes despite adversity is often termed resilience. Additionally or alternatively, the positive
outcome itself is often termed resilience [e.g., 17–19]. Resilience-based research has identified
many protective and promotive factors that potentiate positive outcomes [20], including internal
factors such as self-efficacy [21], self-compassion [22], and emotional regulation [23]; and
external factors such as peer relationships [24] and presence of mentors [20].
Much resilience scholarship has focused on identifying malleable factors for resilient
outcomes [e.g., 20,25], and creating and testing interventions that can improve these factors in a
host of populations [26]. Meta-analyses suggest resilience-based interventions can effectively
improve outcomes for individuals facing challenges, including behaviours (e.g., substance use),
coping skills (e.g., problem solving), and psychosocial factors (e.g., self-efficacy and social
support) [27,28]. Resilience-based approaches have resulted in useful frameworks that guide
building identified promotive factors to encourage change [29,30].
1.2 Criticisms of Resilience
However, there are several criticisms of dominant conceptualisations of resilience. First,
resilience science in particular (and psychological science in general) tends to overstate the
importance of internal, individual factors whilst understating the importance of external,
structural and societal factors [9,31–33], including marginalisation. Most theoretical models of
resilience, as well as interventions built on these models, are largely internally focussed, helping
people to build inner skills and strengths to better cope with and handle their situations, with
little reference to external factors.
Although external factors such as social context, interpersonal factors, and structural
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 7
concerns have been articulated more prominently in recent resilience models [e.g., 32,34–36],
this nascent interest has neither been readily matched by interventions [e.g., 33] nor by measures.
For example, in a systematic review of resilience measures, Windle and colleagues [37]
identified only six of fifteen measures that included a focus on factors beyond the individual, and
only one (the Resilience Scale for Adults [38,39]) was rated at the highest quality level.
A second, related concern is that if resilience models and measures fail to take power and
marginalisation into account, they may inadvertently reproduce or even support oppressive
systems and structures. For example, if resilience-based approaches encourage marginalised
individuals to cope with or “bounce back better” from oppression, rather than encouraging them
to challenge oppression itself, this might support complacency in face of oppression, thus
allowing its continuation [16]. Further discussions of these and related criticisms of resilience as
an approach can be found in Atallah et al. [10] and Hart et al. [40].
Atallah et al. [10] describe three waves in resilience research and theory. The first wave
encompassed concepts of “bouncing back” and related approaches (helping individuals to return
to levels of wellbeing that they had held prior to adversity); the second wave encompassed
“bouncing forward” and related approaches (helping individuals to grow, adapt, and build
wellbeing, such that they emerge with improved wellbeing relative to states prior to the
adversity). Atallah et al. defines the emerging third wave as “centering at the margins” [10]. This
includes resilience research and theory that engages with transformational approaches; builds on
intersectional, transdisciplinary thinking; utilises approaches from liberation psychology; and
aims towards “transforming ecosocial systems toward social justice” [10 p. 20].
Scholars within this third wave have suggested several potential responses to criticisms of
resilience as a construct. Traynor [41] described the need to build “critical resilience,” which is a
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 8
type of resilience in which individuals are critical of power structures and what it means to be
resilient. Alternatively, it has been argued that “resilience is an incomplete intervention” [33]; in
other words, that it is incomplete to conduct individual-level resilience programmes without also
working to influence structures and systems in individuals’ environments. Others have suggested
reconceptualising resilience as “resistance” in marginalised populations [42], proposing
advocating for marginalised populations to resist the status quo rather than encouraging them to
achieve positive outcomes defined by dominant cultures.
1.3 Social Justice: An Approach Supporting “Centring at the Margins”
Each of these possibilities draws inspiration from social justice approaches. Social justice
is another key framework regarding wellbeing for marginalised individuals. However, social
justice approaches have historically remained largely separate from resilience models and
theories. In part, the separation is due to different approaches in social justice vs. resilience.
Rather than taking a largely individual-level perspective, social justice-based approaches
frequently set about the issue from the opposite side, taking a societal and structural-level
perspective, with less attention to individual, internal factors [43].
Social justice prioritises “the equal worth of all citizens, their equal right to meet their
basic needs, the need to spread opportunity and life chances as widely as possible, and finally the
requirement that we reduce and, where possible, eliminate unjustified inequalities” [11 p. 13].
Social justice also focusses on several societal ideals, such as distributing goods and power fairly
throughout society [e.g., 44,45] and enabling all individuals to develop capabilities allowing
them to live their lives with dignity [e.g., 46,47], which aim to contribute to liberating
individuals from oppression faced due to marginalisation.
Scholars in fields such as liberation psychology [based on the work of 48], have
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 9
identified the need for additional attention to individuals’ internal worlds to support liberation
and justice, a level of attention that is not frequently included in social justice-based approaches.
Despite this need, research on internal processes in liberation is still nascent. It is representative
of this gap that although some acknowledge that “individuals and groups may not be readily able
to engage with...sociopolitical...change until they have built up [internal] resources, skills, and
experiences” [49 p. 97], models of exactly how such internal resources, skills, and experiences
should be built, measured, and translated into action are scarce [50]. This missing link could be
filled via a focus on resilience.
2 Introducing Socially Transformative Resilience (STR)
Rooted in the third wave of resilience research and deploying critical conceptualisations
from social justice, we propose a type of resilience that has not yet been described, delineated,
nor developed: Resilience that unlocks, transforms, liberates, and transcends or seeks to
transform social structures and systems, which we call Socially Transformative Resilience (STR).
In the face of adversity rooted in oppressive systems, one can (a) find ways to handle the
adversity better; (b) stop whomever or whatever is creating the adversity, or (c) remove oneself
from the situation of adversity. Combining “a” with “b” and/or “c” corresponds to STR (see
resilience, there is lower potential for social transformation. We therefore call processes
including only “a” without “b” and/or “c” Status Quo Resilience (SQR).
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 10
Possible Responses to Adversity as Status Quo or Socially Transformative Resilience
Responses to Adversity
(a) Cope with (b) Seek to (c) Seek to remove oneself
Types of Resilience
and/or handle the stop the from encountering the
adversity better adversity adversity
Status Quo Resilience
(SQR)
Socially Transformative
✓ + (✓ and/or ✓)
Resilience (STR)
Though the remainder of this manuscript describes a detailed process model only of STR
in hopes of closer examination of this type of resilience, it is useful to understand STR by briefly
contrasting not only its process but also its outcomes with SQR. In the face of adversity, STR
combines simultaneous processes leading towards psychosocial wellbeing and liberation, while
depicts outcomes sought via STR and SQR in relation to psychosocial wellbeing and liberation.
Relationship Among Psychosocial Wellbeing and Liberation Outcomes for STR and SQR
Though definitions abound, psychosocial wellbeing is defined here as encompassing
emotional and social functioning, competencies, and experiences of satisfaction and wellness for
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 11
an individual. This can include life satisfaction, positive affect, social connections and support,
and sense of meaning, among other constructs [51]. Liberation is defined here as encompassing
not only the degree to which an individual is politically or physically free, but also free from
oppression in their thoughts, emotions, beliefs, actions, behaviours, and experienced
relationships with social structures and systems. This definition is aligned with that of Banks and
Stephens [52], who conceptualised psychological liberation as including “what happens between
the process of awakening to oppression and getting free” [p. 102]. Liberation is thus considered
an evolving process of transformative yet pragmatic change, rather than a static endpoint.
STR outcomes include both liberation and psychosocial wellbeing outcomes, without one
emerging much more frequently than or at the expense of the other. This does not mean that for
each response to an adverse situation, STR outcomes always include both liberation and
psychosocial wellbeing simultaneously and in balance. However, in examining the outcomes of
the STR process, which repeats itself within individuals for multiple stressors over time,
liberation and psychosocial wellbeing would both be significantly built and supported via STR.
Psychosocial wellbeing and liberation outcomes do not occur at the expense of one
another in STR, however; instead, they are equally valued and mutually reinforcing. Other
theoretical models have pointed out that liberation and wellbeing have an integral relationship
with one another. For instance, Prilleltensky and Nelson [53] describe liberation as “the process
of overcoming internal and external sources of subjugation…and pursuing well-being” [p. 16].
Thus, without liberation, psychosocial wellbeing is impossible to fully achieve. This mutual
reinforcement is crucial within STR processes, as building one could have beneficial effects on
the other, and vice versa. STR is a process that recognises the power of this leverage, aiming
towards a holistic endpoint of outcomes that recognise the importance of experiencing wellness
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 12
in relation to one’s internal and external realities.
2.1 The Socially Transformative Resilience (STR) Model
The following sections describe in detail the main components of the STR Model. These
The appendix provides a hypothetical case vignette that shows an example of how the model
may manifest. The model begins with a person encountering a stressor within their environment
and ends with STR outcomes. Below, we describe processes between these two points.
2.1.1 Intertwinement with Sociocultural Structures and Systems
Sociocultural structures and systems are foundational to the STR Model, as all model
components occur within and in relation to these. These structures and systems are foundational
to the model in alignment with the Foucauldian conceptualisation that power “produces reality”
[54 p. 194]. In the STR Model, all aspects of a person’s responses to a stressor, as well as the
stressor itself, are intertwined with sociocultural systems and structures with inherent power
differentials, in which a person lacks and/or possesses power based on their location within those
systems and structures. The importance of these systems and structures is represented by the
outer rounded rectangle of “sociocultural structures and systems” in the STR Model, signifying
that all model aspects occur within, are influenced by, and influence these.
2.1.2 Initial Response
According to the Systematic Self-Reflection Model of Resilience (SSRM) [55], a person
encountering a stressor has an immediate, initial response that occurs largely without conscious
premeditation. In the STR Model, two components of this initial response are highlighted: an
emotional and a moral response.
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 13
Model of Socially Transformative Resilience (key components)
Note.
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 14
Model of Socially Transformative Resilience (detail)
1. Strength of emotional responses are hypothesised to have an inverted "U" shaped relationship with STR outcomes: mild and
major distress are likely associated with lower STR, while moderate distress is likely associated with greater STR.
2. Direction of moral judgment (whether the stressor is judged to be "right" or "wrong") is hypothesised to have an inverse
relationship with STR such that the degree to which a person feels that a situation is "right" is associated with lower STR.
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 15
3. Initial response is considered adaptive if supportive of a person’s psychosocial- and liberation-related goals.
4. Self-awareness includes awareness of the emotional and moral initial responses.
5. Situation awareness includes awareness of the specific trigger in the situation. The greater the ability to delineate a specific
trigger, the more aligned with STR.
6. System awareness includes awareness of relevant oppressive system(s).
7. If aligned with STR, this moral lens is underpinned by a humanist ideology.
8. Self-beliefs include self-concept and self-worth.
9. Aspirations include values and goals.
10. Potential moral, practical, cognitive, motivational, social, and emotion regulatory resources and actions that support
psychosocial wellbeing and liberation.
11. Deploying the transformative repertoire (emotion-focused vs. problem-focused strategies) is determined via fit with a person's
acceptability are more STR-aligned.
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 16
Though highlighted separately, moral and emotional responses are related. Multiple
studies have indicated that a person’s emotions influence moral judgments. For instance, one
often-cited study asked participants to rate situations’ morality while sitting at dirty or clean
desks. Those experiencing disgust due to sitting at dirty desks rated morally-ambiguous
situations as less moral than those sitting at clean desks [56]. Emotions’ importance in moral
judgments is also discussed in neuroscience and philosophy [e.g., 57]. However, moral
judgments do have elements separate from emotions. For instance, moral judgments can arise via
cognitive processes based on social norms that lead people to make moral categorisations [58].
This interrelationship of emotional and moral responses is thus represented in the STR Model via
the dotted line between them.Initial Emotional Response The STR Model’s initial emotional
response includes experiential, behavioural, and physiological components (following the modal
model of emotion) [59]. The SSRM predicts that the intensity of initial emotional response has
an inverted “U” shaped relationship with resilience, such that if a person has a “moderate”
distress response, this is more likely to lead to positive change in the future vs. mild or major
distress. Major distress may lead to feelings of paralysis or inability to reflect, while mild-to-no
distress may not provide enough motivation to make changes for the future [55].
This emphasis on the importance of some distress in developing resilience finds synergy
with emphases on some dysphoria in liberation processes. For example, Martin Luther King Jr
asserted the centrality of being “maladjusted” to oppressive systems and structures as an
important component of liberation [60 p. 185]. Combining these theories, moderate
psychological distress is hypothesised to lead to STR outcomes, whereas mild-to-no distress and
major distress are hypothesised to be less likely to lead to STR outcomes.
The behavioural component of one’s initial emotional response also has a relationship
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 17
with STR outcomes. How a person initially behaves in response to a stressor may affect the
situation, thus feeding into the potential for future changes towards STR outcomes. For instance,
initial behaviours (e.g., smiling or crying, leaving the situation or staying) may impact the
situation in varying ways. However, a distinguishing feature of STR-aligned behavioural
responses is their adaptive function. Here, adaptive follows Barrett and colleagues’ [61]
definition, whereby a “process is adaptive to the extent that it better enables the person to…deal
successfully with his/her environment concurrently and/or in the future” (p. 71, emphasis in
original).
However, as Barrett and colleagues [61] point out, it is almost impossible to determine in
the moment whether a given response is adaptive or maladaptive. This resistance to in-the-
moment definition is due to two main reasons: first, that the “success” of the process is hard to
singularly define, as individuals’ goals are multifaceted, often competing, and contexts complex.
Second, the “success” of a process is dynamic, and a response that is “successful” now may have
negative consequences later, or vice versa. For instance, a marginalised individual’s goals in a
given situation might include social wellbeing goals (e.g., maintaining relationships with one’s
family, friends, or colleagues), psychological wellbeing goals (e.g., wanting one’s emotions to
feel pleasant), and liberation goals (e.g., overcoming obstacles related to one’s oppression). It
may not be possible to achieve all goals in the moment, and some goals may be competing. It
may also not be possible to maintain in-the-moment success over time.
Despite the challenges with pinpointing, in the moment, whether an individual’s response
is adaptive or maladaptive, a response is more supportive of STR outcomes if it is more
consistently adaptive with respect to more of an individual’s goals, both immediately and over
time. At minimum, a response is likely to lead to STR outcomes if it supports goals related to
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 18
both psychosocial wellbeing and liberation, with at least some success at some point in time.
2.1.2.2 Initial Moral Response
A precursor and requirement for any liberatory processes is that a person has an
immediate moral response. In the STR Model, moral is not taken to mean objectively “good” or
“bad” in the ethical sense; instead, it is taken to mean an individual’s subjective sense of what is
right and wrong in terms of how they want to ideally live their life, following Kleinman [62]. In
response to a stressor, an individual has a moral response on a spectrum from: “this is wrong,”
through neutral responses, to “this is right.” In various conceptualisations of liberation, including
Banks and Stephens’ Model of Psychological Liberation (MPL) [52], an important component of
liberation processes includes awareness and acknowledgement of one’s oppression. However,
logically, a person must perceive a situation’s “wrongness” before and/or in conjunction with
perceiving that it is a situation of oppression. Therefore, it is hypothesised that the immediate
moral response has an inverse relationship with STR outcomes: the more morally “right” a
person perceives a situation to be, the less likely they are to move towards STR outcomes.
2.1.3 Multidimensional Reflection
Pivotal to the STR Model is that after initial response, reflection ensues. Multiple models
of resilience and liberation emphasise reflection (for instance, the SSRM similarly describes
reflection immediately following initial response [55], and five of the seven model components
of the MPL are reflective [52]). The centrality of reflection in liberation processes is also
identified in many discussions of liberation, including in Freire’s concepts of conscientisation
and praxis [50,63], and in other related processes or methods such as problematisation, de-
habituation, and denaturalisation that support changing consciousness towards liberation [50],
underlining reflection’s relevance for the STR Model.
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 19
The STR Model expands on ways in which reflection is conceptualised in other models,
however, to include multiple dimensions. The processes within STR’s “multidimensional
reflection” includes two sub-processes: multidimensional awareness and contemplation.
Progressing from one sub-process to the next is mediated by a person’s moral lens.
2.1.3.1 Multidimensional Awareness
Awareness in the STR Model includes four components: self-awareness, situational-
awareness, system-awareness, and interconnectivity awareness. The importance of awareness in
STR rests in part on the centrality of awareness to many psychological processes, described and
studied widely via concepts such as mentalisation [e.g., 64–66], metacognition [e.g., 67,68] and
attribution theory [e.g., 69]. Luyten and Fonagy’s [66] description of the concept of
mentalisation, in particular, aptly describes the level of awareness that the STR Model
prioritises: “Mentalizing is the capacity to understand ourselves and others in terms of intentional
mental states, such as feelings, desires, wishes, attitudes, and goals” [p. 366]. Accessing this
ability to be aware of and consider the self is a key skill underpinning awareness and reflection
processes within the STR Model.
The process of self-awareness in the STR Model includes being aware of emotional and
moral components of one’s initial response. A person’s awareness of their emotions is critical in
being able to cope with and regulate emotions [e.g., 70]. Meta-analytic evidence suggests that
emotional awareness is significantly and negatively correlated with depression and anxiety
symptoms among youth [71]. In addition, in models of moral decision-making, including Rest’s
Four Component Model [72], moral awareness (what Rest termed “moral sensitivity”) is key to
taking moral action [72–75], which in turn, is central to transforming or transcending oppression
towards liberation. Empirical evidence also supports the link between moral awareness and
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 20
moral action [73]. Further, logically, it is impossible to contemplate one’s responses, which is a
key component that follows in the STR Model, without first being aware of them.
The process of situational-awareness consists of being able to identify which aspect(s) of
a situation triggered one’s initial response. “Trigger identification” is supportive of psychosocial
wellbeing, as it appears in the SSRM by the same name [following 76,77]. Analogous processes
also appear in liberation models such as the MPL by different names, encompassed within
“awareness/acknowledgement of impact of oppression on the self” [52 p. 103], suggesting that
this process is supportive of both wellbeing and liberation.
The process of system-awareness builds on the MPL component
“awareness/acknowledgement of oppression” [52 p. 102] and Freire’s concept of
conscientisation, which has more recently been referred to as critical consciousness [e.g., 78]. In
conscientisation or critical consciousness, a person becomes conscious of broader system(s) of
oppression, which functions as a precursor to liberation [50,63]. Being aware of oppressive
systems is also a key component underlying development of positive self-concept and self-
advocacy for those in both marginalised and dominant culture groups [e.g., 79]. Empirically,
awareness of oppressive systems has predicted support for and action towards equity. For
instance, one study of university students’ social media use found that awareness of oppression
and privilege predicted support for and participation in Black Lives Matter protests [80].
Awareness of the system is therefore a crucial component in the STR Model.
Finally, awareness of the interconnections amongst each of these elements is highlighted
in the STR Model, including: awareness of how an oppressive system is related to the specific
situation, awareness of how the specific situation relates to the self, and awareness of how the
oppressive system relates to the self. Awareness of how each of these components relates can
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 21
lead to higher-order awareness underlying possibilities of reflection and action. This
interconnectivity awareness can be conceived of as a higher-order or critical thinking capacity
(classically understood as encompassing any intellectual capacities related to analysis, synthesis,
and evaluation [81]). These capacities are increasingly recognised as important abilities
underlying an individual’s ability not just to “‘know their place’ but to ‘determine their own
position’” in the world via both critical thought and action [82 pp. 359-360]. Cultivating a high
level of interconnected awareness and understanding about the self, social structures, and
situations is thus an important component underlying the development of STR outcomes.
A process that is more likely to lead to STR outcomes, therefore, would consist of greater
awareness of one’s emotional and moral responses, what the trigger(s) was/were for these
responses, the existence of one or more oppressive systems, and how each of these relates with
one another. Being less aware of any of these aspects would be less likely to lead to STR
outcomes.
2.1.4 Multidimensional Contemplation Through a Moral Lens
These multiple dimensions, which come to the surface via awareness, are then considered
with respect to what we refer to as a person’s moral lens. This moral lens includes a person’s
beliefs about and aspirations for their internal and external worlds.
2.1.4.1 Moral Lens
In the STR Model, a person’s moral lens consists of their self-beliefs, aspirations, and
reference group orientations, which together form a lens through which the person’s experience
is contemplated. In the STR Model, self-beliefs encompass self-concept and self-worth. Self-
concept refers to a person’s internal representation of who they are, based on an amalgamation of
identities [83]. Identities are dynamic and experienced fluidly depending on the situation [84].
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 22
Which identities are experienced as the most salient may be those that are targets of
discrimination or oppression in a given moment [85]. The identities experienced as the most
salient in a given situation are likely to have the greatest influence on contemplative processes to
come, thus are the most relevant in the STR Model.
Self-worth refers to how much one values the self. The degree of self-worth one holds
has significant influence on subsequent contemplation and behaviour, thus forming an integral
component of the STR Model’s moral lens. A person’s self-worth affects whether they perceive
their own behaviours to be acceptable. For instance, a person with higher self-worth may expect
to be able to respond to a stressor in a way that feels “good” or “right” to them. In turn, their
actual behaviour – in this example, whether they actually did respond to the stressor in a way that
feels “good” to them – feeds back into increasing or decreasing self-worth [86]. The degree to
which a person’s self-worth changes based on actual behaviours is referred to as “contingencies
of self-worth” [86]. As individuals move towards STR outcomes, self-worth becomes less
contingent on their behaviour in response to systems of oppression. This change follows the
importance of components identified in liberation such as “ability to see oppression as separate
from self” and “ability to see the humanity in oneself in spite of oppression” in models such as
the MPL [52 p. 103].
Aspirations in the STR Model include values and goals, which interact closely with a
person’s self-beliefs. The values relevant to building STR include those that one holds central to
living a moral life. These values are the internal intangibles that guide how one behaves in order
to feel that one has lived “right” or lived “well,” such as values of kindness, authenticity, love, or
openness. Such values have often been referred to as character strengths, and multiple studies
have shown clear relationships among these strengths and psychosocial wellbeing outcomes
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 23
[e.g., 87]. These strengths or values have also underpinned reflection within models of moral
decision making [e.g., 88], thus supporting their importance to liberation outcomes and their
inclusion in the STR Model.
In the STR Model, one’s goals include what one wants to do or become in life, such as
what one would like to achieve in terms of career, family, or personal life. These goals are key in
STR, as they “play both a capabilities-selecting and an agency-unlocking role” and influence
one’s “ability to act or to imagine how to change [one’s] life” [89 p. 246]. Holding goals that are
not determined by oppressive social structures may particularly predict the possibility for
marginalised individuals to change their life trajectories. For instance, one recent study found
that for women in Kyrgyzstan, a group which has traditionally faced significant gender
discrimination, holding future-oriented goals (e.g., for improved wealth, social status, education,
and security) was associated with having more egalitarian gender attitudes, having a greater role
in household decision-making, and having a husband with more egalitarian gender attitudes [90].
In the STR Model, one’s self-beliefs and aspirations combine with reference group
orientations within the moral lens to influence subsequent contemplation. Reference group
orientations are beliefs about groups with which one identifies, and how one chooses to relate
with these groups [91]. A person’s reference group orientation includes what they see as the
typical values, goals, abilities, tendencies, or preferences of those within a group with which they
identify, and how they see themselves in relation to these values, goals, abilities, tendencies or
preferences [92]. Reference group orientations have been linked to self-concept and aspirations
in multiple studies; for instance, one study that primed women with images of women and men
in careers matching traditional gender roles (e.g., a woman as a nurse and a man as a surgeon)
increased women’s implicit gender stereotypes while decreasing women’s interest levels in
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 24
traditionally-masculine occupations [93]. Thus, reference group orientations are considered
integral to the moral lens through which contemplation occurs within STR.
For an individual who is progressing towards STR outcomes, all aspects of this moral
lens – self beliefs, aspirations, and reference group orientations – are likely to be underpinned by
a humanist ideology, in the sense of Freire, who put forth that every person’s “ontological
vocation is humanization” [63,94]. The degree to which a person believes themselves to be fully
human and treats themselves as such via their self-beliefs and aspirations, regardless of the
oppression they face, is likely to be more aligned with STR outcomes. Likewise, the degree to
which a person believes those in their reference group(s) is/are fully human, and treats them as
such, is likely to be more aligned with STR outcomes. The importance of humanism in the STR
Model relates to frequently-discussed concepts in social justice literatures, such as Lorde’s
concept of radical self-care, whereby prioritising and caring for the self as a marginalised
individual is, in itself, an act of liberation [95]. The centrality of humanisation of the self also
follows Foucault, who called “care of the self” a “technology of power” [96,97 p. 52]. Thus,
supporting humanisation via STR for a marginalised individual can be both an act of liberation
as well as an act of self-care. As self-care is also supportive of psychosocial wellbeing [e.g., 98],
an underlying humanist ideology is thus a critical aspect of the moral lens in the STR Model.
2.1.4.2 Multidimensional Contemplation
The moral lens then influences contemplation within the STR Model. The contemplation
component of the STR Model draws from contemplative psychology in its emphasis on
multidimensional, higher-order, complex thought [99]. In the STR Model, contemplation
“reflects a fundamental means by which individuals construct meaningful lives” [99 p. 2].
Contemplation in the STR Model also corresponds with the MPL, in which a key component in
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 25
the process of liberation is being willing to “notice/reflect on/wrestle with contradictions in real
time” [52 p. 104], which could be considered a contemplative process in its emphasis on higher-
order complex thinking regarding one’s life.
In the STR Model, contemplation has three main elements: reappraisal, evaluation, and
future focus, following similar elements present in the SSRM [55]. The reappraisal component
of contemplation in the STR Model involves changing how one thinks about a stressor, which
changes its “emotional significance” [59 p. 10]. Reappraisal has frequently been identified as
related to resilience, growth, and learning in the face of challenges, including in multiple
systematic reviews [e.g., 100,101]. Some of the types of reappraisal that have been identified as
supportive of psychosocial wellbeing and growth correspond to reframing stressors or situations
as providing the potential for growth or learning [102]. In the STR model, this emphasis on
growth or learning also encompasses the drive towards creating a new “personal narrative
towards liberation,” which is a component of the MPL [52 p. 104]. Creating a new personal
narrative towards liberation involves reframing an event as providing the possibility of growth
towards “humanizing rather than dehumanizing” self-beliefs, in a manner that “is not in reaction
to appropriated oppression” [52]. Thus, reappraising a stressor is likely STR-aligned if it
includes that the stressor can help to catalyse growth and improvement in one’s psychosocial
wellbeing and humanisation.
The evaluation component of contemplation in the STR Model consists of considering
whether one’s initial response to the stressor was aligned with how one sees one’s current and
future self and others in one’s reference group (perceptions that make up one’s moral lens,
described above). Evaluation is closely related to the third component of contemplation, future
focus, in which one considers whether one’s initial response, including one’s actions, was
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 26
aligned with how one would like to respond in the future, and if not, how one would prefer to
respond. This future focus, though stemming from the SSRM [55], a resilience model, is also
reflective of Freire’s conceptualisation of praxis, which emphasises the importance of a sequence
of action-reflection-action in liberation and social change [50,63]. Paralleling the STR Model,
Freire’s first action can be thought of as STR’s initial response; reflection then occurs in both
Freire’s and STR’s conceptualisation, with a component of considering future desired actions.
This is then followed by further responses and actions in the STR model, as predicted by Freire,
as the model progresses.
The emphasis on contemplation within STR is critical, as it is representative of an area in
which some theories in psychology have been historically less robust but are lately becoming
more nuanced. For instance, models of metacognition in psychotherapy have historically
included two main components: (1) understanding of mind, or a person’s understandings and
interpretations of their own and others’ thoughts, and (2) mastery, or the ability to regulate and
manage these understandings and interpretations [103]. However, contemplation is now being
identified as a key process supporting mastery [e.g., 104,105], lending support to the idea that
one must contemplate one’s understanding of mind in order to master it. In the STR Model, this
process is paralleled by multidimensional awareness leading to the capacity for STR via
contemplation.
2.1.5 Capacity for STR
The SSRM [55] describes the capacity for resilience as composed of the use of coping
resources, emotion regulation, and resilient beliefs, which influence one another. Drawing from
this model, the STR model rephrases the capacity for resilience as “capacity for STR,” which
includes a sub-process involving one’s transformative repertoire and how it is deployed based
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 27
on what we refer to as acceptability-control appraisals. In turn, this sub-process forms a
feedback loop with the moral lens.
2.1.5.1 Transformative Repertoire
Resilience models have often emphasised “coping skills” or “coping resources” [e.g., 55];
in the STR Model, however, “coping skills” are reframed as the “transformative repertoire.” This
language change reflects two conceptual shifts. First, we prefer the word “transform” to “cope,”
reflecting that, in STR, coping is not enough. To lead to STR outcomes, a process must go
beyond helping an individual regain previous levels of psychosocial wellbeing and liberation and
instead to transform these. Second, we prefer the word “repertoire” to “skills” or “resources,” as
the skills/resources wording implies that external actions that a person takes to change their
situation are not relevant. However, actions are critical for the STR Model. One’s transformative
repertoire thus includes any of the possible internal or external skills, resources, or actions that
individuals could utilise to support psychosocial wellbeing and liberation.
The SSRM defines coping resources as “the available practical, cognitive, motivational,
and social resources that can help people to cope with stressors” [55 p. 10], which the STR
Model translates into the “transformative repertoire” via three main expansions: (1) adding moral
resources to the list, (2) integrating emotional regulatory capacities as an important component,
and (3) explicitly defining action as a strategy supporting transformation. First, moral resources
include moral attributes such as strong moral values, integrity to these values even in the face of
risk, and ability to make meaning out of difficult or complex moral dilemmas in one’s life [106].
These attributes are representative of moral assets encompassed in what Young and Rushton
[106] call “moral resilience,” which refers to how individuals can navigate morally ambiguous
and challenging experiences. As marginalised individuals facing challenges will frequently
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 28
encounter morally ambiguous and morally challenging experiences, such assets are critical to
STR and therefore added to the list of transformative repertoire components. Second, instead of
splitting out “emotion regulatory approaches” from “coping resources,” as the SSRM does [55],
emotion regulation is considered a component of the transformative repertoire itself for the sake
of simplicity and accuracy [following, e.g., 107]. Finally, action is explicitly included as a
potential strategy in the transformative repertoire, because taking action (e.g., against
oppression) has significant potential to support one’s STR outcomes. Action is emphasised as
key to overcoming oppression in many approaches to liberation, including Freire’s action-
reflection-action (or praxis, as described above) [50,63] as well as in models such as the MPL, in
which “action to create a new personal narrative towards liberation” and “action to transform
broader systems towards liberation” are described as key components leading to psychological
liberation [52 p. 104]. Taking action in political spheres or social spheres, such as engaging in
activism or collective action, as well as taking other actions such as self-care or actions to
resolve a problem, can transform an individual’s relationship with oppression and help to “create
a sense of self that is humanizing rather than dehumanizing” [52 p. 104]. Therefore, in the STR
model, the transformative repertoire includes: potential moral, practical, cognitive, motivational,
social, and emotion regulatory resources and actions that support psychosocial wellbeing and
liberation.
2.1.5.2 Deploying the Transformative Repertoire Based on Acceptability-Control Appraisals
It is not possible to deploy all strategies in a person’s transformative repertoire at one
time; thus, a person’s capacity for STR is determined not only by their available repertoire, but
also by which strategies from their repertoire they choose to activate and use. This process
mirrors the “usage of the coping and emotion regulatory repertoire” in the SSRM [55]. If, for
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 29
instance, a person can regulate their emotions as part of their transformative repertoire but
chooses not to activate and use this ability, their capacity for building psychosocial wellbeing in
response to stressors (and by extension, their capacity for building STR outcomes) is lower than
if they deploy this ability.
However, choosing which strategies to deploy, alone or in combination, which to forgo
using, and when, is not always straightforward; this may be especially true in complex,
challenging situations, such as those faced by marginalised individuals. Thus, this moment of
choice is highlighted within the STR Model. It may be impossible (or perhaps even undesirable)
for a person to always choose strategies that support the development of both psychosocial
wellbeing and liberation concurrently. However, which strategies are selected and when has
important implications: As described earlier, a person can choose to work to handle a stressor
which can have significant ramifications regarding whether oppression continues or is
transformed, and whether a person is or is not able to improve their psychosocial wellbeing.
Evidence about and conceptualisations of how people choose coping strategies is useful
in elucidating the moment of choice in STR, as “coping strategies” is a related construct to the
“transformative repertoire.” Coping strategies have historically been conceptualised as emotion-
or problem-focused, following Lazarus and Folkman [108], a conceptualisation with extensive
empirical support [e.g., 109–112]. Emotion-focused coping strategies aim to primarily handle
emotions better whereas problem-focused coping strategies aim to change the situation.
According to the goodness-of-fit hypothesis [108], people may select problem- or emotion-
focused coping strategies, which are each more effective if there is a good “fit” with the
situation. Problem-focused coping is usually “a good fit” in situations over which a person
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 30
perceives they have high control, whereas emotion-focused coping is usually a “good fit” in
situations over which a person perceives they have low control. In the goodness-of-fit
hypothesis, however, the effectiveness of a coping strategy is assessed by the degree to which it
supports psychosocial wellbeing. In the STR Model, by contrast, the degree to which deployed
strategies are effective is assessed not only by the degree to which they support psychosocial
wellbeing, but also by the degree to which they support liberation.
In order to support both psychosocial wellbeing and liberation, the goodness-of-fit
hypothesis thus requires expansion. In the STR Model, we hypothesise that a person’s choice of
strategies to deploy is likely to be informed by their perceived control over the situation (as in
the goodness-of-fit hypothesis), but also by their perception of the situation’s moral
acceptability. In social justice and community organising literature, moral acceptability
appraisals of a situation have been described as critical to deciding when, whether, and how to
act. For Homan [113], for instance, the degree to which a situation is deemed morally acceptable
provides an individual with choices regarding how to respond. If a situation is deemed morally
acceptable, individuals often accept the situation without taking action to change it. If a situation
is deemed morally unacceptable, however, there are two main options: a person could try to (1)
change or leave the situation, or (2) accept or ignore an unacceptable situation. Homan [113]
notes that accepting or ignoring a morally unacceptable situation can lead to “demoralized”
individuals (p. 108). Integrating Lazarus and Folkman’s [108] goodness-of-fit hypothesis with
these observations, Homan’s model could be rephrased as: in morally acceptable situations,
using emotion-focused strategies is ideal; in morally unacceptable situations, using problem-
focused strategies is ideal.
Thus, based on a person’s appraisals of their control over and the moral acceptability of a
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 31
situation (what we call their acceptability-control appraisals), a person selects what strategies
from their transformative repertoire to deploy: whether they will deploy those that aim primarily
to support their emotions, primarily to fix the problem, or those that have mixed aims. The fit of
their deployment to these appraisals determines their effectiveness in supporting STR outcomes.
Acceptability-control appraisals and deployment of the transformative repertoire
In addition to deployment of the transformative repertoire in a manner that best fits a
person’s acceptability-control appraisals, it is also likely that a person’s acceptability-control
appraisals themselves are associated with STR outcomes. Lower control appraisals are less likely
to be aligned with STR, as evidence shows that low control appraisals are more likely for
individuals in situations of oppression and marginalisation. Marginalised individuals frequently
have a lower sense of control, which in turn is associated with decreased wellbeing [e.g.,
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 32
114,115], potentially due to internalised oppression. Thus, it is likely that lower internalised
oppression, which would be aligned with STR outcomes, would also be aligned with higher
control appraisals. Additionally, acceptable moral appraisals are likely to be less aligned with
STR outcomes. Building awareness of a situation’s moral unacceptability is a key outcome of
denaturalisation, which underpins liberation. Denaturalisation occurs when a person questions
whether situations that they previously perceived as acceptable truly are acceptable [116], often
concluding that certain situations are not acceptable. Thus, a process that is more aligned with
STR outcomes will include a person appraising more situations as morally unacceptable yet also
within their control to change. Greater alignment with STR outcomes is represented by the
2.1.5.3 Feedback Loop with Moral Lens
One’s capacity for STR in turn feeds back into one’s moral lens via a feedback loop. The
ways in which a person acts via their capacity for STR, including how successfully they can
modulate their emotions and change their situations, changes the ways in which they view
themselves (self-concept), the ways they view the groups with which they identify (reference
group orientations), and what they hope to be and achieve (aspirations), which make up their
moral lens. This feedback loop has theoretical support, including via the concept of
contingencies of self-worth: when individuals assess the degree to which their actual
performance has met certain standards or contingencies they hold in different domains, this feeds
back to influence their sense of self-worth [86]. How one’s strategies worked can also change
one’s goals or aspirations, as the strategies’ success may be interpreted as reflecting whether
goals begin to seem more or less attainable. These changes in how one sees oneself can in turn
influence the capacity for STR by influencing the ways in which a person may choose to act and
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 33
which components of their transformative repertoire they choose to deploy, now or in the future.
2.1.6 STR Outcomes
In the SSRM, the capacity for resilience is iteratively built with each new encounter with
a stressor, leading a person to increasingly better outcomes, which are termed “resilient
outcomes” [55]. This iterative process as well as the outcome language are mirrored in the STR
Model, although in the STR Model, the outcomes sought are “STR outcomes.” As described
previously, STR outcomes include both psychosocial wellbeing and liberation, which are
iteratively built over the course of the process described here, equally valued, and mutually
reinforcing.
3 Discussion
STR is a process by which encountering a stressor can provide a catalyst for
progressively better psychosocial functioning and greater liberation over time. Key components
of the process include multidimensional reflection on one’s immediate responses, as well as
increasing the capacity for STR via deploying the transformative repertoire based on
acceptability-control appraisals. STR outcomes include both psychosocial wellbeing as well as
liberation, taken as mutually enforcing and equally important. Major areas in which the STR
Model furthers scholarship include that its mechanisms are defined at a level of granularity and
specificity that is particularly amenable to generating testable hypotheses. It also provides
specificity regarding hypothesised characteristics of each component of the process that would
support STR outcomes. Additionally, it recognises the catalysing importance of stressors to
growth and transformation as humans and societies. Further, it defines the outcomes of this
growth and transformation as ideally containing both liberation and psychosocial wellbeing
outcomes, rather than prioritising one over the other. Finally, the STR Model integrates what are
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 34
likely simultaneous processes (progress towards both psychosocial wellbeing and liberation) that
have been artificially kept separate in prior work.
The STR Model is particularly noteworthy given the sheer number of people whose
wellbeing is affected by oppressive systems, and who, by extension, could benefit from further
exploration of this model. Being “marginalised” should not be conflated with being in the
minority, although speaking of “marginalised” individuals as members of “minority groups” is a
frequent trope. On the contrary: the majority of the world’s population experiences at least one
form of marginalisation. For instance, approximately 7 in 10 people worldwide have a low
income or live in poverty [117]. In the United States, nearly 40% of the population identifies as
non-white [118]. Women and girls comprise 49.6% of the world’s population [119] and are
marginalised throughout nearly all contexts worldwide [120]. These estimates are in addition to
the multitude of other marginalised populations such as sexual and gender minorities, religious
minorities, indigenous populations, refugees and migrants. These substantial proportions
illustrate that marginalisation is not defined by minority status; instead, it is defined in relation to
the deep-rooted inequities that limit the representation of certain population groups in key
aspects of society. Thus, the STR Model may have critical implications for the majority of the
world’s population.
3.1 A Research Agenda for STR
Four potential areas are notable for future research: (1) examination and refinement of the
STR Model based on lived experiences and empirical evidence; (2) developing a measure of
STR; (3) creating interventions that could support STR; and (4) investigating STR’s relationships
with psychopathology.
3.1.1 Examination and Refinement of the STR Model
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 35
Although the STR Model has been created with reference to existing theories, models,
and empirical evidence, it remains to be seen whether the model is appropriate and accurate
when examined empirically and in relation to lived experience within different populations and
contexts. Multiple qualitative and/or review studies could be conducted to examine how using
stressors as catalysts for improved psychosocial wellbeing and liberation is experienced by
marginalised individuals, which would allow the model to be further explored and evolved.
Quantitatively, it could be informative to investigate whether assumed pathways in the model are
supported empirically, via administering questionnaires measuring each construct within
different populations and exploring their associations. Further engaging with other research
methods across disciplines, including medical anthropology and cross-cultural psychology, could
also allow further unpacking of underlying constructs within the model, such as emotions,
contemplation, or the moral lens.
3.1.2 Measuring STR.
To better understand STR as a construct while learning how best to support it, it is
important to devise ways to measure it. Measurements should focus not only on STR outcomes,
but also on the processes of the model that occur between stressor and outcome. In doing so,
components leading to STR outcomes could be better understood and help guide intervention
and therapy development. In designing and developing such measures, it will be important to
prioritise inclusivity and access, assessing to what degree measures work for different
populations, in different languages, among different cultures, at varying levels of literacy, and/or
for those with different levels of exposure to research.
3.1.3 How to Support and Improve STR Outcomes.
Interventions and therapies have been successful in building resilience [27,28]; it follows,
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 36
then, that interventions and therapies could be successful in building STR. Interventions could be
developed based on the components and processes identified in the STR Model, then evaluated,
to better understand how to support and improve STR outcomes.
Other research concerning how to build STR could include determining to what extent
each of the STR Model components is necessary and/or sufficient to supporting STR outcomes.
Although the STR Model is designed with generalisability to multiple populations in mind, some
individuals, in some situations, may focus on some of the processes to a greater extent than
others. Whether certain combinations of processes are necessary and/or sufficient for change
could inform how interventions are designed in the most efficient manner in the future. Which
components or processes might be most modifiable and therefore most easily supported via
intervention could also be explored and identified.
3.1.4 STR’s Relationship with Psychopathology
Differentiating between STR vs. other conceptualisations of resilience could have
important implications for mental health of marginalised individuals. Resilience is often targeted
to improve mental health; however, STR may support mental health either to a greater extent or
in a different manner than resilience as otherwise defined.
Though building STR may be not only better for society than traditionally defined
resilience, but also better for individuals’ mental health, it is possible that STR has a more
complex relationship with mental health. Although resilience is, essentially by definition,
supportive of mental health, liberation’s relationship with mental health is more complex. Many
processes identified as important for STR that come from liberation theories, including the
importance of some dysphoria in the process of liberation [following 60], as well as building
awareness of the existence of oppression and its impact on the self [e.g., 52], could have a
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 37
detrimental relationship with mental health. Indeed, there is evidence that taking action against
oppression in the form of activism, which is a potential strategy in the transformative repertoire,
has a complicated relationship with mental health. For instance, one study among Black and
Latinx college students regarding their experiences of racial and ethnic microaggressions
indicated that while Black students who were involved in political activism reported less stress,
Latinx students involved in political activism reported more depressive symptoms [121]. It is
uncertain, therefore, what relationship STR has with psychopathology, and as such represents an
important area for future study.
4 Conclusion
This new construct of STR fills gaps and responds to criticisms of resilience by
incorporating careful attention to how individuals relate to unequal power structures and systems
leading to and exacerbating poor wellbeing for marginalised individuals. Via STR, individuals
facing challenges can be supported to not only live full and thriving lives, building ever greater
levels of wellbeing, but to exercise significant agency within their own lives, communities, and
systems, working to change these towards more equality, liberty, and diversity. Conceptualising
STR as a new construct allows delineation and elaboration of a detailed set of mechanisms that
can be measured and supported to achieve these goals. Understanding STR and the mechanisms
by which it is developed represents an urgent need, particularly in the current environment of
global inequities exacerbated by multiple crises, challenges, and traumas.
SOCIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE RESILIENCE 38