Influence of Language Elements in Understanding Language Context in Social Media
Tiara Haninditya Fadillah, Septian Paradesa, Hanna Rizki Nugrahanto, Muhammad
Iqbal Priyatna
Email: tiara.haninditya.fadillah-2020@fib-unair.ac.id
septian.paradesa.329487-2020@fib .unair.ac.id
hanna.rizki.nugrahanto-2020@fib.unair.ac.id
muhammad.iqbal.priyatna-2020@fib.unair.ac.id
Corresponding Author: Dr. Moses Glorino Rumambo Pandin, SS, M.Sc., M.Phil., e-mail:
moses.glorino@fib.unair.ac.id
Address: Jalan Dharmawangsa Dalam Surabaya, Indonesia 60286, Telephone: 031-5035807
Abstract:
The purpose of this study was to analyze the causes of misunderstandings related to an
article on social media that led to cyberbullying. The research focuses on analyzing the
influence of language elements on perspective or the ability to understand the meaning of a
piece of writing on social media. This research was conducted using a descriptive method with
a quantitative approach. The source of the research data was obtained using data collection
techniques with a questionnaire or questionnaire method given to 100 teenagers who were
active users of social media with an age range of 13-24 years. The data obtained were analyzed
by descriptive statistical analysis techniques. The results showed that: 1). There is a significant
influence of language elements such as the choice of diction, the use of punctuation marks, the
use of capital letters, and intonation of writing on the understanding of social media users, 2).
The literacy ability of social media users has an impact on cases of cyberbullying due to a
misunderstanding of an article, 3) All social media has the potential to be a place for
cyberbullying, especially Twitter, 4). It is important to note that language elements are used in
writing on social media to avoid ambiguity of meaning.
Keywords: Social Media, Language Elements, Meaning of Writing, Misconceptions,
Cyberbullying
1. Introduction
In recent years, technology has developed rapidly, especially after the emergence of the
industrial revolution 4.0 trend in Indonesia. The industrial revolution 4.0 is marked by a holistic
integration between machines, jobs, or systems through the internet network which then
connects all parties in activities on a very wide scale (Zambat, 2019). The 4th industrial
revolution is an era where internet technology, information technology and production
automation technology are used in an integrated manner to form a system called Cyber Physical
Systems (CPS), a system where an entity or physical mechanism is supervised and controlled
by a computer-based algorithm, integrated with the internet and its users. One of the products
of the industrial revolution 4.0 is social media.
Putri (2019) argues that social media is a medium on the internet that allows users to
represent themselves and interact, collaborate, share, communicate with other users, and form
virtual social bonds. In social media, three forms that refer to the meaning of social are
recognition (cognition), communication (communicate) and cooperation (cooperation). Social
media also has several types, characteristics and functions that make this a distinctive feature
and make it different from other digital media (Putra, 2019).
Supported by the presence of Smartphones that continue to offer various sophisticated
products, users can freely upload content, both photos, videos, send messages, and even express
opinions on social media. The content can be easily accessed and viewed by the public so that
it is not uncommon for misunderstandings to arise from differences in understanding and
viewpoints between social media users in examining the intent of content and resulting in
cyberbullying. Cyberbullying is a negative action carried out by a certain person or group by
sending text messages, photos, meme images, and videos to someone's social media account
with the aim of insinuating, insulting, harassing, discriminating and even persecute individuals
(Riswanto & Marsinun, 2020).
In Indonesia, there are 170 million social media users out of 202.6 million internet
users. However, surprisingly, 99.1% of Indonesian social media users access it via mobile
phones. This means, how big is the role of mobile phone penetration for Indonesian social
media users. This seems to be what drives the average number of social media accounts owned
by Indonesian internet users to be higher than the world average, which is 10.5 accounts per
internet user (Budi & Barito, 2021). The massive use of social media in Indonesia is of course
also followed by an increase in cases of impacts arising from the use of social media itself. This
is evidenced by the results of a survey from Ditch The Label which shows that in 2021 60% of
teenagers will experience bullying and 87% of bullying cases occur online (cyberbullying).
Another predictable thing that was found was that cyberbullying had increased as a result of
all activities turning online as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The issue of cyberbullying on social media is important to discuss because with the
increase in the number of social media users during the pandemic, it means that there will be
an increase in the number of cases that will occur. Cyberbullying will be very dangerous for a
person's mental health, especially the burden that increases due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
There are various motives that provoke someone to do cyberbullying on social media,
one of which is misunderstanding. T Misunderstanding itself can be provoked by various
factors, one of which is language and its elements. (Azizah, 2021) states that behind a language,
there must be an idea. When these ideas are misunderstood, or give rise to multiple
understandings, there will be conflict. When a post on social media is misunderstood by a user,
other users will definitely be provoked to express their views, which often uses offensive
languages. Related to this, those who carry out cyberbullying will also be threatened with being
attacked by other social media users. This creates a chain of incidents of cyberbullying that
does not stop.
This study aims to find the problem points that cause misunderstandings, by focusing
on the impact of the use of language and its elements. The results of this study are expected to
answer the following research questions:
1. What are the factors that influence the understanding of social media users towards
writing on social media?
2. What are the impacts that occur due to the lack of literacy and the use of language
elements that cause misunderstandings in the context of sentences on social media?
3. Which social media is the most vulnerable to being a place of misunderstanding?
4. How do language elements affect the perspective of social media users on an article?
The objectives to be achieved from this research include four things, namely, knowing
the factors that influence the understanding of social media users towards an article, Knowing
the impact of lack of literacy and the use of language elements on a person's response to writing
on social media, Knowing the most vulnerable social media be a place for misunderstandings
and their reasons, and Knowing the importance of using language elements in social media to
prevent misunderstandings.
Based on the objectives to be achieved, it is hoped that this research will provide
benefits to social media users directly or indirectly. The following are the benefits of this
research theoretically and practically.
Theoretically, research is expected to provide benefits in the form of: 1). Provide
scientific contributions related to the root causes of misunderstandings that occur on social
media so that appropriate solutions can be found to overcome them, 2). Providing insight to
teenagers who are active users of social media regarding the importance of literacy and
language elements in understanding the context of language on social media, 3). can be a basis
for further research related to the problems that occur in social media, especially those related
to literacy and the use of language elements.
Practically, the research is expected to provide benefits in the form of: 1). For the
author, this research is expected to add insight on how to use social media properly and
correctly as a place to express opinions, 2). For educators and prospective educators, this
research is expected to increase knowledge and be an effort to socialize about how to use social
media properly and correctly as a place to express opinions, 3). For students. As research
subjects, students are expected to gain an understanding of the things that need to be considered
when using social media and the basic reasons that can lead to differences of opinion that occur
on social media, 4). For universities, this research is expected to be additional material so that
students are able to analyze the causes that occur and the efforts that can be made to prevent
misunderstandings in opinion on social media.
2. Method
2.1 Types of Research Approach
This research was conducted using a descriptive method with a quantitative approach.
According to (Resseffendi 2010:33) said that descriptive research is research that uses
observations, interviews or questionnaires about the current situation, where this research is
intended to describe the response of society, especially adolescents, regarding the
understanding and application of language and literature in social media. Sugiyono (2017:2)
said that research methods are basically scientific characteristics to obtain data with certain
purposes and uses. Quantitative research is a process of finding knowledge that uses data in the
form of numbers as a tool to analyze information about what you want to know. (Kasiram
(2008: 149) in his book Qualitative and Quantitative Research Methodology).
The rationale for using this method is to reveal events, circumstances, and phenomena
that arose during the research by presenting facts that actually occurred. In addition, the purpose
of using this method is because we want to see the attitudes and views of the community
regarding the problems that are the focus of this research, the relationship between variables
that will arise, and the differences between existing facts and their effects.
2.2 Data Sources and Population
Data is a source of information, also defined as a collection of information needed for
decision making. The source of data in the study is the subject where the data is obtained. In
this study the authors used primary and secondary data sources. The data directly collected by
the author from the first source. The data was obtained by distributing questionnaires to 100
teenagers who were active users of social media with an age range of 13-24 years.
Questionnaires were distributed through Google Forms using the technique Self-Administered
Questionnaire so that time could collect all the necessary data in a short time.
Population refers to all people, events, or things that are the subject of research. Based
on its characteristics, the population must be adapted to the objectives and research problems
(Wijaya H., 2020). The population in this study were 100 teenagers who are active users of
social media with an age range of 13-24 years.
2.3 Data Collection Techniques
Data collection techniques used in this study is to use a questionnaire or questionnaire
method. Understanding the questionnaire method according to Arikunto (2006, 151)
"Questionnaire is a written statement that is used to obtain information from respondents in
terms of personal reports or things they know". Meanwhile, according to Sugiyono (2008, 199)
"Questionnaire or questionnaire is a data collection technique that is done by giving a set of
questions or written statements to respondents to answer. The primary data obtained were
obtained using an online questionnaire via Google Form which was distributed to teenagers
who are active users of social media within a week (12 November 2021 - 19 November 2021)
to reach one hundred respondents.
2.4 Data Analysis Techniques
The collected data were analyzed using descriptive statistical analysis techniques. This
technique is used to analyze data by describing or describing the data that has been collected
as it is without intending to make conclusions that apply to the public or generalizations. This
analysis is only in the form of accumulation of basic data in the form of mere descriptions in
the sense of not seeking or explaining interrelationships, testing hypotheses, making
predictions, or drawing conclusions. This analytical technique is commonly used for
exploratory research to reveal and describe research results. In this technique, data will be
presented in visual form, namely tables as proof of survey results.
2.5 Flowchart of the Research Process
3. Results and Discussion
3.1 Description of Respondents
The subjects of this research are the young age of social media users with an age range
of 13 years to 24 years. This is based on external factors at this time having a considerable
influence, especially on adolescents, including the attractiveness of the media, the factors of
the need for media and the perceived benefits of consuming media. From the distribution of
google form, it was found that 93 respondents with an age range of 19-20 years and 7
respondents aged between 21-23 years.
3.2 Social Media Used by Respondents
Technological developments, especially in information and communication, which are
developing faster have a positive impact where distance and time are not things that must be
considered to have interaction. The developments have led to the presence of social media as
a medium on the internet to socialize more quickly and effectively. The presence of social
media changes the way people interact with each other with the various services that have been
provided. Humans are now transforming from conventional communication to digital
communication.
The use of social media among the public, especially teenagers, is currently considered
a natural thing. This is in line with data from the Ministry of Communication and Information
which shows that as many as 82 million people in Indonesia are internet users. This number
makes internet users in Indonesia the 8th largest in the world. With a variety of existing social
media, users can easily and freely use the services provided on each of these social media
platforms. Budi Gunawan & Barito Mulyo Ratmono (2021), data We Are Social 2021 shows
that 96% of cellular phone users in Indonesia are social media users. This means that wherever,
whenever, and in any situation, social media users can convey their messages through the social
media platforms they follow. The following is data on the percentage of social media users
used by respondents in this study:
1. 98% of respondents use Instagram
2. 68% of respondents use Telegram
3. 58% of respondents use Twitter
4. 51% of respondents use TikTok
5. 33% of respondents use Facebook
6. 16% of respondents use Quora
7. 11% of respondents use Whatsapp
8. 8% of respondents use other social media (Tumblr, LinkedIn, Discord, etc.)
Through the results of this study, we can conclude that Instagram has the most users,
as many as 98%. Some people will come to the conclusion that social media with the highest
number of users is very susceptible to causing misunderstandings in people's opinions. Then,
to find out whether social media with the most users can be an indicator that the medium has
Social Media Percentage
Tiktok 23%
Instagram 23 %
Twitter 31%
Quora 0%
Facebook 15%
Telegram 0%
WhatsApp 4%
Most 1%
All 3%
Total 100%
This data shows that the social media that has the potential to cause misunderstanding
Instagram. This shows that the most widely used social media does not indicate that it is
dangerous (potentially causing misunderstandings). This problem is not found in the large
number of users of social media, however, this problem is determined by how the pattern of
social media users is used.
3.3 Factors that Influence The Understanding of Social Media Users
Reading comprehension is an important component in reading activities, thus, if the
reader can successfully take the meaning of the readings that have been read, then the reading
comprehension process can be said to be successful (Yesika, Pribowo & Afiani, 2020). Based
on the research conducted, there are several factors that influence the reading comprehension
of social media users towards an article. The first factor studied is the choice of words or diction
(wording). (Sari and Juita, 2019) Accuracy in word selection is related to the ability to choose
words that can express ideas appropriately and those ideas can be received appropriately by the
reader or listener. The results obtained are 98 out of 100 respondents answered that the choice
of diction is very important, while the other 2 respondents answered no.
Language errors are events that are inherent (closely related) in every use of language,
both spoken and written. One of the most common mistakes experienced by social media users
is the choice of diction. (Sari and Juita, 2019) argued that accuracy in word selection is related
to the ability to choose words that can express ideas appropriately and those ideas can be
properly accepted by readers or listeners. This means that the choice of diction or words in
writing something on social media is certainly very influential on a person's perception or
understanding. This is because the choice of diction can affect the meaning of a sentence.
Misunderstanding usually occurs when a post on social media uses words with diction that
provoke ambiguity. In addition, the choice of diction can also affect the tone or intonation of a
sentence. (Khairani, 2020) Every word chosen in mass communication is important. Therefore,
the ability to choose diction is very important for social media users. Some words in Indonesian
also have different levels of expression, so the selection must be done carefully.
In this study, it was also found that an article on social media was sometimes
misunderstood due to an error in the reading tone or intonation of a reader. For example, the
use of the word 'yowes' in Indonesian. The word can be read in a nonchalant tone, even though
the author wants to express it in a calm tone. Intonation in direct pronunciation is very easy to
understand, but this is contrary to the intonation of writing. The intonation of writing is very
difficult to understand because writing is much different from speaking. The results of this
study showed that 82% of respondents had experienced errors when interpreting written
intonation, while another 18% admitted that they had never experienced it.
Writing intonation is indeed difficult to understand, but other language elements such
as the choice of diction and punctuation can make a person understand the intonation of a piece
of writing better. In written language, sentence intonation is symbolized by a dot (.), an
exclamation mark (!), and a question mark (?) (Joyo, 2020). As stated by Joyo, in terms of
understanding the intonation of reading, there is a significant influence that comes from the use
of punctuation marks. In addition, in Indonesia, it is a culture when someone writes a word
using capital letters, it means that the intonation of the writing is high or like shouting. From
this study, it was found that punctuation and correct use of capital letters are language elements
that must be considered when writing something on social media. The intonation of an article
can be understood by other social media users if the use of capital letters and punctuation is
correct. This is evidenced from the two-sentence comparison test in the questionnaire. The
respondents were asked to compare two sentences and look for the differences. The results
obtained are as follows:
Differences found by participants Percentage
Differences in sentence form (questioning 17%
sentences and imperative sentences)
Differences in sentence forms (question sentences 7%
and statement sentences)
Differences in sentence form (direct sentences and 1%
indirect sentences)
Intonation 45%
Differences in sentence meaning 10%
Differences in writing 6%
Clarity 1%
No difference 1%
Other 12%
Total 100%
From the results of this study it can be concluded that the factors What influences a
person's understanding in interpreting an article on social media is the choice of diction and the
use of language elements (punctuation, capital letters, etc.). These two elements are then
important to understand the intonation of a piece of writing. These three elements complement
each other; Selection of a good diction must be followed by the use of language elements
appropriately so that the intonation of the writing can be understood and the writing does not
cause misunderstandings.
3.4 Impacts Due to Lack of Literacy and Use of Language Elements That Lead to
Misunderstanding in Social Media
The Central Bureau of Statistics in 2010 proved that there were 80 million young people
aged 14-35 years in Indonesia or 25% of the total population of Indonesia (232 million people)
as active users of social media. Accessibility to the virtual world also shows an extraordinary
number. From these data, it can be concluded that the development of social media in this era
has experienced extraordinary developments both among teenagers and children.
However, it cannot be denied that social media itself has positive and negative impacts
for its users. The positive impact of social media in IT development brings many benefits, such
as ease of communication, finding and accessing information. On the other hand, social media
also has a negative impact if it is wrong to use this media function. The negative impacts of
social networking on adolescents and children include addiction, cyber crime, adolescent
attitudes that lead to a permissive attitude towards social deviations, as well as the emergence
of other negative things related to the spread of hoaxes and misunderstanding sentences.
Hoaxes, disinformation and misinformation, are currently very important in the
discourse related to digital media and social networks. The development of the negative impact
of hoaxes is certainly, strongly influenced by the low level of literacy and the use of language
elements in social media. This is evidenced by the results of research that has been carried out
showing 98% of respondents think that the lack of literacy skills affects a person's response on
the internet.
It is unfortunate how the rapid penetration of social media has not been matched by
good literacy skills. In fact, UNESCO noted that in 2012 the reading interest index in Indonesia
only reached 0.001, meaning that in 1000 people there is only one person who reads. This is
one of the triggers for the tendency to use which then has negative implications, especially
misunderstandings in understanding the context of sentences which can lead to cyberbullying.
Phenomena like this are not uncommon on the Internet. In this study, it was found that some
respondents often encounter phenomena that occur due to the lack of literacy levels and the use
of inappropriate language elements. The data obtained are as follows:
Experience Number of Respondents
Never 9
The emergence of inappropriate responses due 57
to the lack of literacy levels so that
misunderstandings arise in understanding the
context conveyed
Easily fooled by news headlines on online sites 18
without reading and understanding the content
of the news which is one of the reasons for the
occurrence of hoaxes
The emergence of misunderstandings, mainly 2
due to hoax spreaders and readers who do not
read the news carefully
Lack of attention to the use of good and correct 5
grammar on the Internet
Lack of creativity in responding a topic of 1
conversation
Lack of understanding of technology 2
The emergence of repeated questions because 5
of not reading the instructions/explanations
completely
Variety of social media users, ranging from 1
small children, teenagers, to adults
Total 100
One of the worst impacts of lazy reading is to dwarf people's mindset so they are easily
influenced by various negative doctrines and beliefs. This can be seen from how Amanda
Michelle Todd, a 15-year-old student in Canada, decided to commit suicide because she
couldn't stand the constant bullying she endured through social media. This case began with
Amanda's conversation with her new friend on social media in 2010, Amanda was persuaded
to show sensitive parts of her body to the perpetrator via webcam. The perpetrator threatened
to spread the photo he recorded to Amanda's friends if she was not willing to comply with the
perpetrator's request.
Various insults for Amanda flowed as a hot topic of conversation on social media, and
the digital footprint continued to follow Amanda wherever she moved. In the end, Amanda
actually died after hanging herself in October 2012. One month before she died, Amanda
uploaded a video on Youtube entitled "My Story: Struggling, Bullying, Suicide and Self-Harm"
which became the outpouring of suffering that was conveyed by Amanda before she ended her
life.
Reviewed once again from the case above, Amanda does not deserve social sanctions
which are part of the embodiment of restorative justice for something that is not even her fault.
Amanda, who was 15 years old at that time, certainly couldn't think thoroughly about the
consequences she did on social media. However, no matter what happens, spreading someone's
photo without consent is considered a crime. Amanda should get protection and strength from
the people around her for bad events that occur due to irresponsible people. It's ironic to know
the fact that the opposite is true. This is because there are still many active users of social media
who have low reading levels, so they indifferently catch the news from one perspective, without
looking at other perspectives and thinking about the impact that will occur on their actions.
In addition, low interest in reading or literacy levels will cause a person's creativity to
not develop. Creative thinking patterns will be realized if the person concerned develops a
mindset and is able to respond to the surrounding environment quickly and this can be trained
with reading activities. People with low reading interest will find it difficult to catch and
respond to a sentence they read, especially if the sentence has the right diction or choice of
words that are in harmony (in use) to express ideas so that a certain effect is obtained (as
expected), which will lead to misperceptions.
Not only that, the use of random language rules can also have a negative impact on the
reader. Social media users tend to mix up text, punctuation, and emoticons in writing their
statuses because random writing is considered to exist today. Crystal (2004) explains that the
language of the internet or the internet language is the fourth medium after the written language
(writing), speech language (speaking), and the language of signs (signing). Text typography
that appears and develops on social media is sometimes in the form of words (morphemes),
letters (graphemes), and punctuation marks, as well as the use of certain symbols or images.
Therefore, the text that appears in the chat room is imagined as if it were speaking.
However, not many people understand this concept. Judging from the number of active
social media users who still use punctuation marks and emojis carelessly. The use of
punctuation and language elements that are not appropriate will have a negative impact on the
reader, such as causing misunderstandings or even worse, the emergence of multiple
interpretations or multiple understandings (interpretations).
3.5 How Language Elements Affect Netizen Perspectives
According to research results that have involved up to one hundred respondents,
language elements are an important aspect when writing on social media. This plays a big role
because it relates to whether or not a piece of writing is easy to understand. There are many
language elements that should be used in writing to make it easier for readers to understand the
contents of the reading. The following will show data from the results of the study:
Language Elements Percentage of
Punctuation marks 95%
Emoji 42%
Use of letters capital 44%
Use of prepositions 38%
Use of conjunctions 59%
Other elements 9%
Total 100%
From the data above, it can be concluded that there are several language elements that
can be used to make it easier to convey something using written media. By not using language
elements when writing in cyberspace, it will certainly increase the possibility of
misunderstanding the reader's perspective. Misunderstanding can occur because of the
ambiguity of writing and the reader cannot know the author's intonation. Therefore, language
elements, especially punctuation marks, should not be forgotten when writing.
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, there are several factors that cause misunderstandings between
social media users regarding an article, namely the lack of literacy and the use of language
elements. The lack of literacy among social media users has an impact on the occurrence of
misunderstandings in capturing the intent of an article. In addition to the lack of literacy,
misunderstandings are also provoked by ambiguity in writing. The ambiguity of a piece of
writing is influenced by language elements in the form of inappropriate diction selection, lack
of language elements such as punctuation, errors in the use of language elements, and errors
by social media users in capturing the intonation of an article. The research is limited to finding
the root of the problem related to things that provoke misunderstandings on social media, not
yet reaching the realm of finding solutions. The solution gives a way out to answer the problem.
Further research is needed on solutions that can be applied to solve this problem.
Funding: This project received no external funding.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in
the study.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are available in
the supporting information provided alongside this article.