Divided attention impairs detection of simple visual features
Amelia H. Harrison1,2, Sam Ling2,3, and Joshua J. Foster2,3
1 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara
2 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University
3 Center for Systems Neuroscience, Boston University
Corresponding author:
Joshua J. Foster
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Boston University
677 Beacon Street
Boston, MA 02215
Email: jjfoster@bu.edu
Conflicts of interest: None
Author contributions: All authors designed the study. AHH and JJF performed the
experiments, analyzed the data, and drafted the manuscript. All authors revised the
manuscript, and approved the final version for submission.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by R01 EY28163 to SL, and a Boston
University Center for Systems Neuroscience Postdoctoral Fellowship to JJF.
Abstract
Covert spatial attention allows us to prioritize processing at relevant locations. There is
substantial evidence that perception is poorer when attention is distributed across multiple
locations than when attention is focused on a single location. However, recent work suggests
that may not always be the case: divided attention does not appear to impair detection of
simple visual features that are represented in primary visual cortex. Here, we re-examined
this possibility. In two experiments, observers detected a simple target (a vertical Gabor),
and we manipulated whether attention was focused at one location (focal-cue condition) or
distributed across two locations (distributed-cue condition). In Experiment 1, targets could
appear independently at each location. Thus, observers needed to judge target presence for
each location separately in the distributed-cue condition. Under these conditions, we found
a robust cost of dividing attention. In this experiment, the cost of dividing attention could
reflect either a limit in perceptual processing or a limit in decision making. Therefore, in
Experiment 2, we simplified the task to more directly test whether dividing attention impairs
perceptual processing of the target. Specifically, only one target could appear on each trial,
such that observers made the exact same decision in both conditions (“was a target
present?”). Here, we found a marginal cost of dividing attention on performance, that was
weaker than the cost in Experiment 1. Together, our results suggest that divided attention
does impair detection of simple visual features, but that this cost is primarily due to limits in
post-perceptual decision making.
Keywords: attention; divided attention; detection; capacity limits
Introduction
Our capacity to process sensory information is limited. Thus, we must prioritize the
processing of relevant information to the detriment of other information. Covert spatial
attention plays a central role in this effort, allowing us to prioritize processing at relevant
locations without moving our eyes. Decades of research has shown that covert attention
improves perception, such that observers can resolve finer details and detect fainter signals
at attended locations than at unattended locations (for review, see Carrasco, 2011). A
substantial body of work has shown that dividing covert attention across multiple locations
impairs perceptual performance. These studies found that performance is worse when covert
attention is spread over multiple locations in the visual field, compared to when attention is
focused at a single, cued location (e.g. Itthipuripat et al., 2014; Ling & Carrasco, 2006;
McMains & Somers, 2005; Pestilli et al., 2011).
Recent evidence, however, suggests that there may be an exception to this rule:
dividing attention may not impair detection of simple visual features (Moreland et al., 2020;
Scharff et al., 2011; White et al., 2017, 2018). White et al. (2017) noted that studies that
have reported costs of dividing attention have used tasks that involve higher-order demands.
For example, many studies of divided attention have required observers to detect or
discriminate conjunctions of features (e.g., letters or objects), which are encoded in higher
visual areas, where attention has a substantial impact on neural responses (for review, see
Maunsell, 2015), while other studies have used tasks that place demands on working
memory because successive stimuli must be compared across short delays (e.g. Itthipuripat
et al., 2014; Pestilli et al., 2011). White et al. (2017) reasoned that divided attention may not
impair detection of simple features that are encoded in primary visual cortex (V1), such as
orientation, because attention effects are small or absent in V1 (Chen & Seidemann, 2012;
Moran & Desimone, 1985; Yoshor et al., 2007). For example, Chen and Seidemann (2012)
had monkeys perform a detection task under focal- and distributed-attention conditions, and
found that dividing attention did not reduce the amplitude of stimulus-evoked response in V1.
Indeed, White et al. (2017) found that detection of orientation targets was not impaired when
attention was divided compared to when attention is focused at a single location (for similar
results, see Moreland et al., 2020; Scharff et al., 2011; White et al., 2018; but see Chen &
Seidemann, 2012).
There are two reasons that these results are surprising. First, although there is
evidence that attentional modulation of neural responses in V1 is small or absent (Chen &
Seidemann, 2012; White et al., 2017; Yoshor et al., 2007), other work has contested the
view that attention effects in V1 are negligible (e.g. Hembrook-Short et al., 2017, 2019;
Briggs et al., 2013). Second, even if divided attention does not attenuate sensory
representations in V1, divided attention might nevertheless impair detection of simple
features via modulation of representations in higher visual areas, or due to limits in post-
perceptual stages of processes. Thus, even if dividing attention does not degrade sensory
representations in early visual cortex, it might still lead to poorer detection of simple visual
features due to limits in later stages of processing.
The finding that divided attention does not impair detection of simple features
(Moreland et al., 2020; Scharff et al., 2011; White et al., 2017, 2018) warrants further
investigation because it challenges the widely embraced notion that dividing attention impairs
perceptual performance in general. In this study, we re-examined whether detection of
simple features is impaired when attention is divided across multiple locations. In two
experiments, we asked observers to detect vertical target gratings, overlaid over a horizontal
attention (Chen & Seidemann, 2012; White et al., 2017). Across blocks of the task, we
manipulated whether observers focused on one of two locations (focal-cue condition) or
distributed across both locations (distributed-cue condition).
(present in the left aperture in this example) appeared on the side indicated by a post-cue. In the
distributed-cue condition, the pre-cue was spatially uninformative. In the focal-cue condition, one
side was cued in advance. In Experiment 1, targets could appear in each aperture independently. In
Experiment 2, only one target could appear on any given trial. Cue validity in the focal cue-condition
was ~90% in Experiment 1 and 100% in Experiment 2. The size of the cue and fixation point are
exaggerated here for clarity.
In Experiment 1, targets could appear independently at each location (with 50%
probability), as was the case in recent studies that have found no effect of dividing attention
on detection of simple features (Moreland et al., 2020; White et al., 2017, 2018). Therefore,
in the distributed-cue condition, observers needed to judge whether a target was present at
each location separately, and were then promoted to report whether a target was present at
the post-cued location. In the focal-cue condition, the post-cued location matched pre-cued
location with 89% validity, and mismatched on a small fraction (11%) of invalidly cued trials.
Invalidly cued trials allowed us to verify that observers used the pre-cue to direct attention
(manifesting as better performance for validly cued trials than for invalidly cued trials), in case
we found no difference in performance between the focal-cue and distributed-cue conditions.
In this experiment, a cost of divided attention might reflect poorer sensory coding of the target
when attention is distributed, but could also reflect a limit in decision-related stages of
processing when observers must make multiple decisions.
In Experiment 2, we simplified the task: just one target could appear on each trial (also
with 50% probability), and observers judged whether a target was present or absent, rather
than making that same judgement for each location separately. The target (when present)
appeared always at the cued location in the focal-cue condition or could appear at either
location in the distributed-cue condition. Thus, observers made the exact same decision
(“was a target present?”) in both conditions, with the only difference being whether the
targets location was known in advance of the stimulus display. We reasoned that if distributed
attention impairs sensory coding of simple-featured targets, then perceptual sensitivity
should be lower in the distributed-cue condition than in the focal cue condition. However, if
we instead observe no cost of dividing attention in Experiment 2, that result would suggest
any cost observed in our first experiment reflected a limit in decision-related stages of
processing.
Methods
Data Availability and Pre-registration
All data and analysis code will be made available on Open Science Framework at
the time of publication. We pre-registered the methods and analysis plan for Experiment 2
on Open Science Framework before we began data collection (see osf.io/6np4v/).
Participants
Participants were recruited from the Boston University community. All participants
were at least 18 years old, reported normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity, and
provided informed consent according to procedures approved by the Boston University
Institutional Review Board. Because the experiment was run during the COVID-19 pandemic,
participants were screened for COVID-19 risk factors prior to enrollment in the study, and
we excluded individuals with health conditions that increased their risk of developing a severe
case of COVID-19 in accordance with Boston University guidelines at the time of data
collection. Participants were screened for COVID-19 symptoms the day before testing and
upon arrival at the lab. Participants were compensated $12/hour for participating in the
study.
Experiment 1
For Experiment 1, our target sample size was 10 participants, following White et al.
(2018). Fourteen volunteers participated in the study (6 males and 8 females, mean age =
20.1 years, SD = 1.2). Three participants were excluded from the final sample for the
following reasons: one participant withdrew from the study; we did not bring one participant
back for the second session of the study because we were unable to obtain adequate eye
tracking data for that participant; and we did not bring another participant back for the
second session of the study because they broke fixation on more than 25% of trials in the
first session. The final sample was 11 participants (3 males and 8 females, mean age = 20.0
years, SD = 1.3). We exceeded our target sample size of 10 participants by one because the
final participant was scheduled before reaching our target sample size.
Experiment 2
For Experiment 2, our target sample size was 12 participants This sample size was
determined based on the effect size (Cohen’s d , see Statistical Analysis) found for the cost
of divided attention in Experiment 1 of approximately 1.5. Anticipating that the effect may be
smaller in Experiment 2, we carried out a power analysis, performed using G*Power 3.1 (Faul
et al., 2009), which revealed that approximately 11 participants would be needed to detect
an effect size of 1.0 with 90% power. Thus, we set a target sample of 12 participants so that
we could counterbalance block order across participants (see pre-registration:
osf.io/6np4v/). Sixteen volunteers participated in the study (2 males and 14 females, mean
age = 21.4 years, SD = 1.8). Four participants were excluded from the sample for the
following reasons: one participants withdrew from the study; we did not bring one participant
back for the second session of the study because we were unable to obtain adequate eye
tracking data for that participant; we did not bring another participant back for the second
session of the study because they broke fixation on more than 25% of trials in the first
session; and one participant was excluded because task performance after staircasing was
at ceiling (accuracy of 98.7%). The final sample was 12 participants (2 males and 10 females,
mean age = 21.3, SD = 1.8).
Apparatus and Stimuli
Stimuli were generated using MATLAB (The MathWorks) and the Psychophysics
Toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) on a PC running Ubuntu Version 16.04 LTS.
Participants viewed stimuli on a gamma-corrected LCD monitor (Display++, Cambridge
Research Systems Limited; 100 Hz refresh rate, 1440  1080 resolution). The full range of
luminance was resolved to 14 bits (i.e., 16,384 luminance levels), which enabled precise
control of the contrast of the low-contrast target Gabor patches. Participants were seated
comfortably with their chin on a padded chin rest at a viewing distance of 135 cm. Stimuli
were presented against a mid-grey background (108 cd/m2). There were no additional light
sources in the room. Participants made their responses on a standard keyboard. Participants
wore a face mask during the study in accordance with Boston University’s COVID-19
research guidelines.
Task Procedures
Experiment 1
Participants fixated a dark gray dot (0.16° in diameter, 88 cd/m2) at the center of the screen
and began a trial by pressing the spacebar. At the start of each trial, circular apertures
appeared to the left and right of fixation (6.0° in diameter, 0.2° thick, centered 5.66°
horizontally from fixation, same luminance as the fixation dot), which marked the locations at
which each stimulus would appear. These apertures remained on-screen for the duration of
the trial. After a jittered interval between 300 and 500 ms, a pre-cue was presented for 500
ms. For the distributed-cue condition, this was composed of two small horizontal bars (0.18°
long, 0.12° thick) that extended from fixation, pointing to either side of the screen. Thus, the
pre-cue provided no information about which side the participants would be tested on in the
distributed-cue condition. In the focal-cue condition, just one bar appeared, either pointing
to the left or right side of the screen; this bar indicated the likely side that the participant
would be tested on. The pre-cue was valid on 89% of trials. For the 500 ms after the pre-
cue, only the fixation dot and apertures remained on-screen. Next, the stimulus display was
presented for 300 ms. In this display, a horizontally oriented Gabor patch (2 cycles per
degree, Gaussian envelope with standard deviation of 1°, 20% Michelson contrast) was
presented in each of the apertures. These horizontal Gabor patches served as pedestals for
potential targets, which were vertically oriented Gabor patches. On each trial, there was a
50% chance that a target was present on each side, determined independently. Only the
fixation dot and apertures remained on-screen for 300 ms after the stimulus display before a
response screen was presented. Finally, the participant reported whether or not a target was
present on the side indicated by a post-cue. On invalidly cued trials, the post-cue was black
rather than grey to make it obvious to the participant that they were being tested on the
uncued side because these trials were uncommon. Participants responded using the number
pad of the keyboard (‘1’ = target present, ‘2’ = target absent). The participant’s response
was displayed above the fixation dot (“yes” or “no” for target present or target absent,
respectively), and the participant could correct their response if they pressed the wrong key.
There was no time limit for inputting a response. The participant confirmed their response by
pressing the spacebar, and feedback was then presented for 300 ms: If the response was
correct, the fixation dot flashed white; if the response was incorrect, the fixation dot flashed
black and the word “Incorrect” was displayed above the fixation dot in black text. We
instructed participants to maintain fixation and to avoid blinking for the duration of each trial
(from the time the pre-cue was triggered to appear until the time the response screen was
displayed). Participants were free to blink or move their eyes in between trials. Trials during
which blinks or breaks from fixation were detected with an eye tracker were aborted, and
responses were not collected on these trials (see Eye Tracking).
Following White and colleagues (White et al., 2017, 2018), we manipulated the cue
condition (focal cue vs. distributed cue) across blocks. The pre-cue conditions (focal-cue
and distributed-cue) were alternated across blocks, with the order counterbalanced across
participants. Each block of the distributed-cue condition included 64 trials, with the left and
right stimuli probed equally often, such that participants needed to divide attention between
the two stimuli. Each block of the focal-cue condition included 72 trials (64 validly cued trials
and 8 invalidly cued trials, such that cue validity was approximately 89%). Participants
completed two sessions, each comprising 12 blocks, six focal-cue blocks and six distributed-
cue blocks. The left side was cued in half of the focal-cued blocks, and the right side was
cued in the other half (c.f. Moreland et al., 2019; White et al., 2017, 2018). In the first session,
which took approximately 2 hours, participants were familiarized with the task, and we
adjusted task difficulty by staircasing the contrast of the vertical Gabor targets (see Staircase
Procedure). In the second session, which took approximately 1.5 hours, the contrast of the
targets on each side of the display were set based on performance in the first session. All
analyses were performed on data acquired in the second session.
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1 except for three changes. First, and most
substantially, just one target could appear on each trial (with 50% probability), and
participants judged whether a target was present or absent, rather than making that same
judgement for each location separately. Second, for efficiency, we did not include invalidly
cued trials in focal-cued blocks, which comprised 64 validly cued trials. Thus, the target
always appeared on the cued side in the focal-cued condition (i.e. the pre-cue was 100%
valid). Third, we increased the sample size based on a power analysis performed on the basis
of Experiment 1 (see Participants, Experiment 2).
Staircase Procedure
In the first session of each experiment, we adjusted contrast of the vertical targets
independently for the left and right apertures, for both the focal-cue and distributed-cue
conditions. Thus, we ran four independent staircases. We used a weighted up/down
procedure to adjust target contrast: after a correct response, target contrast decreased by
5%; after an incorrect response, target contrast increased by 17.6%. This procedure was
intended to held accuracy fixed at approximately 76%. However, in practice, accuracy was
generally higher than 76% in the second session of the experiment because performance
continued to improve with experience. The contrast of the targets in the second session (for
both the focal-cue and distributed-cue conditions) were determined on the basis of the
performance in the focal-cued conditions in the staircase session. We included the
distributed-cue conditions in the staircase session solely to ensure that participants had
equal practice with the focal-cued and distributed-cued conditions prior to the second
session of the experiment. We set the contrast of the targets for each side of the display to
the mean value of the staircase across the last 80 trials of the staircase. For some
participants in Experiment 1, we averaged across more trials to determine the contrast
values if the staircase had clearly reached an asymptote sooner. In Experiment 1, the mean
target contrast after staircasing was 1.21% (SD = 0.28) for the left aperture and 1.16% (SD
= 0.22) for the right aperture. In Experiment 2, the mean target contrast was 1.09% (SD =
0.30) for the left aperture and 1.14% (SD = 0.26) for the right aperture.
Eye Tracking
We monitored gaze position at 1000 Hz with a desk-mounted infrared eye tracker
(Eyelink 1000 Plus, SR Research), which provides spatial resolution of 0.01 of visual angle,
and average accuracy of 0.25-0.50 of visual angle. In both experiments, trials were aborted
if participants broke fixation or blinked to ensure that participants maintained steady fixation.
We calibrated the eye tracker throughout the session as needed. We operationalized a break
in fixation as the participant’s gaze exceeding a specified distance from the fixation dot. This
threshold was initially set to 1 from fixation. A threshold of 1 was too stringent for some
participants, for whom noise in the eye tracking data resulted in too many false alarms. We
increased the threshold for these participants. The threshold was never larger than 1.5. If
the participant broke fixation during a trial, the text “Eye movement” appeared above the
fixation point, and a black line extended from the fixation point to the recorded gaze position
to indicate where the participant had moved their eyes. If the participant blinked during a
trial, the word ‘Blink’ was immediately displayed above the fixation point. The participant was
free to initiate the next trial after this feedback. We excluded participants for whom more than
25% of trials were aborted due to blinks or eye movements (see Participants). In Experiment
1, an average of 8.7% (SD = 3.6) trials were aborted for participants in the final sample. In
Experiment 2, and an average of 6.5% (SD = 3.2) trials were aborted in for participants in
the final sample.
Statistical Analysis
For each observer, we calculated sensitivity to vertical targets, d’ = z(hit rate) - z(false
alarm rate), for each condition separately. We used an alpha level of .05 for statistical tests.
Statistical results for directional hypotheses are noted as one tailed and non-directional
hypotheses are noted as two tailed. We calculated effect sizes for paired-samples t-tests as
Cohen’s d :
𝑑 =
√𝑛
where t is the t-statistic and n is the sample size, and for independent-samples t-tests as
Cohen’s d :
1 1
𝑑 = 𝑡√ +
𝑛 𝑛
1 2
where t is the t-statistic, and n and n are the number of observations in each sample (see
1 2
Lakens, 2013). We used the BayesFactor Package (version 0.9.12; Morey & Rouder, 2018))
for R to calculate Jeffreys-Zellner-Siow (JZS) Bayes factor from t-statistics (r-scale = 0.7071).
Results
Detection Performance
Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we tested whether divided attention impairs detection of vertical
distributed-cue, and invalid focal-cue conditions. Sensitivity was significantly higher in the
focal-cue condition when the cue was valid (M = 2.12, SD = 0.67) than when it was invalid
(M = 0.73, SD = 0.61), t(10) = 6.74, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 2.03, BF = 1033.58 (one-tailed
z 10
test), confirming that observers took advantage of the pre-cue to orient attention to the cued
location. Next, we tested whether dividing attention impairs target detection by comparing
sensitivity for the valid focal-cue and distributed-cue conditions. We found that sensitivity was
higher in the focal-cue condition (M = 2.12, SD = 0.67) than in the distributed-cue condition
(M = 1.59, SD = 0.53), t(10) = 4.88, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 1.47, BF = 117.90 (one-tailed
z 10
test). The Bayes factor indicates very strong evidence for a cost of dividing attention. Thus,
observers were considerably poorer at detecting vertical targets when covert attention was
distributed across two locations than when attention was focused at one location.
mean  1 SEM across participants. Gray lines show data for each participant.
Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, observers performed the same detection task as in Experiment 1
with one major difference: only one target could appear on any given trial. Therefore, in the
distributed-cue condition, observers judged whether a target was present or absent
regardless of location, rather than making that same judgement for each location separately.
For efficiency, we did not include invalidly cued trials in this experiment, having already
the focal-cue and distributed-cue conditions. As in Experiment 1, sensitivity was higher in the
focal-cue condition (M = 1.80, SD = 0.47) than in the distributed-cue condition (M = 1.64,
SD = 0.42), however, this modest difference was not significant, t(11) = 1.73, p = 0.11,
Cohen’s d = 0.50, BF = 1.71 (one-tailed test). The Bayes factor indicates weak evidence
z 10
on sensitivity (valid focal-cue – distributed cue) in each experiment. An independent-samples
t-test confirmed that the cost of dividing attention was significantly larger in Experiment 1 (M
= 0.53, SD = 0.36) than in Experiment 2 (M = 0.16, SD = 0.32), t(21) = 2.58, p = .0175,
Cohen’s d = 1.08, BF = 3.44. Thus, although the evidence for a cost of dividing attention
s 10
was ambiguous in Experiment 2, this cost was smaller in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1.
shown the mean  1 SEM across participants. Gray circles show data for each participant.
Eye Movement Controls
In both experiments, we used a gaze-contingent procedure to abort trials with blinks
or eye movements to ensure that observers maintained steady fixation throughout each trial
(see Methods, Eye Tracking). However, small residual biases in eye position toward the cued
location might nevertheless remain if observers consistently made sub-threshold eye
mean gaze position across time as a function of cued location. The first two participants in
Experiment 1 are not included in this analysis because the eye tracking data were not saved
due to a technical error, although the gaze-contingent procedure did operate for these
participants. In both experiments, mean horizontal gaze position during the stimulus display
varied by less than 0.1 across pre-cued locations. Thus, bias in eye position toward the pre-
cued location cannot account for differences in detection performance between conditions
focal-cue and distributed-cue conditions.
the fixation dot during the 300-ms stimulus display as a function of pre-cued location. Black circles
and error bars show the mean  1 SEM across subjects (the error bars are smaller than the circle in
some cases). Gray lines show data for each participant. Dashed lines at the top and bottom of each
plot mark the inner edge of the stimulus apertures at 2.66 of visual angle.
Discussion
In two experiments, we tested whether dividing covert attention across multiple
locations impairs the detection of simple visual features. In Experiment 1, targets appeared
independently at each of two locations. Therefore, in the focal-cue condition, observers could
make a single judgement about the presence of a target at the cued location, whereas in the
distributed-cue condition, observers needed to judge whether a target was present at each
location separately. As a result, poorer performance in the distributed-cue condition could
reflect a cost in decision-related stages of processing. In this experiment, we found a robust
cost of dividing attention on detection performance. In Experiment 2, we simplified the task.
In this experiment, only one target was present on any given trial. In both the focal-cue and
distributed-cue conditions, observers judged whether a target was present or absent,
regardless of its location, such that only difference between the conditions was whether the
target location was cued in advance. In this experiment, the evidence for a cost of dividing
attention was equivocal. The Bayes factor suggested that this experiment did not provide
compelling evidence for or against a cost of dividing attention, and the cost of dividing
attention in this experiment was significantly smaller than the cost in Experiment 1. Together,
our results suggest that dividing covert attention does indeed impair detection of simple
visual features, but that this cost is largely due to a limit in decision-related stages of
processing.
Our results are at odds with recent studies that have found that dividing attention
does not impair detection of simple visual features (Moreland et al., 2019; White et al., 2017;
White et al., 2019). In these studies, as was the case in our first experiment, targets could
appear independently at each of the stimulus locations. For example, White et al. (2017)
presented observers with two streams of dynamic noise and asked observers to detect brief
target Gabors presented within this noise (White et al.’s Experiment 2). In the focal-cue
condition, observers were pre-cued to the relevant stimulus, allowing them to focus
exclusively on the cued location. In the distributed-cue condition, observers needed to judge
target present at each location, and report whether a target was present on the side indicated
by a post-cue. White et al. (2017) found no cost in detection performance due to divided
attention (also see Moreland et al., 2019; White et al., 2018). It is somewhat surprising that
these studies found no cost of divided attention. Even if divided attention does not degrade
sensory coding of the stimuli, detection performance may be worse in the distributed-
attention due to limits in post-perceptual processing because observers must make two
independent decisions in the distributed-cue condition, rather than a single decision in the
focal-cue condition. Thus, no cost in detection performance suggests that observers can
process two stimuli in parallel, at both sensory and decision-related stages of processing.
Our results tell a different story. Our first experiment was closely modeled after these recent
studies, but unlike these studies, we found a robust cost of dividing attention on detection
performance. In our second experiment, we did not find a reliable cost of dividing attention
when we simplified the task demands so that observers did not need to make two
independent decisions in the distributed-cue condition. This finding suggests that the robust
cost of divided attention in our first experiment reflects a limit in post-perceptual, decision-
related stages of processing.
It is unclear why we observed a clear cost of divided attention in our first experiment
while other similar studies (e.g. White et al., 2017) have not. We think the discrepancy is
unlikely to be due to stimulus parameters because we modeled our stimuli closely after those
used by White et al.’s (2017) Experiment 1. One factor that may be important to consider is
the participants themselves. We recruited volunteers that had little previous experience
performing psychophysical task, and it is not entirely clear how our participants compared in
this respect with those in previous studies (e.g. White et al., 2017).
Although our results are incompatible with those of White et al. (2017), our results are
consistent with other studies. For example, Chen and Seidemann (2012) had monkeys
perform detect a vertical target over a horizontal pedestal, much like the detection task used
in our experiments and by White et al. (2017) in their Experiment 1. Chen and Seidemann
(2012) found that detection performance was poorer in the distributed-cue condition than in
the focal-cue condition. Interestingly, however, Chen and Seidemann also found that divided
attention did not attenuate stimulus-evoked responses in V1, which led them to conclude,
like us, that the cost in behavioral performance reflected limits in later stages of processing.
It must be noted that there are some important differences to consider between Chen and
Seidemann’s experiment and our own. In their experiment, as in our Experiment 2, only one
target could be present on each trial in the distributed-cue condition. Thus, at first glance,
Chen and Seidemann found a cost of divided attention under conditions where we did not.
However, importantly, in their experiment, the animals reported target presence by making
a saccade to the target’s location. Therefore, their task involved a location-discrimination
component that our Experiment 2 did not. This additional task requirement might explain why
Chen and Seidemann found a cost of dividing attention while we did not in Experiment 2.
Further work is needed to delineate the precise boundary condition between our experiments
and Chen and Seidemann’s. Nevertheless, Chen and Seidemann’s results are broadly
consistent with our conclusion that the cost of divided attention for detection of simple visual
features is primarily reflects limits in later stages of processing
Conclusions
Dividing attention impairs perception. However, recent studies have suggested that
dividing covert attention may not impair detection of very simple visual features that are
coded in early sensory cortex (Moreland et al., 2020; White et al., 2017, 2018). In this study,
we re-visited this possibility. In contrast to these recent studies, we found that divided
attention produced a robust cost in detection of simple orientation targets. Interestingly, the
cost of divided attention was only significant in our first experiment, where post-perceptual
stages of processing could limit performance, but not in our second experiment, which
provided a purer test of whether dividing attention impairs perceptual processing specifically.
Our results suggest that dividing attention impairs the detection of simple features due to
limits in decision-related stages of processing.