Encoding specificity instead of online integration of real-
world spatial regularities for objects in working memory
1,2+ 1+ 1 2 1,2,3,4*
Xinyang Liu , Ruyi Liu , Lijing Guo , Piia Astikainen , Chaoxiong Ye
Institute of Brain and Psychological Sciences, Sichuan Normal University, Chengdu, China;
Department of Psychology, University of Jyvaskyla, Jyväskylä, Finland;
Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland;
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
+ Xinyang Liu and Ruyi Liu contributed equally to this work and should be
considered as co-first authors.
Author Note
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (31700948), the Academy of Finland (333649). All the authors had full
independence from the funding sources. The authors declare no competing financial
interests. We thank Kaijun Jiang, Zifang Zhou, Guanghao He, Yuxin Cheng and Qian Li
for their help in data acquisition. * Correspondence should be addressed to Chaoxiong
Ye, Institute of Brain and Psychological Sciences, Sichuan Normal University, Chengdu,
610068, China. E-mail: cxye1988@163.com.
Abstract
Most objects show high degrees of spatial regularity (e.g., beach umbrellas appear
above, not under, beach chairs). The spatial regularities of real-world objects benefit
visual working memory (VWM), but the mechanisms behind this spatial regularity
effect remain unclear. The “encoding specificity” hypothesis suggests that spatial
regularity will enhance the visual encoding process but will not facilitate the
integration of information online during VWM maintenance. The “perception-alike”
hypothesis suggests that spatial regularity will function in both visual encoding and
online integration during VWM maintenance. We investigated whether VWM
integrates sequentially presented real-world objects by focusing on the existence of the
spatial regularity effect. Throughout five experiments, we manipulated the presentation
(simultaneous vs. sequential) and regularity (with vs. without regularity) of memory
arrays among pairs of real-world objects. The spatial regularity of memory objects
presented simultaneously, but not sequentially, improved VWM performance. We also
examined whether memory load, verbal suppression and masking, and memory array
duration hindered the spatial regularity effect in sequential presentation. We found a
stable absence of the spatial regularity effect, suggesting that the participants were
unable to integrate real-world objects based on spatial regularities online. Our results
support the encoding specificity hypothesis, wherein the spatial regularity of real-
world objects can enhance the efficiency of VWM encoding, but VWM cannot exploit
spatial regularity to help organize sampled sequential information into meaningful
integrations.
Introduction
The capacity-limited system known as visual working memory (VWM) is vital, as it
prevents the brain from being overwhelmed by information from the environment and
ensures the efficient processing of incoming information (Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2004).
VWM is also the foundation for higher-level cognition (Wilken & Ma, 2004). Due to
its practical and theoretical importance, VWM has attracted significant interest from
researchers in terms of its capacity (Fukuda, Awh, & Vogel, 2010; Luck & Vogel,
2013), function (Mičič, Horvat, & Bakracevic, 2020), and mechanisms (Heuer,
Schubö, & Crawford, 2016; Mance, Becker, & Liu, 2012; Shen et al., 2013; Shen,
Huang, & Gao, 2015; Shen et al., 2021).
VWM studies have typically relied on memory materials made of objects or features
(e.g., colors, orientations, and shapes) found in the visual environment (Gao et al.,
2009; Luria et al., 2010; Woodman & Vogel, 2008). However, the way objects or
features are organized, such as by color–color conjunction (Luria & Vogel, 2014) or
color-orientation conjunction (Balaban & Luria, 2016), can greatly influence VWM.
Many previous studies have found that participants encode targets more efficiently in
their VWM when using integration principles (Hitch, Allen, & Baddeley, 2020; Li,
Qian, & Liang, 2018; Peterson & Berryhill, 2013; Peterson, Gözenman, Arciniega, &
Berryhill, 2015; Treisman & Zhang, 2006; Vogel, Woodman, & Luck, 2001). Among
the various integration principles, Gestalt principles have been extensively examined
(Wagemans et al., 2012a, 2012b).
Generally, the term “Gestalt” refers to the configuration guiding the entire integration
to be immediately accessible prior to its constituent parts (von Ehrenfels, 1988). A
variety of Gestalt principles, such as similarity, collinearity, and surface uniformity,
have been proposed (Wertheimer, 1923), and many studies have shown that Gestalt
principles elevate visual perception (Bertamini, Rampone, Makin, & Jessop, 2019;
Fox, Harel, & Bennett, 2017; Kaiser, Stein, & Peelen, 2014; Stein, Kaiser, & Peelen,
2015) and VWM processes (Allon, Vixman, & Luria, 2019; Jackson & Raymond,
2008; Kałamała, Sadowska, Ordziniak, & Chuderski, 2017; Kim & Kim, 2011;
Woodman, Vecera, & Luck, 2003). For example, Lin and Luck (2009) varied the
similarity (homogeneity vs. heterogeneity) of colored squares to investigate the effect
of Gestalt principle. In the homogeneous condition, all colored squares belonged to
the same category; consequently, those squares shared high similarity (e.g., three red
squares of different shades). Conversely, in the heterogeneous condition, when the
colored squares were selected from different color categories (e.g., red, blue, and
green), this caused a lower level of similarity. As the results revealed, the participants
showed better VWM performance in the homogeneous condition than in the
heterogeneous condition. This suggests that VWM benefits from the Gestalt principle
of similarity.
However, these previous studies used only single-feature objects (e.g., color; see
Peterson & Berryhill, 2013) or multi-feature objects (e.g., a colored square and a tilted
bar; see Balaban & Luria, 2016; Vogel et al., 2001) as memory materials, and the
integration principles for the simple objects were often constrained at the perceptual
level, as experience and background knowledge were not necessarily demanded or
required (Kimchi, Yeshurun, & Cohen-Savransky, 2007). In contrast, the integration
principles for real-world objects often exploit preexisting information stored in long-
term memory; therefore, they differ from those used for simple objects (Kaiser &
Peelen, 2018; Kaiser, Quek, Cichy, & Peelen, 2019). Real-world objects are often
viewed in relation to each other (e.g., spatially related); therefore, after frequent
exposure to regularly organized real-world object pairs, people learn and store many
so-called statistical regularities in their long-term memory (Quek & Peelen, 2020).
Spatial regularity is a special type of statistical regularity (Kaiser et al., 2019) that
refers to the location of one object in relation to another object (e.g., a hat on a hook).
People learn the spatial contingencies of various objects through long-term exposure
in daily life, so they automatically retain the objects as larger coherent unitary
representations in long-term memory (Gronau, Neta, & Bar, 2008; see anti-holistic
integration evidence in Markov, Utochkin, & Brady, 2021). The spatial contingencies
then work as spatial regularities to reduce the memory load imposed by related real-
world objects (Brady & Tenenbaum, 2013).
The possibility that objects organized according to certain integration principles may
be represented beyond a linear combination of single objects in the brain has been
extensively investigated (Baeck, Wagemans, & Op de Beeck, 2013; Hollingworth,
2007; Kaiser & Peelen, 2018; Kremláček et al., 2016; Quek & Peelen, 2020). By
applying multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) to functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) data, which focuses on nonlinearity with synthetic response patterns
(Kubilius, Baeck, Wagemans, & Op de Beeck, 2015), researchers are able to examine
higher-level visual processing (i.e., object integration) beyond the activation of
separate objects at the cortical level. Baeck et al. (2013) controlled the spatial
regularity of real-world object pairs and asked participants to judge whether the object
pairs were correctly positioned and whether they were likely to represent a specific
action (e.g., a hammer knocking on a nail). During the task, fMRI was employed to
record each participant’s brain activity. They found greater activity in the lateral
occipital cortex (LOC) for objects with spatial regularity than for objects without
regularity. More importantly, they observed a greater response to object pairs than to
their constituent objects, revealing that object pairs are not represented solely as the
sum of all separate objects. Kaiser and Peelen (2018) found a similar activity pattern
that supported the integrative processing of object pairs in the object-selective visual
cortex (OSV). These results demonstrate that the human brain is capable of exploiting
integration principles to generate holistic configurations that transcend the linear
processing of constituent parts.
Electrophysiological studies using electroencephalograms (EEG) and event-related
potentials (ERPs) have also confirmed the effects of spatial regularity on visual
perception (Quek & Peelen, 2020; Wickenden, 2014). Quek and Peelen (2020) found
a greater induction of visual mismatch negativity (vMMN), an ERP component
sensitive to infrequent and unexpected stimuli (Kremláček et al., 2016), for objects
with spatial regularity than without regularity. These previous findings indicate that
the brain is tuned to the spatial regularity of real-world objects.
Given the close relationship between perception and VWM, we can assume that for
real-world objects, both perception and VWM can benefit from spatial regularity.
Kaiser et al. (2015) were the first to investigate the effects of the spatial regularity of
objects on VWM. They used a change detection task (Luck & Vogel, 1997) to present
atypical real-life setting), and the participants were asked to remember the object pairs
in the memory array and to report whether a change had occurred in the probe array.
Better performance was found in the with-regularity condition than in the without-
regularity condition. The benefit gained from spatial regularity on VWM performance
is termed the “spatial regularity effect”. Importantly, the spatial regularity effect is
stable, irrespective of encoding time (Kaiser, Stein, & Peelen, 2015). This suggests
that spatial regularity can improve the efficiency of the VWM process for real-world
objects.
Given the stability of the spatial regularity effect, the causes underlying this effect can
be explained by two different hypotheses. The “perception-alike” hypothesis (Gao et
al., 2011) holds that VWM representations, tightly intertwined with visual perceptions,
can take advantage of integration principles in a similar fashion to those used for
visual perception representations. Thus, even if visual stimuli disappear, the
representations in VWM maintenance can still benefit from spatial regularity.
Alternatively, the spatial regularity effect can also be explained by the “encoding
specificity” hypothesis (Prieto, Peinado, & Mayas, 2022; Tulving & Thomson, 1973;
Woodman et al., 2003), which suggests that VWM representations are determined by
how information is encoded when visual stimuli appear, as visible integration cues
(e.g., spatial regularity) will promote an efficient encoding of regularly organized
objects into a coherent whole, whereas objects that are not regularly organized will
have discrete representations. Therefore, the impact of spatial regularity on VWM
processing occurs specifically in the visual encoding phase but disappears in the
VWM maintenance phase. Both hypotheses provide plausible explanations for the
spatial regularity effect, but they differ in whether spatial regularity plays a role in the
VWM maintenance process. Kaiser et al. (2015) did not examine the specific VWM
phases as influenced by spatial regularity, and to our knowledge, no prior studies have
tested the two hypotheses regarding the VWM processing of real-world objects.
One way to test these two hypotheses is to apply simultaneous and sequential
presentations to manipulate the accessibility of integration principles (e.g., spatial
regularity) in different process phases. In simultaneous presentation trials, integration
principles are continuously available upon the appearance of the memory array,
meaning that participants might integrate stimuli in the visual encoding phase.
However, whether integration principles could improve the efficiency of the post-
encoding phases (e.g., VWM maintenance) cannot be tested or excluded (Kałamała et
al., 2017). In contrast, when stimuli are presented sequentially, participants cannot
perceive the whole picture, nor can they exploit integration principles in the first
display. Only in the second display, during the post-encoding phase for representations
formed in the first display, can they obtain all the information and possibly integrate
retained representations in the VWM with the new input.
Studies to determine which integration principles enhance VWM, such as the work by
Gao et al. (2016), have exploited the sequential presentation condition to allow the
direct investigation of the online integration of simple stimuli (a notched disk). Gao et
al. (2016) compared VWM performance under with-regularity and without-regularity
conditions. Two memory arrays, each containing two disks, were displayed
sequentially. In the with-regularity condition, the two disks in the first array were
connected to the disks in the second array via virtual elongated occluding rectangles,
thereby leading to collinearity—a Gestalt principle. In contrast, in the without-
regularity condition, all four disks were randomly placed. The participants showed
better VWM performance (i.e., higher sensitivity) in the with-regularity condition than
in the without-regularity condition. For the sequential presentation condition, the
participants could only form an intact representation after all stimuli had been
presented, which meant that information in separate memory arrays was integrated
during the maintenance phase. Gao et al.’s (2016) work supported the beneficial effect
of the Gestalt principle on the VWM maintenance phase for memory materials of
simple shapes. That is, the Gestalt principle’s effects can be explained by the
perception-alike hypothesis rather than the encoding specificity hypothesis. However,
Gao et al.’s (2016) findings cannot be directly generalized to the spatial regularity
effect for real-world objects. Therefore, employing the sequential presentation
condition is meaningful in testing the two hypotheses regarding the spatial regularity
effect.
In Experiment 1 conducted for the current study, we utilized both simultaneous and
sequential presentation and manipulated the regularity (with regularity vs. without
regularity) to examine the spatial regularity effect on visual encoding and VWM
maintenance to test the perception-alike and encoding specificity hypotheses. We
predicted that the spatial regularity effect would occur in simultaneous presentation
trials, which is in agreement with previous studies (Kaiser et al., 2015). That is, in the
simultaneous presentation trials, VWM performance would be better under the with-
regularity condition than under the without-regularity condition. The encoding
specificity hypothesis suggests that the spatial regularity effect will appear only when
all objects are presented simultaneously and that it will disappear when they are
presented sequentially. Thus, we would observe no significant difference in VWM
performance for sequentially presented object pairs between the with-regularity and
without-regularity conditions. On the contrary, the perception-alike hypothesis
suggests that both the encoding and maintenance phases will benefit from spatial
regularity. Thus, we would expect to observe significantly better VWM performance
under the with-regularity condition than under the without-regularity condition.
Experiment 1: Examining the spatial regularity of real-world objects in
VWM
In Experiment 1, we tested the two hypotheses by investigating the process(es) of
VWM as influenced by the spatial regularity of real-world objects. We used a change
detection task and displayed real-world object pairs with or without spatial regularity,
either simultaneously or sequentially. As mentioned above, in sequential presentation
trials, spatial regularity exists after all the information is displayed when the encoding
of objects in the first memory array has been finished and their VWM representations
are available. Thus, the possible spatial regularity effect should be attributed to online
integration. We also designed a simultaneous presentation condition to confirm the
spatial regularity of the memory materials. We chose to use three pairs in both
simultaneous and sequential presentation trials because we found a greater difference
in change detection sensitivity between the with-regularity and without-regularity
conditions in a previous study when the memory load was relatively high (e.g., three
pairs; see Kaiser et al., 2015).
Methods
Participants
Based on the previous results of the study by Gao et al. (2016), we predicted the same
effect size (η = 0.34) for our experimental design. On that basis, a power analysis
(G*power 3.1; Faul, Erdfflfer, Buchner, & Lang, 2007) with an α level of 0.05
indicated that 14 participants were needed in our experiments to achieve 95% power.
We ensured sufficient statistical power in our analyses by further increasing our
sample size to 23 participants to give a sample size comparable to or larger than that
used in previous similar studies (e.g., 16–23 participants for each experiment in the
study by Gao et al., 2016 and 20 participants for each experiment in the study by Chen
et al., 2021).
We enrolled 32 healthy undergraduates in Experiment 1. Nine were excluded for not
participating seriously in the experiment, as they created a very low accuracy (less
than 50%, which equals the chance level). This left 23 participants (19 females, 19.48
± 0.67 years old) for further analysis. All remaining participants had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision and were compensated for their participation. The
experimental procedures and design complied with the Declaration of Helsinki (2008)
and were approved by the ethical committee of Sichuan Normal University.
Stimuli and procedure
Before the formal experiments, we screened out appropriate stimuli for all
experiments from prepared real-world objects by conducting a judgment task to select
suitable visual materials for observing the spatial regularity effect (more details can
be found in the Supplementary Materials). Similar to the objects used in the study by
Kaiser et al. (2015), a set of 12 categories of real-world objects (tap, beer glass; film,
tripod; pot, pot rack; mirror, sink; toilet tank, toilet; closet, clothes; bread, plate; lamp,
beach chair) with spatial regularity in the vertical direction were used as stimuli. We
controlled spatial regularity by organizing all object pairs in the with-regularity
condition or in the without-regularity condition. We provided two different exemplars
for each object, resulting in four different pairs for each category. All images were
decolorized and matched for size using Photoshop 2020. Images were presented
against a gray (140, 140, 140, RGB) background on a 21-inch LCD monitor (refresh
rate: 75 Hz). A single object subtended a visual angle of about 3°. The experiment was
programmed using E-prime 2.0.
The stimuli were displayed in two presentation manners: one for the simultaneous
1). In the simultaneous condition, a fixation cross was shown for 500 ms at the
beginning of each trial. After the disappearance of the fixation cross, the memory
array containing three pairs of objects (to the left, right and either above or below the
fixation cross) was presented for 2000 ms. After an interval of 1000 ms, the probe
array, with all locations unchanged, was shown for up to 3000 ms. In 50% of the trials,
the probe array was the same as the memory array, while in the remaining trials, one
object was changed to another object within the same category. The sequential trials
began with the same fixation cross, but the object pairs were presented in sequence. In
the first display, one object from each of the three pairs was presented for 1000 ms,
followed by a 500 ms blank screen. The second display with the other half of the pairs
was shown for 1000 ms before another 1000 ms blank screen. The subsequent probe
array was the same as in the simultaneous trials and contained three pairs of objects at
the original locations. The participants were asked to remember the three object pairs
when they all appeared simultaneously or when half of each pair appeared
sequentially in the memory array. When the probe array appeared, they were required
to indicate a change by pressing “K” or no change by pressing “S.” During the change
detection task, accuracy was stressed rather than response speed. Each pair
configuration was presented for 48 simultaneous trials and 48 sequential trials,
yielding 192 trials. The experimental factors of presentation manner (simultaneous vs.
sequential) and pair configuration (with-regularity object pairs vs. without-regularity
object pairs) were randomly mixed within the blocks. The entire duration of
Experiment 1 lasted approximately 25 min.
with/without spatial regularity in Experiment 1.
Data analysis
The main purpose was to examine the spatial regularity effect in different presentation
trials (simultaneous or sequential presentations). The sensitivity of VWM performance
was calculated as the difference between hit rates and false alarm rates (i.e., a d-prime
score [d' = Z{hit rate} – Z{false alarm}] was applied as an index of sensitivity toward
change detection, as in Kaiser et al., 2015). A 2 (presentation manner: simultaneous vs.
sequential) × 2 (pair configuration: with-regularity object pairs vs. without-regularity
object pairs) repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied to the d-
prime scores. Paired samples t-tests were conducted for the follow-up pairwise
comparison between with-regularity and without-regularity object pairs within the
simultaneous and sequential presentation trials. Cohen’s d was used to estimate the
effect size for the t-tests. The false discovery rate (FDR) corrections for p-values of
paired samples t-tests were calculated to control for false predictions in multiple
comparisons (Benjamini & Yekutieli, 2001). JASP (Version 0.16, JASP Team, 2021)
was used to provide Bayes factors to show whether the t-test results supported the
alternative hypothesis or null hypothesis (Rouder et al., 2009; Schmalz, Manresa, &
Zhang, 2021), thereby providing an odds ratio for the alternative/null hypotheses
(values < 1 favor the null hypothesis and values > 1 favor the alternative hypothesis).
The default priors in JASP were used.
Results
Sensitivity (d')
significant main effect of presentation manner, F(1, 22) = 43.50, p < .001, η = 0.66,
and a significant interaction between presentation manner and pair configuration, F(1,
22) = 5.90, p = .024, η = 0.21, but no significant main effect of pair configuration,
F(1, 22) = 3.45, p = .077, η = 0.14. Planned comparisons revealed that in the
simultaneous presentation trials, the sensitivity was significantly higher in the with-
regularity condition than in the without-regularity condition, t(22) = 2.52, p = .038,
Cohen’s d = 0.67, BF = 2.82. In contrast, in the sequential presentation trials, no
significant difference was detected between the with-regularity and without-regularity
conditions, t(22) = 0.21, p = .838, Cohen’s d = 0.06, BF = 0.22.
light gray bars represent the without-regularity condition. * = p < .050, n.s. = non-significant. Error bars
reflect 95% confidence intervals (CIs) (Cousineau, 2005).
Discussion
In Experiment 1, we found that the participants had a higher sensitivity to with-
regularity than to without-regularity object pairs in the simultaneous presentation trials.
These results indicate that when stimuli were presented simultaneously, spatial
regularity enhanced the participant’s VWM performance, thereby confirming the
stability of the spatial regularity effect found in the study by Kaiser et al. (2015). This
also suggests that the object pairs used in our study were effective, as the spatial
regularity effect occurred in the simultaneous presentation trials. One possible reason
for the effect observed in the simultaneous presentation condition is that the
configuration of regularly organized object pairs is readily accessible; therefore, it can
forge a stronger sensory impression than object pairs without regularity. A stronger
sensory impression improves the encoding of the object pairs, thereby leading to
better VWM performance.
However, in the sequential presentation trials, sensitivity was not significantly
different between the with-regularity and without-regularity object pairs. No spatial
regularity effect occurred when the real-world objects appeared sequentially,
suggesting that spatial regularity failed to enhance the online integration of VWM
representations. In general, the results seem to favor the encoding specificity
hypothesis.
Furthermore, these results seem to contradict Gao et al.’s (2016) findings that
participants had a higher sensitivity to with-regularity than to without-regularity object
pairs in sequential presentation trials. A main cause of this contradiction may be the
different stimuli used in the two studies. Previous research has demonstrated that an
individual’s VWM storage capacity is reduced with an increase in stimulus
complexity (Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2004), such as two faces (Eng, Chen, & Jiang,
2005) or three to four colors (Luck & Vogel, 1997). Gao et al. (2016) used simple
disks as memory materials, and their participants remembered all the disks in the two
sequential displays. However, in the current study, participants may have formed
VWM representations of two complex real-world objects in each of the two memory
arrays while retaining the remaining objects as conceptual representations in their
minds. Spatial regularity specifically influences visual processes; therefore, when the
memory load exceeds the VWM capacity, participants may integrate only one pair of
objects displayed in the two arrays due to occasionally discrepant types of
representations (e.g., encoding a teapot and a closet in the first display but the set-top
box and clothes in the second one, thereby incurring integration failure for two objects)
(Bays, 2016).
Representation discrepancy caused by the exceeding of the memory load might
weaken the impact of spatial regularity on VWM performance in sequential
presentation trials. Previous studies have indicated that the perceptual integration
principles for simple objects are stimulus driven and capture attention automatically
(Kimchi et al., 2007). The collinearity effect examined by Gao et al. (2016) was a low-
level perceptual integration principle that demanded fewer cognitive resources (i.e.,
subjective attention) than the complex integration principles for real-world objects,
which rely on an individual’s attentional capacity (Gronau & Shachar, 2014) and
depend on experience and long-term memory (Kaiser et al., 2019). In addition, only
two disks were displayed by Gao et al. (2016) in each memory array, and this was
within each individual’s VWM capacity. That is, the memory load was lower in Gao et
al.’s (2016) study than in Experiment 1 of the present study. Therefore, the
overburdening of memory from real-world objects might make the use of spatial
regularity more difficult for participants during sequential presentation trials because
of the integration failure this causes between the different types of representations.
In Experiment 2, we tested whether the memory load might influence the occurrence
of the spatial regularity effect by specifically controlling the memory load and using
only sequential presentations. If the integration of real-world objects presented
sequentially is too difficult, no significant difference should occur between the with-
regularity and without-regularity conditions, whether with high or low memory loads.
On the contrary, if the overburdened memory is what weakens the spatial regularity
effect, a reduction in the memory load should lead to the occurrence of the spatial
regularity effect in sequential presentation trials.
Experiment 2: Examining the effect of memory load on the spatial
regularity of real-world objects in VWM
In Experiment 1, we used three pairs of real-world objects as the memory materials in
each trial and found no significant difference between with-regularity objects and
without-regularity objects in the sequential presentation trials, supporting the encoding
specificity hypothesis that only the encoding phase benefits from spatial regularity.
However, the memory load might exceed each individual’s VWM capacity; therefore,
the sequential presentation of the stimuli might cause integration failure for VWM
representations with conceptual representations in the two displays, thereby hindering
the spatial regularity effect. That is, we cannot accept the encoding specificity
hypothesis unless we were to also exclude the possibility that the overburdened
memory would lead to the absence of the spatial regularity effect in sequential
presentation trials.
In Experiment 2, we exploited the sequential presentation condition in Experiment 1
and manipulated the memory load of the stimuli. Since the spatial regularity effect had
been verified in Experiment 1, the use of a sequential stimulus presentation was
sufficient to test whether spatial regularity facilitated online integration. In addition to
the three object-pair trials, we added a low memory load condition of two object pairs
to explore the potential impact of memory load on the spatial regularity effect.
Experiment 2a
Methods
Participants
As a follow-up experiment to Experiment 1, we set a comparable sample size in
Experiment 2a. We recruited a new group of 26 undergraduates. Two participants were
excluded from further analysis because they did not participate seriously in the
experiment, leading to very low accuracy (less than 50%, which equals the chance
level). This left a final group of 24 participants (22 females, 19.38 ± 1.50 years old).
All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were compensated for
their participation. The experimental procedures and design complied with the
Declaration of Helsinki (2008) and were approved by the ethical committee of
Sichuan Normal University.
Stimuli and procedure
The stimuli and apparatuses in Experiment 2a were identical to those in Experiment 1.
Because previous studies suggest that VWM performance improves when the objects
to be remembered are distributed between left and right visual fields compared to
when they are all presented within the same hemifield (Delvenne, 2005; Umemoto et
al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2018), we ensured that all items were presented bilaterally in
in Experiment 1, except that only the sequential presentation trials were applied and
the factor of memory load was manipulated. We set two memory loads: the lower
level involved two pairs, and the higher level involved three pairs. The stimuli
locations on screen in the higher-level trials were the same as in the sequential
presentation trials of Experiment 1, while in the lower-level trials, the objects were
presented to the left and right of the fixation cross, and the two objects in the same
display were arranged diagonally. As in Experiment 1, Experiment 2a consisted of 192
trials, with each pair configuration presented for 48 two-pair trials and 48 three-pair
trials (24 change trials and 24 without-change trials for each condition). The
experimental factors of memory load (two vs. three object pairs) and pair
configuration (with-regularity vs. without-regularity object pairs) were randomly
mixed within the blocks. The entire duration of Experiment 2a lasted approximately
30 min.
Data analysis
As in Experiment 1, we calculated the d-prime scores as an index of sensitivity toward
change detection. We also applied a 2 (memory load: two-pair vs. three-pair) × 2 (pair
configuration: with-regularity object pairs vs. without-regularity object pairs) repeated
measures ANOVA to the d-prime scores. The follow-up pairwise comparison of
different pair configurations under the two memory load conditions was conducted
using paired samples t-tests. For both the d-prime scores, Cohen’s d was used to
estimate the effect size for the t-tests. The Bayes factors for the t-tests are reported.
Results
Sensitivity (d’)
significant interaction between memory load and pair configuration, F(1, 23) < .01, p
= .985, η < .01, and no significant main effect of pair configuration, F(1, 23) = .38, p
= .542, η = .02. A significant main effect of memory load was found, F (1, 23) =
8.10, p = .009, η = .26, with a greater sensitivity for the two-pair condition than for
the three-pair condition, t(23) = 2.85, p = .009, Cohen’s d = 0.58, BF = 5.21. The
results of the paired samples t-tests revealed no significant difference between with-
regularity and without-regularity object pairs in the two-pair condition, t(23) = 0.47, p
= .646, Cohen’s d = 0.13, BF = 0.24, or in the three-pair condition, t(23) = 0.67, p
= .513, Cohen’s d = 0.15, BF = 0.26.
Discussion
In Experiment 2a, the sensitivity did not differ independently between the with-
regularity and without-regularity object pairs, regardless of whether the memory load
was high or low. These results seem to exclude the impact of an overburdened
memory load, as the two-pair condition yielded no spatial regularity effect. In line
with our findings in Experiment 1, Experiment 2a also aligned with previous studies
that found worse memory performance for spatial layouts in which the objects were
presented sequentially rather than simultaneously (Liu, 2010). This result can be
explained by the difficulty associated with integrating objects online.
The results of Experiment 2a revealed no spatial regularity effect during the
maintenance process; however, this does not mean that online integration is
impossible. The 1000 ms duration for displaying the memory array is relatively long
compared to the time settings used in previous experiments, which applied simple
features (Balaban & Luria, 2016; Kałamała et al., 2017). Therefore, participants might
have used verbal memory to help memorize the object pairs, regardless of their spatial
regularity. Previous studies that used real-world objects as stimuli usually employed a
verbal suppression task to interrupt verbal rehearsal (Kaiser et al., 2015). Moreover,
Gao et al. (2016) thought that the sensory afterimages of a stimulus in the first display
might still occur after the onset of the second display if the blank screen interval
between the two sequential presentations was too short (e.g., 500 ms). The blank
screen interval was relatively short (500 ms) in the current study; therefore, images
appearing later in the retina might serve as novel stimuli that occupy more attention. A
salient local stimulus would interfere with global processing (Weinbach & Henik,
2014), which could obstruct integration. The spatial regularity effect demands more
cognitive resources and individual experience than the Gestalt principle effect, so it is
influenced more by sensory afterimages. Therefore, Experiment 2b was performed to
exclude the interference of verbal rehearsal and sensory afterimages.
Experiment 2b
In Experiment 2b, we added a verbal suppression task at the beginning of the
procedure and provided masks immediately after the stimulus disappeared. Real-world
object pairs were used as stimuli in the current study, and participants might have
taken advantage of semantic coding to help memorize the object pairs. However,
spatial regularity only benefits visual processes. Semantic coding might hinder the
spatial regularity effect and could be validly inhibited by a verbal suppression task, as
previous research has shown (Kaiser et al., 2015). In addition, two scrambled images
were displayed as masks after each of the memory arrays, as described by Gao et al.
(2016), to eliminate sensory afterimages.
Methods
Participants
We set a sample size in Experiment 2b comparable to that in Experiment 1. We
recruited a new group of 29 undergraduates. Four participants were excluded from the
analysis. Two of them did not finish the experiment; the other two had poor
performance (accuracy < 50%), leaving a final group of 25 participants (19 females,
19.76 ± 1.54 years old) for further analysis. All participants had normal or corrected-
to-normal vision and were compensated for their participation. The experimental
procedures and design complied with the Declaration of Helsinki (2008) and were
approved by the ethical committee of Sichuan Normal University.
Stimuli and procedure
The stimuli used in Experiment 2b were identical to those used in Experiment 2a. The
Importantly, to prevent the possible use of verbal memory to encode the objects, we
took a similar approach to that described by Kaiser (2015). Five-digit numbers were
presented at the beginning of the trial for 1400 ms, and the participants were asked to
rehearse the numbers throughout the trial. After the presentation of the first and
second memory arrays, masks were shown for 200 ms at the same locations the
stimuli were in the memory arrays to reduce the impact of iconic memory. A total of
192 trials were conducted in Experiment 2b, with the experimental factors of memory
load (two pairs vs. three pairs) and pair configuration (with-regularity vs. without-
regularity object pairs) randomly mixed within the blocks. The entire duration of
Experiment 2b lasted approximately 40 min.
Data analysis
All analyses were identical to those described in Experiment 2a. Because the
participants had nearly perfect performance in the verbal suppression task (mean
accuracy ≥ 98%), we kept all trials for further analysis.
Results
significant interaction between memory load and pair configuration, F(1, 24) = 1.23, p
= .278, η = 0.05, and no significant main effect of pair configuration, F(1, 24) = 2.57,
p = .122, η = 0.10. A significant main effect was observed for memory load, F(1, 24)
= 12.46, p = .002, η = 0.34, with higher sensitivity for the two-pair condition than for
the three-pair condition, t(24) = 3.53, p = .002, Cohen’s d = 0.83, BF = 21.73. No
significant difference was found between the with-regularity and without-regularity
pairs in the two-pair condition, t(24) = 1.60, p = .123, Cohen’s d = 0.44, BF = 0.64,
or in the three-pair condition, t(24) = 0.50, p = .620, Cohen’s d = 0.12, BF = 0.24.
dark gray bars represent the with-regularity condition, and the light gray bars represent the without-
regularity condition. n.s. = non-significant. Error bars reflect 95% CI.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 2b again showed no significant difference between with-
regularity and without-regularity object pairs presented sequentially, regardless of the
memory load, thereby indicating that verbal rehearsal and sensory afterimages had no
influence on the pattern of results in Experiment 2a. Previous studies employing fMRI
found the dissociated activation of verbal working memory and VWM in the frontal
and parietal cortex (Ikeda & Osaka, 2007; Rothmayr et al., 2007), demonstrating two
relatively independent subsystems for working memory.
Some previous studies suggest that individual differences in VWM capacity can
explain the variance in attention resource allocation ability across individuals (Cowan
& Morey, 2006; Fukuda & Vogel, 2009; Vogel et al., 2005), while a recent study found
no support for the claim that individual differences in VWM capacity are related to the
internal attention allocation (Ye et al., 2021). In addition, the VWM capacity actually
fluctuates among individuals (Cowan, 2001); therefore, our arranged memory loads
might have exceeded the capacities of some participants, thereby concealing the
spatial regularity effect in the other part of the sample. We tested the interruption to
the individual capacity difference by asking the participants in Experiment 2b to
complete a VWM capacity measurement after they had completed the main task.
However, the results indicated that individual differences in VWM capacity had no
influence on the degree of online integration, regardless of the memory load (more
details can be found in the Supplementary Materials).
Taken together, the results in Experiment 2 favor the idea that the overburdened
memory has no impact on the disappearance of the spatial regularity effect in
Experiment 2b showed that when participants needed to remember two pairs of
stimuli, the d-prime scores seemed better in the with-regularity condition than in the
without-regularity condition (although no statistically significant difference was
detected between them). One possible reason for this is that the spatial regularity
effect may be more obvious when the memory load consists of two pairs. In addition,
some relatively deficient controls might have impeded the spatial regularity effect.
Therefore, we still cannot directly conclude that participants were unable to integrate
objects with spatial regularity. Although we selected these materials based on a
judgment task (see Supplementary Materials) and our instructions encouraged
participants to pair the memory objects, the participants might have failed to pair them
due to the absence of specific experiences (e.g., a participant may never have seen a
gas stove in daily life) or of the desire to pair them in the formal experiment.
Moreover, participants may have inadvertently tried to integrate the objects presented
in the same display, and with obvious failure, they were unaware of the spatial
regularity. Because the participants did not have an expectation as to which pair of
stimuli to integrate, they may have integrated the stimuli incorrectly or memorized
each object independently (Bays, 2016). Therefore, in the follow-up experiments, we
delineated the location of each pair with a bounding box to eliminate the ambiguity of
integration.
Since the results of Experiments 2a and 2b seemed to show slightly different trends, in
Experiment 3, we tested whether verbal working memory and sensory afterimages
would again impair the spatial regularity effect in sequential trials. If the participants’
performances improved under the with-regularity condition compared to the without-
regularity condition after adding a verbal suppression task and masks, then those two
factors influenced the online integration of real-world objects. On the contrary, if no
significant difference was evident between the pair-configuration trials in either
experimental design conditions, then the failure of online integration using spatial
regularities is reliable, and the results would support the encoding specificity
hypothesis.
Experiment 3: Examining the effects of verbal working memory and
sensory afterimages on the spatial regularity of real-world objects in
VWM
In Experiment 2b, controlling the memory load of real-world objects and utilizing a
sequential presentation with a verbal suppression task and masks revealed only a trend
of difference between the with-regularity and without-regularity conditions. In
consideration of the individual difference in spatial regularity effect, we tested
whether the absence of the spatial regularity effect in sequential trials was stable,
despite the rigorous control of verbal working memory and sensory afterimages, by
combining Experiments 2a and 2b into a within-subject experiment in Experiment 3.
Because the trend seemed more obvious in the lower memory load condition, we fixed
the stimuli in the memory arrays as two-pair objects. We eliminated the ambiguity
when associating two objects in the same display by adding a box around each
corresponding object pair.
We also asked the participants to engage in a judgment task before the main task to
confirm their familiarity with the spatial regularities of each pair of objects. The
judgment task could also have improved participants’ familiarity with the stimuli and
increased their motivation to integrate objects in the main follow-up task. Very high
accuracy in the judgment task (i.e., a ceiling effect) indicated that the participants
were familiar with the spatial regularity and were precise about the spatial relationship
discrimination.
Methods
Participants
We set a sample size in Experiment 3 comparable to that in Experiment 1. We
recruited a new group of 25 undergraduates . Two participants were excluded from
further analysis due to extremely low accuracy (less than 50%), which left a final
group of 23 participants (23 females, 19.13 ± 1.29 years old). All participants had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were compensated for their participation.
The experimental procedures and design complied with the Declaration of Helsinki
(2008) and were approved by the ethical committee of Sichuan Normal University.
Stimuli and procedure
The stimuli and apparatuses in Experiment 3 were the same as those in Experiments 1,
2a, and 2b.
We first showed the participants all the object pictures used in Experiment 3, and we
asked them to say the objects’ names out loud in cases of incognizance. When
familiarity with the objects was ensured, the participants commenced the judgment
task in which two objects were presented on the screen. We manipulated the regularity
of the object pairs to present two levels of stimuli: with-regularity pairs (96 trials) and
no-regularity pairs (96 trials). Participants pressed “1” if objects had spatial regularity
and pressed “2” otherwise. Accuracy was prioritized over speed. The entire judgment
task lasted for approximately 20 min.
Upon completion of the judgment task and after a short break, the participants started
presented after a 500 ms fixation. The first memory array contained two objects sorted
into different object pairs and were presented in a box to the left or right of the
fixation cross (the horizontal distance between the left and right pairs of stimuli was a
6° visual angle). The other half of the object pairs was presented in the second
memory array after a 500 ms interval. The participants were instructed that the two
objects appearing sequentially in the box at the same locations could be regarded as
pairs. In half of the trials, the object pairs had spatial regularity, whereas they were
reversed in the other half. After a second 500 ms interval, the test array provided two
object pairs, each in a box, at the same locations as the memory arrays. The
participants had to decide whether the probe objects were identical to the memory
objects; if they were identical, the participants were asked to press “S”; otherwise,
they were to press “K”. We emphasized that only one object would change and that
the change was intra-category instead of inter-category in the change trials. The probe
objects in half of the trials were identical to the memory objects and changed in the
other half. The test array lasted up to 3000 ms and disappeared after the participants
pressed a key. Accuracy was prioritized over speed. Moreover, in half of the trials, we
also presented a 1400 ms rehearsal task display at the beginning and a 200 ms mask
immediately after the memory arrays.
The main task of Experiment 3 was similar to the composite of Experiments 2a and 2b,
except for four changes. First, we adjusted the existence of verbal suppression tasks
and masks into a within-subject condition between blocks. Second, we asked the
participants to memorize only two pairs. Third, we added two boxes surrounding the
object pairs to the left and right of the cross throughout the memory and test arrays.
Fourth, before the main experiment, the participants completed a judgment task in
which they were asked to assess the spatial relationships between the objects
presented as pairs. The aims of this task were to improve each participant’s ability to
distinguish spatial regularity and to check their familiarity with the spatial regularities
of each pair of objects.
The experimental design conditions (with verbal suppression and masks vs. without
verbal suppression or masks) were blocked, with their order counterbalanced across
subjects. Stimuli with each pair configuration (condition) were randomly presented
within the blocks, yielding 96 trials for each condition. A total of 192 trials with 4
blocks were conducted, and the entire experiment took approximately 40 min.
with verbal suppression and masks in Experiment 3.
Data analysis
We calculated the d-prime scores as an index of sensitivity toward change detection
and used a 2 (experimental design: with verbal suppression and masks vs. without
verbal suppression or masks) × 2 (pair configuration: with-regularity object pairs vs.
without-regularity object pairs) repeated measures ANOVA to determine the d-prime
scores. The follow-up pairwise comparison of different pair configurations under the
two experimental design conditions was conducted through paired samples t-tests. For
the d-prime scores, Cohen’s d was used to estimate the effect size for the t-tests. The
Bayes factors for the t-tests are reported.
Results
Accuracy of the judgment task
The accuracy of the judgment task (0.94 ± 0.04) was very high, indicating a ceiling
effect.
Sensitivity (d’)
significant interaction between experimental design and pair configuration, F(1, 22) =
0.52, p = .478, η = 0.02, nor a significant main effect of experimental design, F(1, 22)
2 2
= 0.43, p = .518, η = 0.02, or pair configuration, F(1, 22) = 0.62, p = .440, η = 0.03.
p p
The results of paired samples t-tests revealed no significant difference between with-
regularity and without-regularity object pairs in the trials with rehearsal tasks and
masks, t(22) = 0.10, p = .920, Cohen’s d = 0.02 , BF = 0.22, or in the trials without
rehearsal tasks or masks, t(22) = 1.10, p = .283, Cohen’s d = 0.24 , BF = 0.38.
Discussion
In Experiment 3, participants were familiar with the provided spatial regularity, as
indicated by the near-perfect accuracy result for the judgment task, but the sensitivity
to the different pair-configuration stimuli still showed no significant differences. This
indicates that there was a consistent absence of the spatial regularity effect in
sequential presentations, even though we meticulously controlled for verbal working
memory and sensory afterimages. The within-subject design directly revealed that
rehearsal tasks and masks had no impact on the online processing of real-world
objects in the VWM.
The results of Experiments 1–3 support the encoding specificity hypothesis that
participants can only use spatial regularity in the encoding phase of VWM. We
utilized simultaneous and sequential presentations to test the spatial regularity effect
of real-world objects and the phase of action in Experiment 1. Subsequently,
Experiments 2a, 2b, and 3 excluded some variables that might have impeded the
online use of spatial regularity. Specifically, these variables were excessive memory
load, the aid of verbal working memory, sensory afterimages, the motivation for
integration, and individual differences.
Apart from these potentially impeding factors in the sequential trials, the longer
display durations in the simultaneous condition in Experiment 1 presumably
facilitated the integration of paired objects and elicited the spatial regularity effect. We
matched the total encoding time by choosing 2000 ms for each memory array in the
simultaneous trials (with three paired objects) and 1000 ms for each memory array in
the sequential trials (with three single objects). However, previous studies have shown
that participants can allocate VWM resources in different ways for different display
durations (Long et al., 2020; Ye, Hu et al., 2017; Ye, Sun et al., 2019; Ye, Liang et al.,
2020). The longer display durations in the simultaneous condition could have led to
more inevitable passive eye movements, which would have enhanced the goal
locations and provided memory traces in the VWM (Damiano & Walther, 2019;
Hanning & Deubel, 2018). Furthermore, they might have enabled the participants to
take advantage of spatial regularity.
In Experiment 4, we manipulated the display duration of the sequential trials to
investigate whether the presentation time of the memory arrays affected the online
integration of real-world objects. If the performance was significantly better with
with-regularity objects than without-regularity objects in a long-display-duration
condition (2000 ms for each memory array) and if the performances between the pair-
configuration conditions revealed no significant differences in short-display-duration
trials (500 ms for each memory array), more eye movements could be vital in causing
the spatial regularity effect. If no spatial regularity effect arose despite the systematic
manipulation of display duration, eye movements probably had no impact on online
integration, and our results would sustain the encoding specificity hypothesis.
Experiment 4: Examining the effects of display duration on the spatial
regularity of real-world objects in VWM
Because eye movements might strengthen participants’ employment of spatial
regularity, we implemented three different display durations for each memory array to
test whether spatial regularity appeared in sequential trials. Prior research has
confirmed that 500 ms is sufficient to encode two complex stimuli (e.g., faces in Ye et
al., 2018). We also employed a judgment task to improve familiarity with spatial
regularity and the motivation to integrate. Therefore, 500 ms per memory array was
chosen as the short display duration and 2000 ms as the long duration to correspond to
the display durations used in the simultaneous trials in Experiment 1. In Experiment 3,
we demonstrated that verbal suppression and masks had no impact on the success of
online integration; thus, we removed these controls in Experiment 4 to simplify the
task.
In addition, in Experiment 3, we added boxes around the memory array to guide the
participants to realize which pair of objects they needed to integrate. However, since
the boxes only appeared when the memory array appeared and disappeared with the
disappearance of the memory array, the sudden appearance and disappearance of the
boxes could have attracted additional participant attention. Therefore, the setting of
bounding boxes around memory items could have interfered with the integration of
paired objects. In Experiment 4, bounding boxes were kept on the screen throughout
the experiment to reduce possible interference with the integration caused by the
appearance and disappearance of the boxes.
Methods
Participants
We set a sample size in Experiment 4 comparable to that in Experiment 1. We enrolled
25 healthy undergraduates. Two of them were excluded for a lack of serious
participation, which created very low accuracy (no more than 50%, which equals the
chance level). This left 23 participants (21 females, 20.22 ± 1.83 years old) for further
analysis. All remaining participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and
were compensated for their participation. The experimental procedures and design
complied with the Declaration of Helsinki (2008) and were approved by the ethical
committee of Sichuan Normal University.
Stimuli and procedure
The stimuli and apparatuses in Experiment 4 were the same as in Experiments 1–3. As
in Experiment 3, we initially showed the participants all the object pictures used in
Experiment 4 and asked them to say the objects’ names out loud in cases of
incognizance. The participants engaged in the same judgment task as in Experiment 3.
Upon completion of the judgment task and after a short break, the participants were
asked to complete the main task.
The main task of Experiment 4 was similar to the trials without verbal suppression or
(500 ms vs. 1000 ms vs. 2000 ms) as a variable and kept the boxes around the paired
objects throughout the trial to decrease their interference. After the judgment task, the
participants completed 32 trials for each condition, with a total of 192 trials randomly
organized into 4 blocks. The entire task lasted approximately 40 min.
Data analysis
We calculated the d-prime scores as an index of sensitivity to change detection. A 2
(pair configuration: with-regularity vs. without-regularity) × 3 (display duration: 500
ms vs. 1000 ms vs. 2000 ms) repeated measures ANOVA was applied to the d-prime
scores. Follow-up pairwise comparisons of different pair configurations under three
display-duration conditions were conducted using paired samples t-tests. For the d-
prime scores, Cohen’s d was used to estimate the effect size for the t-tests. The Bayes
factors for the t-tests are reported.
Results
Accuracy of the judgment task
The accuracy of the judgment task (0.98± 0.04) was very high, indicating a ceiling
effect.
Sensitivity (d’)
significant interaction between display duration and pair configuration, F(2, 44) =
0.08, p = .928, η < 0.01, and no significant main effect of pair configuration, F(1, 22)
= 0.36, p = .552, η = 0.02. A significant main effect of display duration was found, F
(2, 44) = 5.23, p = .009, η = 0.19, with greater sensitivity under the 2000 ms
condition than under the 500 ms condition, t(22) = 3.81, p = .009, Cohen’s d = 0.80,
BF = 36.58. The results of paired samples t-tests revealed no significant differences
between with-regularity and without-regularity object pairs in each display-duration
condition; 500 ms duration: t(22) = 0.32, p = .752, Cohen’s d = 0.08, BF = 0.23;
1000 ms duration: t(22) = 0.09, p = .933, Cohen’s d = 0.02, BF = 0.22; and 2000 ms
duration: t(22) = 0.70, p = .489, Cohen’s d = 0.12, BF = 0.27.
Combined analysis of the spatial regularity effect under the sequential presentation
condition
In addition to the analyses mentioned above, we quantified the spatial regularity effect
by calculating the spatial regularity index (SRI) by subtracting the d-prime score for
the without-regularity condition from the d-prime score for the with-regularity
condition. The SRI was calculated using the following formula:
In the formulation, refers to sensitivity under the with-regularity
condition and refers to sensitivity under the without-regularity
condition. Therefore, an SRI larger than zero suggests better performance under the
with-regularity condition than under the without-regularity condition, and vice versa.
An SRI equal to zero indicates that spatial regularity has no impact on VWM.
We confirmed the presence of a spatial regularity effect in the sequential presentation
trials by combining the SRI values in the five formal experiments (only sequential
presentation condition in Experiment 1, averaged between the two-pair and three-pair
conditions in Experiment 2a or Experiment 2b, averaged between the with and
without verbal suppression and mask conditions in Experiment 3, and averaged
between the three display-duration conditions in Experiment 4) to obtain a large
sample of data (n = 118). A mean SRI was calculated for each participant in the
sample, and an independent samples t-test was conducted to compare the SRI (0.005 ±
0.61) against zero. Again, the results revealed no significant difference between the
mean SRI and zero, t(117) = 0.10, p = .924, Cohen’s d = 0.01, BF = 0.10.
Discussion
In Experiment 4, the participants were also familiar with the provided spatial
regularity according to the near-perfect accuracy results for the judgment task.
Furthermore, the significantly better performance in the trials with a 2000 ms than 500
ms display duration implied a VWM facilitation of a longer encoding time.
Interestingly, the d-prime results for Experiment 4 were consistent with those in
Experiments 1–3, indicating no significant difference between with-regularity and
without-regularity object pairs in the sequential presentation condition, despite the
increase in passive eye movements. These results are in accordance with other
research demonstrating that eye movements do not enhance VWM during the
encoding or maintenance phases (Lange & Engbert, 2013; Martin et al., 2017).
The SRIs of the sequential presentation trials in all experiments showed the same
pattern; therefore, we calculated the mean SRI of these experiments to conduct a
combined analysis based on a relatively large sample. Again, we found no significant
difference between the two pair-configuration trials, and this result provided strong
evidence that online integration was not likely to occur within the domain of real-
world stimuli.
General discussion
In the current study, we replicated the results of a previous study (Kaiser et al., 2015)
that showed that participants had a higher sensitivity to the with-regularity than
without-regularity object pairs. This result indicates that participants can exploit the
spatial regularities of real-world objects to improve their VWM performance.
However, our study differs from the study by Kaiser et al. (2015) in one important
aspect: Kaiser et al. (2015) described the spatial regularity effect of real-world objects
in VWM, whereas we conducted a further examination of the specific phase during
which the effect emerged, and we tested the encoding specificity and perception-alike
hypotheses by utilizing a sequential presentation condition. The core difference
between the two hypotheses is whether the effect of spatial regularity occurs during
the VWM maintenance period. Kaiser et al. (2015) used a simultaneous presentation
condition, which could not exclude the possibility that the VWM maintenance phase
might benefit from spatial regularity. In contrast, our study examined this possibility
by employing a sequential presentation condition in which participants could only
acquire adaptive spatial regularity in the second memory array when they could
manipulate VWM representations of the other half of the objects that had disappeared
from the screen. Our results showed that the spatial regularity effect emerged only
under the simultaneous presentation condition and not the sequential presentation
condition, suggesting that the participants could not employ spatial regularity to
integrate object pairs online. Consequently, these results provide strong support for the
encoding specificity hypothesis.
We also consistently found that participants showed no significant difference in their
sensitivity to with-regularity and without-regularity object pairs in the sequential
presentation trials across the four experiments with the same memory load. The
combined analysis of the results in these trials, based on a relatively large sample,
confirmed the disappearance of the spatial regularity effect. The results verified the
stability of the encoding specificity hypothesis in experiments with differences in the
memory loads, verbal rehearsal, sensory afterimages, or eye movements, which
seemed to contradict the results of Gao et al. (2016). However, the stimuli differed
between the current study and their study, as Gao et al. (2016) used much simpler
stimuli (e.g., oriented arrows) while we applied real-world objects (e.g., a teapot) that
contained ampler information and more complex integration principles. Previous
studies have found that the mechanisms underlying the integration principles for
simple stimuli and real-world objects differ (Kaiser et al., 2019). Simple perceptual
integration principles influence VWM in a bottom-up way, and they automatically
attract attention (Bharti, Yadav, & Jaswal, 2020), whereas the integration principles for
real-world objects necessitate top-down attention capacity (Gronau & Shachar, 2014).
Neuroimaging studies have also provided evidence supporting the idea that integration
principles for simple and complex objects function differently in VWM. Luria and
Vogel (2014) examined the common fate principle of simple colors using contralateral
delayed activity (CDA), an ERP component sensitive to the number of objects
maintained in the VWM (Luria, Balaban, Awh, & Vogel, 2016). In the four-to-two
condition trials, four colored squares moved in separate directions before they met.
The small one overlapped the large one, and the two pairwise combinations
continuously moved together until they disappeared. They found no significant
difference between the CDA amplitude for this condition in the maintenance phase
and for two colored squares moving independently throughout the memory array,
thereby indicating that the common fate principle benefited from the online
integration of simple colored squares. However, a colored square is only a single-
dimensional feature. When the memory material consists of multidimensional objects
or features, online integration can be very difficult. Balaban and Luria (2016) also
investigated the possibility of online integration of a colored square and a tilted bar,
using a similar procedure to that used in Luria and Vogel (2014). They did not find the
integration of the multi-dimensional features during the maintenance process because
the CDA was higher for the four-to-two condition than for the two-object condition.
Moreover, notwithstanding the use of simple stimuli (Pac-man), Zhang and Du (2022)
noticed that the obviously perceptive similarity principle could enhance VWM
performance, whereas the relatively complex proximity principle could not in
sequential presentation tasks. Taken together, the findings indicate that the utilization
of integration principles in a sequential presentation depends partly on the complexity
of the stimuli and principles. In our study, the real-world objects were far more
sophisticated than the colored squares and multi-feature conjunctions used in previous
studies, and spatial regularity was also not as obvious as the similarity Gestalt
principle. Therefore, we can propose the reasonable assumption that the participants
were unable to integrate real-world objects easily during the maintenance process.
A natural question that arises is why the rate of failure of online integration might
increase as the complexity of memory objects and integration principles escalate. The
Gestalt principle essentially works automatically, whereas the employment of spatial
regularity demands comparisons between perceptual or VWM representations and
prototypes in long-term memory. One possibility is that the VWM is actually unable
to allocate enough resources to spatial regularity during the memory process, and the
stimuli are actually integrated during the perception process. In other words, VWM
limitations could have caused integration failures in both the maintenance phase and
the working memory encoding phase, but the participants integrated the
simultaneously presented object pairs once they saw them. Therefore, perceptual
encoding provided pairs of integrated objects to the VWM system. However, our
study did not test this hypothesis. Moreover, perceptual encoding and working
memory encoding usually entwine tightly in VWM tasks and daily life; therefore,
distinguishing them seems less urgent.
Furthermore, the inevitable increase in eye movements in sequential presentation trials
might impede online spatial integration. Sequential presentation and vertical object
configuration cause more passive eye movements (Burke, Allen, & Gonzalez, 2012),
which could disrupt the configural process because spatial representations have to be
updated with each movement to maintain perceptual stability (Martin et al., 2017).
The results of Experiment 4 indicated that eye movements had no positive impact on
the integration of real-world object pairs; however, we could not exclude a negative
impact, and the increased eye movements might have been the reason why the spatial
regularity effect disappeared in the sequential presentation. For example, participants
moved their eyes more during sequential presentation than they did during the
encoding phase when all the information needs to be parsed at once. As a result, they
may have more often foveated the top and bottom objects separately when they were
presented one by one rather than fixating them as a pair when they were presented
alongside. This may have cancelled out visual field-specific regularity effects.
However, Gao et al. (2016) also used a sequential presentation design similar to the
one we used in our experiment, and they observed the online integration of simple
stimuli. Therefore, inevitable eye movements during VWM maintenance caused by
sequential presentation settings may not hinder the stimulus-driven integration of
simple items but will interfere with top-down online integration using the spatial
regularity of real-world objects. This study has provided sufficient evidence regarding
an individual’s inability to perform online integration of real-world objects based on
their spatial regularity; therefore, future studies should use eye-tracking techniques to
further investigate the mechanisms underlying the failure of this online integration of
real-world objects.
Our study has some limitations. We still could not directly observe the subprocesses of
VWM that are influenced by the spatial regularity of real-world objects. Future studies
should use event-related potentials (e.g., CDA components) to visualize the specific
VWM process that is influenced by spatial regularity. In addition, since we only used
static pictures of real-world objects, we were unable to examine the dynamic
properties of moving objects within the VWM. Previous studies have investigated
integration within VWM through dynamic demonstrations of the integration of
separate objects, and CDA has been used to reflect this active process (Balaban &
Luria, 2016; Luria & Vogel, 2014). However, most of the findings were still
constrained to the domain of simple stimuli. Future studies should pay attention to the
dynamic properties of VWM in relation to real-world objects.
In conclusion, we found no spatial regularity effect in sequential presentation trials,
regardless of memory load, indicating that individuals do not perform the online
integration of real-world object pairs. Our results support the encoding specificity
hypothesis rather than the perception-alike hypothesis.
Data Availability
The datasets generated/analyzed during this study have been added to