Movement tracking of psychological processes: A tutorial using
mousetrap
ff∗,1,2 ∗,3 3,4 5,6
Dirk U. Wul , Pascal J. Kieslich , Felix Henninger , Jonas M. B. Haslbeck , and Michael
1,7
Schulte-Mecklenbeck
Authors contributed equally
Max Planck Institute for Human Development
University of Basel
University of Mannheim
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich
University of Amsterdam
University of Maastricht
University of Bern
Movement tracking is a novel process-tracing method that promises unique access to the tem-
poral dynamics of psychological processes. The method involves high-resolution tracking of a
hand or handheld device (e.g., a computer mouse) while it is used to make a choice. In contrast
to other process-tracing methods, which mostly focus on information acquisition, movement
tracking focuses on the processes of information integration and preference formation. In this
article, we present a tutorial to movement tracking of psychological processes with the mouse-
trap R package. We address all steps of the research process, from design to interpretation,
with a particular focus on data processing and analysis and featuring both established and
novel approaches. Using a representative working example, we demonstrate how the various
steps of movement-tracking analysis can be implemented with mousetrap and provide thor-
ough explanations of their theoretical background and interpretation. Finally, we present a
list of recommendations to assist researchers in addressing their own research questions using
movement tracking of psychological processes.
Keywords: movement tracking, process tracing, cognitive processes, decision making
Movement tracking is a novel technique aimed at tracking separated options. The result is a sequence of coordinates
the temporal development of psychological processes. The representing the movement’s spatiotemporal development, a
technique involves tracking reaching movements of the hand movement trajectory that is assumed to reflect the psycholog-
using video cameras or movable devices (e.g., a computer ical processes that gave rise to the choice. Movement track-
mouse) while people choose between two or more spatially ing is being widely employed in investigations of attention
(e.g., Frisch et al., 2015; Miles & Proctor, 2015), decision
making (e.g., Koop & Johnson, 2013; Tabatabaeian et al.,
2015), language (Blazej & Cohen-Goldberg, 2015; Spivey et
ff // /
Dirk U. Wul https: orcid.org 0000-0002-4008-8022
al., 2005), memory (Abney et al., 2015; Papesh & Goldinger,
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed
2012), numerical cognition (e.g., Faulkenberry & Rey, 2014;
ff
to Dirk U. Wul , Department of Psychology, University of
Ganor-Stern & Goldman, 2015), perception (e.g., Grosjean
Basel, Missionsstrasse 60-62, 4055 Basel, Switzerland. E-mail:
et al., 2012; van Vugt & Cavanagh, 2012), social cognition
ff
dirk.wul @gmail.com
(e.g., Freeman et al., 2013; Martens et al., 2012), and clini-
We are grateful to Laura Wiles for editing the manuscript.
This work was supported by a grant from the Swiss Science cal psychology (Hepp et al., 2021). There are several excel-
ff
Foundation (100015_197315) to Dirk U. Wul . Pascal J. Kies- lent reviews summarizing this literature (Dotan et al., 2019;
lich and Felix Henninger were supported through a grant by the
Faulkenberry et al., 2018; Freeman, 2018; Kieslich et al.,
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun-
2019; Lopez et al., 2018; Stillerman & Freeman, 2019; Still-
dation) [KR2211 5-1] to Frauke Kreuter. Jonas M. B. Haslbeck ff
man et al., 2018; Tian & Wu, 2019; Wul et al., 2019).
was supported by the gravitation project ‘New Science of Mental
and the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (NWO
movement-tracking methodologies can be used to study psy-
gravitation grant number 024.004.016).
chological processes. We address the entire research pro-
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
cess, from implementing movement tracking to collecting, working example.
processing, and analyzing movement trajectories. We dis- As with other process-tracing techniques, the usefulness
cuss the advantages and disadvantages of various analysis ap- of movement tracking rests on key assumptions about the
proaches, provide practical recommendations for prospective mapping of the cognitive process onto the recorded process
users, and discuss unresolved theoretical questions in move- data, that is, the movement trajectory. The central assump-
ment tracking. tion is that the current state of preference—with regard to the
Throughout the article, we showcase the analysis of available options—influences aspects of the movement, such
movement trajectories using our mousetrap package, cur- as its angle or speed. Support for this assumption comes from
rently the most comprehensive analysis package available neuropsychological studies that have revealed close neuronal
for movement tracking . Built on the R programming lan- links between ongoing cognitive processes and motor output
guage (R Core Team, 2020), mousetrap supports all steps (Cisek & Kalaska, 2005; Gold & Shadlen, 2001), which sug-
ff
of movement-tracking data analysis, including raw data im- gest that the development of preference formation can a ect
port from a wide array of formats; various algorithms for the ongoing motor output as a choice is executed. How ex-
processing, analyzing, and visualizing movement trajecto- actly the processes of preference formation impact the move-
ries; and novel methodology for classifying movement tra- ment, however, is still an open question. Early applications
ff
jectories types (Wul et al., 2019). Where available, we of movement tracking worked under the assumption of a
also point to other, complementary tools. Reproducible code fully continuous mapping, where a continuous evidence ac-
for all analyses and figures presented in our tutorial can cumulation process (Bogacz et al., 2006; Busemeyer et al.,
// /
be accessed at https: pascalkieslich.github.io mousetrap- 2019; Lamberts, 2000) would directly control either the po-
resources mousetrap_tutorial.html. sition or the angle of movement throughout the movement
Our article is structured as follows. First, we discuss (Spivey et al., 2005). Recent results, however, point towards
the promise of movement tracking for psychological re- a more discrete mapping, where the cognitive process influ-
search, describe a representative movement-tracking study ences movement intermittently during the decision process
ff
that serves as our working example throughout this article, (Wul et al., 2019). We will revisit the issue of assumptions
and provide an overview of the elements of mousetrap. In at the end of this tutorial.
the two major sections that follow, we provide a detailed Crucially, the usefulness of movement tracking as a
introduction to movement-tracking processing and analysis. process-tracing method only depends on there being a link
Finally, we discuss practical and theoretical issues that re- between cognitive process and movement, not whether the
searchers should consider when designing and interpreting mapping is continuous or discrete. In either scenario, move-
movement-tracking studies and provide recommendations to ment tracking provides valuable information on the develop-
guide future movement-tracking research. ment of the preference-formation process, which can be used
in at least three ways. First, the trajectory of the movement
The Promise of Movement Tracking can shed light on the relative strength of preference for the
options, or, in other words, the degree of choice competition.
Movement tracking promises unique insights into psycho-
Second, the movement trajectory can be used to identify the
logical processes. Traditional process-tracing techniques,
time point at which the preference-formation process com-
such as eye tracking (Russo, 2019), Mouselab (Willemsen
mits to a particular option, and in some cases the order of
& Johnson, 2019), and Flashlight (Schulte-Mecklenbeck &
commitments, including the detection of changes of mind
Huber, 2003), closely track the processes of information ac-
ff
(Wul et al., 2019). Third, by varying features of the in-
quisition but only indirectly shed light on the processes of
dividual choice problems, movement trajectories can reveal
information integration and preference formation (see also
at what point these features are considered during preference
ff
Schulte-Mecklenbeck et al., 2017; Wul & Hertwig, 2019).
formation (e.g., Sullivan et al., 2015).
Although movement tracking can be employed to track in-
The potential of movement tracking to reveal the cogni-
formation acquisition, its main purpose is to overcome the
tive process has been exploited in various domains of psy-
limitation of other process techniques by directly reveal-
chology and cognitive science. This research has relied pri-
ing the process of preference formation. Movement track-
marily on a particular type of setup involving a forced choice
ing achieves this in two ways: first, by designing choice
between two options, with the options varying as a function
tasks such that there are minimal requirements for informa-
of the research domain and question. These options can be
tion acquisition, implying that behavior is governed by the
anything, but have often been pairs of words (e.g., Dale
processes of information integration and preference forma-
et al., 2007), images (e.g., Sullivan et al., 2015), numbers
tion; and second, by recruiting a temporal resolution that
(e.g., Faulkenberry et al., 2018), or more complex decision
is considerably higher than in other process-tracing meth-
ods (Schulte-Mecklenbeck et al., 2017). We discuss these 1For detailed documentation on mousetrap, visit
// / /
two components in the next section, when we introduce our http: pascalkieslich.github.io mousetrap
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
problems such as social dilemmas (e.g., Kieslich & Hilbig,
Mammal Fish
2014). Movement tracking is, however, not limited to two-
alternative, forced-choice settings and has been generalized
successfully to settings with more than two options (e.g., 250
Koop & Johnson, 2011; Moher & Song, 2014), responses in
surveys and questionnaires (Fernández-Fontelo et al., 2021;
Horwitz et al., 2017; McKinstry et al., 2008), and senso-
rimotor localization experiments (Fuchs et al., 2020). We
now turn to an early mouse-tracking study that serves as the
−250
working example throughout this tutorial. It follows the two-
Whale
alternative, forced-choice paradigm.
−500
Tracking Semantic Categorization: A Working Example −500 0 500
As our working example throughout this article, we use Illustration of the animal categorization task showing three
a replication of an early mouse-tracking study by Dale et al. exemplary mouse movement trajectories for a trial involv-
(2007), who sought to use movement tracking to uncover the ing the categorization of “Whale” as either “Mammal” or
temporal dynamics of semantic categorization. To achieve “Fish.” Axis units are pixels.
this, they designed a task that required participants to select
the correct taxonomic class of animals that varied in their
typicality for their respective class. For instance, participants
& Henninger, 2017) for mouse tracking.
would be presented with the word “whale” and then asked to
classify it as either “fish” or “mammal,” which would con-
The mousetrap Suite
stitute an atypical trial, as “whale” is atypical for the correct
category “mammal.” They hypothesized that the typicality of In this tutorial we showcase all key functions of the
an animal for its true category should influence the psycho- mousetrap R package, which is part of the mousetrap
made visible by tracking the movement executing the choice. ther includes mousetrap-OS (Kieslich & Henninger, 2017)
This hypothesis was based on the assumption that atypical and mousetrap-web (Henninger & Kieslich, in press), two
trials, compared to typical trials, introduce a higher level of software solutions for implementing movement-tracking
response competition that should pull trajectories in atypi- studies for the Python-based experiment builder OpenS-
cal trials more strongly to the nonchosen option compared to esame (Mathôt et al., 2012) and the JavaScript-based on-
trajectories in typical trials. line experiment builder lab.js (Henninger et al., 2021),
To test whether the typicality of words influenced the respectively. More information about these companion
psychological process in the hypothesized way, Dale et al. solutions, including software templates, is available at
// / /
(2007) employed a procedure that has become a standard for https: pascalkieslich.github.io mousetrap-resources .
movement-tracking studies: Participants in front of a com- The functions of the mousetrap R package can be grouped
puter screen initiated a trial by clicking a start button at the into functions for processing and for analyzing movement-
bottom center of the screen. The click triggered the display tracking data. The processing functions cover all steps from
of the critical piece of information (i.e., the animal word) to the raw data to a ready-for-analysis mousetrap object class:
select one of two response options (i.e., animal categories) reading in the data from one of many supported data types,
located at the top left and right corners of the screen, respec- including those exported from OpenSesame and Mouse-
teristic movement trajectories from our replication study. tion to implement movement-tracking studies using the com-
For the purpose of this tutorial, we replicated this study puter mouse); importing into the mousetrap object class; and
design (Kieslich & Henninger, 2017) on 60 individuals us- aligning, resampling, and cleaning trajectory data. Analy-
ing the same 19 stimuli used by Dale et al. (2007) (trans- sis functions then provide access to a number of analytic
lated into German; additional details regarding the ex- approaches, ranging from the analysis of simple trajectory
perimental procedure and sample can be found in Kies- summaries (e.g., curvature or initiation time) to advanced
lich & Henninger, 2017). The raw data are available at approaches focusing on trajectory types and the analysis of
// / /
https: pascalkieslich.github.io mousetrap-resources and are temporal dynamics.
also included in the mousetrap R package. The study The next two sections present, in turn, the two classes
was implemented using the OpenSesame experiment builder of mousetrap functions for processing and analyzing
(Mathôt et al., 2012) and the mousetrap-os plugin (Kieslich movement-tracking data, while also delivering necessary the-
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
Implementation Processing Analysis
read_mt mt_derivatives
mousetrap-OS
read_opensesame* mt_measures
mousetrap-Web
mr_angles
mt_sample_entropy
mt_import_mousetrap
mt_aggregate
mt_import_long
Tracking device
mt_standardize
mt_import_wide
Device sensitivity
Trial layout
mt_remap_symmetric mt_heatmap
Starting procedure
mt_align_start mt_diffmap
Response mode
mt_align_start_end mr_animate
mt_check_bimodality
mt_length_normalize
mt_time_normalize
mt_resample
mt_cluster
mt_subset
mt_plot
mt_cluster_k
mt_exclude_initiation
mt_plot_aggregate
mt_map
mt_exclude_finish
mt_riverbed
mr_plot
mt_plot_per_trajectory
erawtfoS
ngiseD
daeR
tropmI
egnarrA
elpmaseR
naelC
sepyT
etaluclaC
ssessA
scimanyD
Overview of the mousetrap suite. The first panel lists two mousetrap-related tools, mousetrap-OS and mousetrap-Web, that
can be used to implement movement tracking on local machines or via the Web, respectively. It also lists important design
dimensions discussed in a later section. The second and third panels show the key functions of the mousetrap R package. Note
that the read_opensesame function is imported from the readbulk package.
oretical background as well as reproducible analysis code. empty cells at the end of rows to represent shorter trajecto-
ries. The long data format stores trajectories across rows of a
narrow matrix, with coordinate pairs and trajectories stacked
Processing Movement Trajectories
on top of each other, requiring that an additional identifier
column be added to the data. Both formats are used in the
The first step of working with movement-tracking data is
analysis of movement-tracking data; however, a wide data
to prepare the data for analysis. Similar to other process-
representation is often preferred. This is due to the fact that
tracing techniques, preparing movement-tracking data can
trajectories are typically resampled before analysis, resulting
involve several steps and decisions that can be critical for
in a common number of data points for each trajectory and
the results of an analysis. In this section, we discuss reading
rendering the wide format more economical than the long
in and importing movement-tracking data, adjusting the tra-
format (see section Resampling Trajectories).
jectories’ spatial layout, and resampling the trajectory data.
Importing Data Using mousetrap
Importing Movement Data
Processing movement-tracking data with mousetrap first
Movement tracking records the x,y (and potentially z) co- requires that the raw data is read into R using one of
ordinates of the hand or a recording device at fixed inter- many available functions for generic data formats (see,
vals. As these intervals are typically very short (e.g., 10 ms), e.g., the rio package, which bundles functions for import-
movement-tracking datasets are often large, with up to sev- ing many common file formats) or specialized functions
eral thousand coordinate pairs (or tuples) per trajectory, for such as mousetrap’s read_mt for MouseTracker files or
each of potentially hundreds of trajectories per individual. readbulk’s read_opensesame for mousetrap-os generated
Furthermore, movement trajectories typically vary in length OpenSesame files. The next step is to import the data into the
ff
due to di erences in decision time, rendering the import and mousetrap object class using one of several functions named
storage more complex than in traditional experiments. For mt_import_*, where * is a wildcard that can be either long
instance, in our working example, there are 19 trajectories or wide depending on the format of the raw data. For data
for each of 60 participants that are between 72 and 2,159 that has been collected using mousetrap-os, there is also a
observations long. dedicated mt_import_mousetrap function.
Trajectory data is usually stored in one of two formats. The mousetrap object initially consists of a list of two ele-
The wide data format represents trajectories horizontally ments. The first element is a data frame called data with one
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
made by Dale et al. (2007), the chunk first eliminates trials
with incorrect answers using the subset function and then
imports the data using mt_import_mousetrap, respecting
the fact that the working example data has been collected
using the OpenSesame plugin.
# 1) Load mousetrap ------
library(mousetrap)
# 2) CSV raw data ------
The two core elements of the mousetrap object. The rectan-
# Read raw data
gle on the left hand side represents the data element of the
library(readr)
mousetrap object, the rectangles on the right-hand side the
mt_data_raw <- read_csv("raw_data.csv")
trajectories element.
# Import wide data into mousetrap
mt_data <- mt_import_wide(mt_data_raw)
jectory. In our working example, this includes the variables
# Import long data into mousetrap
subject_nr, identifying the participant; Condition, cod-
mt_data <- mt_import_long(
ing whether the animal is typical or atypical; correct, cod-
mt_data_raw, mt_id_label = "mt_id")
ing whether the choice was correct; and mt_id, a unique trial
identifier added by mousetrap that is also used for the row
# 3) mousetrap-os raw data ------
names of data. The second element is a three-dimensional
array called trajectories containing the trajectory data in
# Read and combine mousetrap-os files
a wide format. The array’s first dimension distinguishes the
ff # in folder "raw_data"
N di erent trajectories, the second dimension distinguishes
library(readbulk)
the up to M points on the trajectories, and the third dimension
mt_data_raw <- read_opensesame("raw_data")
distinguishes the trajectory features, which initially are time
stamps (timestamps), x-positions (xpos), and y-positions
# Import data into mousetrap
(ypos). To enable matching of trajectories between the two
mt_data <- mt_import_mousetrap(mt_data_raw)
elements, the first dimension of trajectories is named ac-
# 4) Internal package raw data ------
illustration.
ff
The code below shows how trajectory data from di er-
# Exclude incorrectly answered trials
ent file types can be read in and imported into mousetrap.
KH2017_raw <-
The first chunk loads the mousetrap library, which is neces-
subset(KH2017_raw, correct == 1)
sary to be able to run all further processing and analyses.
The second chunk reads in data from a standard comma-
# Import data into mousetrap
separated file (CSV) and then imports the data using ei-
mt_data <- mt_import_mousetrap(KH2017_raw)
ther mt_import_wide or mt_import_long depending on
the format of the raw data. Note that if the raw data has a
Transforming Movement Trajectories
long format, the mt_id_label argument must be specified
to provide the names of the variables that uniquely identify The analysis of movement-tracking data typically requires
each trajectory. The third chunk makes use of readbulk’s that trajectories are transformed to render them more compa-
read_opensesame function to read in multiple mousetrap- rable to one another. The two most common transformation
os CSV files from a folder and then imports them with the steps, which we turn to now, are adjusting the trajectories’
dedicated mt_import_mousetrap function. spatial arrangement and resampling and interpolating trajec-
tories.
Unlike the first three chunks, the fourth chunk shows the
creation of the data object used throughout this tutorial. It
Adjusting the Trajectories’ Spatial Arrangement
makes use of the KH2017_raw object included in the mouse-
trap package, which contains the complete raw data of our Movement-tracking setups invariably produce trajectories
ff
working example. Consistent with the analytics choices that di er in starting position, end position, or both. In
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
many studies, including our working example, trajectories normalization and length normalization.
that started in a common area at the bottom center of the Time normalization (e.g., Spivey et al., 2005) interpo-
screen end in either the upper left or upper right corner, lates trajectories such that they are represented by exactly the
where the response buttons for the two options are located same number of temporally equidistant data points (see Fig-
of concern (for an exception, see section Temporal Analyses), following early work by Spivey et al. (2005), who first intro-
given that response options are typically counterbalanced be- duced this resampling method. This number of points may
ff ff ffi
tween locations, but having trajectories end in di erent loca- represent a reasonable trade-o between retaining su cient
ffi
tions greatly impedes comparability. A frequent first step in detail and enabling e cient processing; however, other num-
processing movement trajectories is therefore to remap tra- bers of points may be justified depending on the length and
jectories such that all trajectories end (or start) in the same complexity of trajectories. Time normalization is recruited
location. In the case of our working example, this means in many analyses of movement trajectories, but is especially
A typical second step is to account for any small varia- ries (see section Temporal Evolution of the Trajectory).
tions in start or end positions, which result from participants Length normalization interpolates the trajectory into the
ff
clicking slightly di erent locations within the start and re- same number of spatially equidistant data points or, in other
sponse buttons (e.g., Dale et al., 2007). Aligning is achieved words, N-1 equally long movement segments. Compared to
by shifting the trajectories to the average start or end posi- time normalization, in which the beginning and end of a tra-
tion or to a specific start or end position. Most commonly, jectory are usually represented with higher resolution due to
trajectories are aligned by setting the start position to [0,0], lower movement velocity, length normalization distributes
which has the added benefit that the trajectory coordinates points such that the spatial resolution is constant through-
can be interpreted as distances relative to the start position. out the trial. Length normalization thereby emphasizes the
Trajectories can also be aligned at both start and end posi- shape of the trajectory irrespective of changes of movement
mensions of the trajectory. erty, length normalization is typically used in association
A third, less common, preprocessing step in spatial ar- with type-based approaches to movement-tracking analysis
ff
rangement is projecting trajectories into a new coordinate (Wul et al., 2019, see sections The Bottom-Up Approach to
system. The MouseTracker software (Freeman & Ambady, Trajectory Types and The Top-Down Approach to Trajectory
2010), for example, automatically projects trajectories into a Types).
coordinate system with x-values ranging from -1 to 1 and y- Finally, there is a third resampling method called neu-
values ranging from 0 to 1.5, with the point [0,0] as the start tral resampling, which interpolates the trajectories such that
position. Such transformations can assist the interpretability timestamps are equidistant from each other. Neutral resam-
of trajectories, as well as comparability across studies. How- pling can be useful to correct for variability in sampling
ff
ever, mapping trajectories to a new coordinate system a ects rates across trials or computers, which, for instance, is of-
the trajectories’ aspect ratio and, with that, the relative im- ten a problem in web-based movement tracking (Henninger
portance of the trajectories’ dimensions in the results. For & Kieslich, in press).
instance, making a coordinate system narrower emphasizes
the importance of the vertical relative to the horizontal di- Preparing Trajectories Using mousetrap
mension. Moreover, projections usually lose the exact pixel
The mousetrap package provides functions for each of the
information of the experimental setup.
spatial and temporal processing operations discussed above:
mt_remap_symmetric maps trajectories to a common side,
Resampling Trajectories
mt_align_start and mt_align_start_end align trajec-
Due to the fact that movements are typically tracked using tories at the start and or end, mt_time_normalize time-
ff
(more or less) constant sampling rates, trials with di erent normalizes trajectories, and mt_length_normalize length-
ff
durations result in trajectories of di erent lengths. For exam- normalizes trajectories. By default, each of these func-
ple, in a setup with a 100 Hz sampling rate, trials lasting 1 s tions works with the standard trajectories element in the
and 2 s will result in 101 and 201 recorded positions, respec- mousetrap object, containing the raw trajectories. However,
ff
tively. The di erences in the number of points of trajectories via the use argument, the functions can be instructed to use
presents a problem for many analyses that require trajecto- alternative trajectory representations.
ff
ries to be comparable in a point-by-point fashion. To address One point of di erence between processing functions
this, trajectories can be resampled using one of several tech- is how output of the functions is written into the mouse-
niques that make trajectories consist of the same number of trap object. The spatial transformation functions, such
points. The two most common resampling methods are time as mt_remap_symmetric and mt_align_start, over-
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
A B
−250
−500
C D
−250
−500
−500 0 500 −500 0 500
Common trajectory processing steps. Panel A: Three trajectories as they were originally recorded. Panel B: Trajectories all
mapped to the left side and aligned at the start position. Panel C: Trajectories after time normalization. Panel D: Trajectories
after length normalization. Axis units are pixels.
write the standard trajectories element by default, be-
cause such transformations are typically intended to im- # 2) Resample trajectories
pact all further analyses. The resampling functions (i.e.,
mt_time_normalize and mt_length_normalize), on the # Time-normalize trajectories
other hand, create new trajectory arrays in the mousetrap ob- mt_data <- mt_time_normalize(mt_data)
ject by default. This allows users to later decide which trajec-
tory representation to use in a given analysis. Either default # Length-normalize trajectories
can be overruled using the save_as argument, which allows mt_data <- mt_length_normalize(mt_data)
users to specify how any of the processing functions store
their results within the mousetrap object.
Filtering Movement Trajectories
The code chunks below show how to prepare trajectory
data using mousetrap. The first chunk remaps all trajecto-
A key requirement in movement tracking is that the pro-
ries to the left-hand side (default) and then aligns the trajec-
cess of interest is appropriately reflected in all movement tra-
tories’ start positions at the point [0,0]. The second chunk
jectories used in the analysis. While it is not always clear
then adds new, resampled trajectory representations to the
how to best achieve this, several proposals have been made
mousetrap object, which will be stored as new elements.
that at least eliminate the trajectories that likely do not re-
Specifically, the mt_time_normalize function adds the
flect the process of interest. First, studies involving factually
tn_trajectories element containing time-normalized tra-
correct responses can consider removing trials representing
jectories, and the mt_length_normalize function adds the
an erroneous response (e.g., Scherbaum et al., 2010; Spivey
ln_trajectories element containing length-normalized
et al., 2005). The argument for excluding these trajectories is
trajectories.
ff
that such trials must have resulted from a di erent, irrelevant
# 1) Adjust the trajectories’ spatial arrangement cognitive process. However, this reasoning may only be valid
in easy tasks, such as the categorization task in our working
# Remap all trajectories to the left example, where erroneous responses (6.7%) likely resulted
mt_data <- mt_remap_symmetric(mt_data) from lapses of attention or faulty movement execution.
Second, studies imposing strict requirements for move-
# Align trajectories to common start ment times (see section The Role of Study Design), can con-
mt_data <- mt_align_start( sider removing trials exceeding these limits. In the case of
mt_data, start = c(0,0)) movement initiation, the argument for exclusion is that par-
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
fied variables are assumed to be columns in data); however,
other elements can be specified via the check argument.
The code chunks below show trajectory filtering using
mousetrap. The first chunk selects trials where the column
correct in data has value 1 in order to only retain trials
with correct responses. The second chunk maps trajectories
to the standard prototypes (see section The Top-Down Ap-
proach to Trajectory Types). It then uses mt_standardize
to determine the standardized distance of a trajectory from
its closest prototype. Finally, it uses mt_plot to visualize
anomalous trajectories ( 2 SD) and mt_subset to remove
these cases. The third chunk uses mt_subset to remove in-
dividual trajectories (identified, e.g., through manual inspec-
tion) based on their ID.
Outlier detection via prototyping. The 34 trajectories from
# 1) Filter incorrect responses ------
our working example that deviated more than two standard
deviations from the respective closest trajectory prototype
# Only keep correctly answered trials
are in blue. Axis units are pixels.
mt_data <- mt_subset(mt_data, correct == 1)
# 2) Prototype filtering ------
ticipants might have completed most or all of the decision
process before the movement was initiated. Indeed, evi-
# Prototype mapping
dence suggests that long initiation times are associated with
mt_data <- mt_map(mt_data)
more straight, ballistic movement towards one of the options,
likely reflecting only the outcome of the cognitive process
# Determine standardized distance
rather than its development (Grage et al., 2019). Studies
# to nearest prototype
ff
have used various cuto s ranging from 300 ms (e.g., Dshe-
mt_data <- mt_standardize(mt_data,
muchadse et al., 2013) to 750 ms (e.g., Martens et al., 2012).
use = "prototyping",
A similar argument has been made for total response time,
use_variables = "min_dist")
with studies excluding trials exceeding a total response time
ff
limit; previously used cuto s ranged from 2 s (e.g., Quétard
# Visualize anomalous trajectories
et al., 2015) to 8 s (e.g., Martens et al., 2012).
mt_plot(mt_data,
Finally, studies can consider removing trials that produce
use2 = "prototyping",
otherwise anomalous trajectories. For instance, Freeman et
subset = z_min_dist > 2,
al. (2008) removed movements involving “erratic output pro-
wrap_var = "mt_id")
ducing uninterpretable looping cycling leftward and right-
ward” (p. 677). No precise criteria exist for defining anoma-
# Exclude anomalous trajectories
lous trajectories, and most studies have relied on human
mt_data <- mt_subset(mt_data,
judgment based on intuition and common sense. An alter-
z_min_dist <= 2,
native route to defining and identifying anomalous trajecto-
check = "prototyping")
ries exists in analyzing trajectory similarities, as anomalous
trajectories should, by definition, exhibit low similarity to
# 3) Filter individual trajectories ------
potentially anomalous trajectories in our working example
# Exclude trajectories by id
identified by comparing the trajectory’s similarity to a set of
mt_data <- mt_subset(mt_data,
trajectory prototypes (see section The Top-Down Approach
!mt_id %in% c("id0426","id0588"))
to Trajectory Types).
Analyzing Movement Trajectories
Trajectory Filtering With mousetrap
Movement tracking produces rich data that, once pro-
The mousetrap package provides functions for trajectory cessed, is amenable to a large set of analysis approaches.
filtering. The mt_subset function selects trials via log- In this section, we discuss three central approaches to
ical comparisons, which by default are interpreted within movement-tracking analysis. We first discuss trajectory in-
ff
the scope of the mousetrap data element (i.e., the speci- dices that summarize di erent characteristics of movement
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
trajectories. The trajectory index approach is still the dom- Single-point measures are often easier to interpret, as the sin-
inant one in psychological research; however, there are ad- gle point of, for instance, maximum deviation clearly indi-
vanced approaches that aim to harness more of the rich in- cates how strongly a movement has been pulled to the non-
formation contained in movement-trajectory data. Two of chosen option. Integrative measures are possibly less easy
these approaches are analyses of the trajectories’ develop- to interpret, as they integrate curvature across many points,
ment across time and the more novel type-based analysis of of which some (e.g., the start and end of the trajectory) may
the trajectories’ spatial distribution. be less influenced by response competition. On the other
hand, they use more data than single-point measures and
might therefore be more representative of the movement as a
Trajectory Indices
whole. Overall, it is important to note that curvature indices
Trajectory indices are trial-level summaries of primarily have been proposed with a two-dimensional, two-option sce-
three distinct characteristics of movement trajectories: curva- nario in mind, similar to the one in our working example;
ture, temporal development, and spatiotemporal complexity. nevertheless, it should be straightforward to generalize them
Trajectory indices often serve as the key dependent variables to more complex scenarios.
ff
in studies aiming to test the e ect of an experimental manip-
ulation. One such example is the original study behind our
Complexity Indices
working example. To show that movements in atypical tri-
als are pulled more strongly to the nonchosen option than in
typical trials, Dale et al. (2007) relied on trajectories indices.
Complexity indices aim to measure a trajectory’s spa-
In the next sections, we discuss each type of trajectory in-
tiotemporal degree of disorder (Hehman et al., 2015). Three
dices individually before turning to their commonalities and
complexity indices are commonly recruited in the literature.
ff
di erences.
The most frequently employed index is the number of flips,
directional changes along the axis of interest, typically the
Curvature Indices
horizontal axis (Freeman & Ambady, 2010). Similar to flips,
reversals measure the number of times a trajectory crosses
Curvature indices aim to measure how strongly a trajec-
the midline between options (Koop & Johnson, 2013). A
tory is bent towards a nonchosen option. Curvature is com-
ff
somewhat di erent index is sample entropy, which measures
monly defined in reference to an idealized movement tra-
the level of spatiotemporal disorder of a dimension of interest
jectory that directly connects the start and end points of the
(Dale et al., 2007; Hehman et al., 2015). Sample entropy,
observed trajectory through a straight line (e.g., Freeman &
which is often employed in time-series analysis, achieves
Ambady, 2010; Spivey et al., 2005). Relative to this line,
this by quantifying temporal self-similarity (see Yentes et al.,
curvature is quantified as the perpendicular distance of either
2013, for details).
a single or all points on the trajectory.
Like trajectory curvature, complexity is thought to reflect
Two single-point measures are maximum absolute devi-
response competition. The argument is that response com-
ation (MAD) and maximum deviation above the ideal tra-
petition not only changes the path of the movement but also
jectory MD . MAD is the more commonly employed
above
its complexity. For instance, Freeman and Ambady (2010)
measure of the two. It is defined as the signed maximum
posited: “if both response alternatives simultaneously attract
absolute distance of the observed trajectory from the straight
participants’ mouse trajectories (relative to only one), this
line (in either direction), where the sign indicates whether
additional stress might manifest as less smooth, more com-
the distance is toward (positive) or away from (negative)
plex, and fluctuating trajectories” (p. 230). Consistent with
the alternative. MD , by contrast, only considers devi-
above
this view, manipulations of conflict tend to also produce dif-
ations in the direction of the nonchosen alternative (Kieslich
ferences in complexity indices, with higher conflict being as-
& Hilbig, 2014). Two integrative measures are the average
sociated with higher complexity (Dale et al., 2007; Koop &
deviation (AD) and the area under curve (AUC). AD is de-
Johnson, 2013; McKinstry et al., 2008).
fined as the arithmetic mean of all signed pointwise devia-
tions between the trajectory and the ideal trajectory (Koop
& Johnson, 2013), whereas AUC is typically defined as the
2Also referred to as maximum deviation (MD) in previous stud-
area between the observed and idealized trajectories, with
ies (e.g., Freeman & Ambady, 2010; McKinstry et al., 2008)
areas below the idealized trajectory being subtracted rather
ff
3Note that di erent implementations of AUC can produce dif-
than added (e.g., Freeman & Ambady, 2010; Spivey et al.,
ferent results.
2005) .
4Instead of counting every directional change as a flip, some
All curvature indices are thought of as a direct measure
studies specify a minimum distance that needs to be covered so that
of response competition, but they vary slightly in how they
a change in direction is counted as flip. This method is implemented
may capture competition and how easily they are interpreted. in mt_measures.
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
ffi
Temporal Indices equated with degree of competition or di culty (Cheng &
González-Vallejo, 2018).
Temporal indices aim to measure the temporal develop-
Notwithstanding these claims, empirical results typically
ment of the movement. There are two sets of temporal in-
suggest a high degree of overlap both within and between tra-
dices. The first set of indices decomposes the overall re-
jectory index classes. Using the data of our working exam-
sponse time (i.e., the time between the trial onset and the
ple, for instance, we observed correlations among curvature
choice) into two components: movement time, defined as the
= =
indices between r .79 (AUC x AD) and r .99 (MAD x
time during which the movement is ongoing, and idle time,
MD ), among complexity indices between r .49 (flips
above
defined as the total time during which there is no movement
x sample entropy) and r .69 (flips x reversals), and among
(Cheng & González-Vallejo, 2018). Idle time is sometimes
temporal indices, excluding initiation time, between r .43
decomposed further into initiation time, defined as the idle
(motor pauses x movement) and r .92 (response time x mo-
time prior to the first onset of movement (Dale et al., 2007;
Faulkenberry et al., 2015; Freeman & Ambady, 2010), and
tial correlations between curvature and complexity (mean
motor pauses, defined as the remaining idle time after move-
r .50), curvature and temporal indices excluding initiation
ment initiation (Calcagnì et al., 2017). The second set of
time (mean r .26), and complexity and temporal indices
temporal indices summarizes the velocity and acceleration
excluding initiation time (mean r .37). These correlations
profiles of the movement, such as maximum velocity or max-
show a high to very high degree of overlap within indices of
imum acceleration (Koop & Johnson, 2013).
the same class, as well as substantial correlations between
In contrast to curvature and complexity indices, the inter-
them. Only initiation time deviated from this pattern—likely
pretation of temporal indices is less uniform and overall less
due to the compensatory relationship with movement time
clear. For instance, initiation time, which has received more
discussed in section Temporal Indices—showing small neg-
attention in the literature, has been interpreted as a signal
ative correlations ranging from r −.11 (initiation time x
of response competition (e.g., Dale et al., 2007). However,
motor pauses) to r −.21 (initiation time x sample entropy)
results concerning the relationship between response com-
with all indices, except overall response time, which includes
petition and initiation time have been mixed. Recent inves-
initiation time.
tigations point to study design as a potential moderator of
The intercorrelations between trajectory indices imply
the interpretation of initiation time and possibly other tem-
that their true dimensionality is much lower than the number
poral indices. In particular, designs that imposed time lim-
of available indices. This is further supported by a principle-
its on movement initiation (e.g., Faulkenberry et al., 2015)
component analysis on the trajectory indices in our working
have found initiation time to be less sensitive to competition
example (excluding response time, to avoid a rank-deficient
than designs without time limits (e.g., Incera & McLennan,
correlation matrix) revealing that 53% of variance can be ex-
2016). For initiation time to capture competition, it might
plained using a single component, and 92% using five com-
ffi
thus be necessary to provide individuals with su cient op-
ponents. Moreover, analyzing the indices’ sensitivity to the
portunity to initiate movement on their own terms. Con-
sequently, the information carried by temporal indices can
6B), we observed that all indices showed considerable sen-
hinge on the characteristics of the study design (Fischer &
sitivity, with Cohen’s d values ranging from .26 (initiation
Hartmann, 2014; Wirth et al., 2020).
time) to .60 (AD). The fact that all indices are sensitive to re-
ff sponse competition can in part be explained by their tremen-
Commonalities and Di erences Between Trajectory Indices
dous overlap. However, the overlap between indices is not
Although trajectory indices have almost all been linked to
ff
perfect, leaving some room for psychological di erentiation.
ff
response competition, there are proposals aimed at di eren-
tiating the mapping between trajectory index and psycholog-
Analyzing Trial-Level Indices Using mousetrap
ical process. For instance, Freeman and Ambady (2010) sug-
gested that single-point and integrative indices of curvature The mousetrap package includes several functions to com-
may capture maximum and overall response competition, re- pute, analyze, and visualize trajectory indices. Most of
spectively. Furthermore, complexity indices may capture as- the trajectory indices listed above can be calculated using
pects of the psychological process over and beyond those mousetrap’s mt_measures function. By default, it uses the
captured by curvature indices. Koop and Johnson (2013), for trajectories element; however, as in other functions, dif-
instance, distinguished momentary valence (i.e., the current, ferent trajectory elements can be specified via the use argu-
continuous evaluation of each option) from absolute prefer- ment. The computed measures are stored in a new element
ence (i.e., the option with the higher valence) and associ- called measures. Additional measures of velocity and ac-
ated changes in momentary valence with flips and changes celeration are calculated when these trajectory characteris-
in absolute preference with reversals. Finally, complexity tics were previously added using mt_derivatives. Finally,
has been equated with wavering, whereas curvature has been sample entropy can be added to measures using a dedicated
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
MAD 0.95 0.95 0.93 0.46 0.66 0.51 0.22 −0.18 0.16 0.47
MD
0.99 0.94 0.91 0.54 0.7 0.55 0.26 −0.21 0.21 0.53
above
AD 0.9 0.91 0.9 0.48 0.66 0.54 0.25 −0.22 0.21 0.51
AUC 0.88 0.87 0.79 0.4 0.61 0.43 0.15 −0.19 0.12 0.38
Flips
0.45 0.47 0.41 0.34 0.7 0.44 0.37 −0.24 0.4 0.51
Reversals
0.65 0.65 0.58 0.52 0.69 0.44 0.29 −0.26 0.3 0.49
Sample entropy
0.53 0.54 0.53 0.39 0.49 0.5 0.28 −0.29 0.19 0.67
RT 0.23 0.24 0.24 0.11 0.35 0.3 0.27 0.19 0.69 0.67
Initiation time
−0.14 −0.13 −0.13 −0.13 −0.2 −0.21 −0.21 0.17 −0.3 −0.23
Motor pauses
0.13 0.14 0.14 0.06 0.29 0.22 0.12 0.92 −0.11 0.46
Movement
0.48 0.5 0.51 0.31 0.54 0.54 0.7 0.64 −0.12 0.43
DAM
DM
evoba
DA
CUA spilF
slasreveR
yportne
elpmaS
TR
emit
noitaitinI
sesuap
rotoM
tnemevoM
A B
Cohen's d
.2 .1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
MAD
MD
above
AD
AUC
Flips
Reversals
Sample entropy
RT
Initiation time
Motor pauses
Movement
Overlap between trajectory indices. Panel A: Pearson (lower triangle) and Spearman (upper triangle) intercorrelations be-
tween the four curvature, three complexity, and four temporal indices discussed in the text for our working example. Panel B:
Indices’ sensitivity to the typicality manipulation of our working example in terms of Cohen’s d. MAD maximum absolute
= = =
deviation; MD maximum deviation above the ideal trajectory; AD average deviation; AUC area under curve; RT
above
response time.
mt_sample_entropy function. fied via the use2_variables and subject_id arguments,
respectively. The aggregated MAD values are then compared
To facilitate statistical comparisons, mousetrap provides
between conditions using the standard paired t test.
two functions for aggregating trajectory indices: The
To carry out analyses at the trial-level, the final chunk be-
mt_aggregate function aggregates trajectory indices within
low first uses R’s standard merge function to join the infor-
condition, whereas the mt_aggregate_per_subject func-
mation contained in the grouping variable(s) in the data el-
tion does so within individuals (and conditions). To com-
ement with the trial-level indices in the measures element
pare trajectory indices between conditions, studies often first
of the mousetrap object. Then it employs the lmer function
aggregate values within individuals per condition and then
of the lme4 package to run a mixed model predicting MAD.
ff
carry out comparisons using o -the-shelf statistical tests.
For a tutorial on mixed models, see Demidenko (2013).
However, it is generally preferable to analyse the disaggre-
gated data on the trial level, while accounting for potential
# 1) Compute trajectory indices ------
heterogeneity between individuals. This approach typically
ff
o ers greater statistical power and permits flexible inclusion
mt_data <- mt_measures(mt_data)
of additional covariates, for instance to account for item ef-
fects. Appropriate models are provided by the lme4 (Bates et
# 2) Subject-level analysis ------
al., 2015), afex (Singmann et al., 2015), and brms (Bürkner,
2017) packages.
# Aggregate MAD for each
The code below illustrates simple analyses based on tra- # condition and participant
jectory indices. The first chunk uses the mt_measures func- agg_data <- mt_aggregate_per_subject(
tion to compute indices. The next chunk carries out a subject- mt_data,
level analysis of the MAD values computed in the previous use_variables = "MAD",
chunk, using the mt_aggregate_per_subject function to use2_variables = "Condition",
aggregate MAD values, specified via the use_variables subject_id = "subject_nr")
argument, per experimental condition and participant, speci-
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
ff
# Compare conditions using t-test tracking as a direct and continuous e ect of temporally un-
t.test(MAD ~ Condition, folding, gradual response competition (Freeman & Ambady,
data = agg_data, 2010; Spivey et al., 2005). The supposed outcome of this
paired = TRUE) view are trajectories that are all homogeneous in shape and
vary only with the respect to the degree of pull to nonchosen
# 3) Trial-level analysis ------ options. However, it is not at all clear whether or when this
view holds and, thus, whether trajectories will necessarily be
ff
# Merge grouping variables with indices distributed in a homogeneous fashion (Wul et al., 2019).
trial_data <- merge(mt_data$data, One alternative scenario to the traditional view on movement
mt_data$measures, tracking is that psychological process and movement trajec-
by = "mt_id") tories map onto each other in a more discrete and intermit-
tent way. For instance, in one of the first movement-tracking
# Compare MADs using linear-mixed model studies, Spivey et al. (2005) considered as a rival hypothesis
# including a random intercept per participant an intermittent process that would give rise to two distinct
library(lme4) types of trajectories: trajectories that, on the basis of a single
lmer(MAD ~ Condition + (1|subject_nr), readout of the psychological process, move directly to the
data = trial_data) chosen option and trajectories that, based on two readouts,
first move all the way to the nonchosen option before revers-
Advanced Mouse- and Hand-Tracking Analyses
ing course towards the eventually chosen option. The result
is a highly heterogeneous distribution of trajectory types.
Despite the widespread use of trajectory indices in the lit-
Trajectory heterogeneity presents a problem for all an-
erature, their ability to unveil the dynamics of psychological
alytic approaches involving the aggregation of trajectory
processes is limited. This has to do with the high correlations
points, including the temporal dynamics approach. The rea-
among indices largely precluding a fine-grained characteri-
son is that in the presence of trajectory homogeneity, ag-
zation of the movement and the underlying processes. But,
gregate trajectories (or aggregate trajectory indices) are not
possibly more importantly, this is due to the fact that they
representative of the actual distribution of trajectories. Con-
compress the dynamic pattern within trajectories into a sin-
sequently, one should assess the homogeneity of trajectories
gle number, thereby losing valuable information contained in
before choosing the temporal-dynamics approach and use the
the full movement trajectory.
type-based approach instead whenever trajectories are het-
There are two main approaches that aim to make use of
erogeneous.
the full information in trajectory data: the type-based ap-
proach and the temporal-dynamics approach. The type-based There are two approaches to assessing trajectory homo-
approach focuses on the spatial characteristics of trajecto- geneity. One is based on evaluating the distribution of cur-
ries, with the goal of uncovering distinct movement types vature indices (e.g., MAD or AUC) for signs of bimodality,
ffi
that might correspond to distinct modes of the underlying using, for instance, the bimodality coe cient (Pfister et al.,
cognitive process. The temporal-dynamics approach focuses 2013) or Hartigan’s dip statistic (Hartigan & Hartigan, 1985).
on the temporal characteristics of the trajectory in order to This approach is based on the assumption that trajectory het-
ff
shed light on the development of the psychological process erogeneity expresses in extremely di erent types of trajec-
over time. Both approaches promise distinct insights into tories that form two clearly distinct modes in the curvature
the psychological process; however, in addition to focusing distribution. However, this assumption may often not be met
ff ff
on di erent characteristics of the trajectory, they are based (Pfister et al., 2013; Wul et al., 2019). Recent evidence
ff
on di erent assumptions. The temporal-dynamics approach suggests that when trajectories occur in types, there are typi-
generally assumes that trajectories are distributed in a ho- cally more than than two types that may be distinguishable in
mogeneous fashion, whereas type-based approaches thrive terms of curvature or other trajectory indices (Kieslich et al.,
ff
when there is heterogeneity. This distinction implies that 2020; Lepora & Pezzulo, 2015; Tomlinson et al., 2013; Wul
either of the two approaches is most useful precisely when et al., 2019). Consequently, the bimodality approach should
the other is not. Consequently, it is important to assess the be used with caution.
homogeneity of trajectories before implementing one of the
The second approach, which is arguably simpler and more
two approaches.
robust than the bimodality approach, is based on visualizing
the spatial distribution of trajectories. An example is pre-
Assessing Trajectory Homogeneity
The question of trajectory homogeneity has been raised ple. It shows the trajectories of typical trials in yellow and
in the literature for its importance for a particular theoretical of atypical trials in blue, with the trajectories’ endpoints all
view on movement tracking. This view conceives movement mapped to the left side. This simple visualization clearly
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
ff
reveals the di erent kinds of trajectories present in the data.
There appear to be two dominant types of trajectories—those
that go straight to the chosen option and those that first visit
the nonchosen option—as well as a number of trajectories
that fall between these two types.
The distribution of trajectories in our working example as
jectory types present for traditional movement-tracking anal-
ysis. First, the assumption of a gradual process mapped con-
tinuously to movement trajectory is not met: The trajecto-
ries are clearly the type of intermittent processes discussed
by Spivey et al. (2005). Second, a hypothetical average tra-
jectory would fall in between the two dominant types and
thereby fail to accurately represent the distribution of trajec-
tories. Third, a comparison between aggregate trajectories
of the two conditions may wrongly suggest a small spatial
shift for the nonchosen option for atypical versus typical tra-
jectories, whereas in fact the exact same trajectories may oc-
ff
cur in both conditions, only in di erent proportions. This
version of the between-condition comparison illustrated in
ff
marily in the region of the two dominant trajectory types,
with the typical condition having higher density in the re-
gions of the straight trajectory type and the atypical condi-
tion having higher density in the region of the trajectory type
that first moves to the nonchosen option before turning to the
Assessment of trajectory homogeneity. Panel A: Spatial dis-
chosen option. This highlights that analyses based on ag-
tribution of trajectories of the atypical (blue) and typical
gregating trajectories may strongly misrepresent not only the
(yellow) trajectories from our working example. Panel B:
ff
distribution of trajectories, but also the e ect of experimental
Same trajectories of the two conditions after applying a high
manipulations, and that in such cases type-based analyses are
degree of smoothing. Note that transparent regions reflect-
preferable.
ing equal density may or may not be populated by trajectory
points, as can be seen when comparing the two panels.
Assessing Trajectory Homogeneity Using mousetrap
The mousetrap package provides functions for assessing
trajectory homogeneity using bimodality tests and visual- ing the kinds of trajectories contained in a dataset.
ization. The mt_check_bimodality function evaluates bi-
ffi
modality by calculating the bimodality coe cient (Pfister
et al., 2013) and Hartigan’s dip statistic (Hartigan & Harti- The code below demonstrates how to create visualizations
gan, 1985). The functions mt_plot and mt_heatmap pro- of movement-tracking data that will help with assessing tra-
vide basic visualizations of the trajectory distribution using jectory homogeneity. The first line uses mt_plot to plot all
lines or densities, respectively. The mt_plot is based on trajectories in a single panel. Setting alpha = .1 reduces
the widely used ggplot2 package (Wickham, 2016), which the line opacity, which helps distinguish overlaying trajecto-
means it can be flexibly extended using ggplot2 functions, ries. The second line uses mt_heatmap to create a trajectory
including facets to show the distribution separately for con- heatmap showing the spatial distribution of trajectory points.
by contrast, is built on custom code that provides unique an appropriate opacity. The third line uses mt_diffmap
ff
features, such as smoothing or coloring the densities by a to create a di erence heatmap, which contrasts the trajec-
third trajectory dimension. Another visualization function, tory densities between the typical and atypical trials in our
mt_diffmap, uses mt_heatmap to provide a visual compar- working example. The arguments smooth_radius = 10
ison of trajectory densities between conditions as shown in and n_shades = 10 specify a high level of smoothing and
ff
animation of trajectories, which can help greatly in identify- ferences between the conditions. Finally, mt_animate pro-
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
duces an animated visualization of all trajectory data . of trajectories distances between groups. Clustering algo-
ff
rithms di er in the criteria that they recruit or permit, imply-
# Plot individual trajectories
ff ff
ing that di erent clustering algorithms will produce di erent
mt_plot(mt_data, alpha = .1)
solutions.
# Create a trajectory heatmap
ing example that was derived using Euclidean distance and
mt_heatmap(mt_data)
a hierarchical clustering algorithm that optimizes within-
# Create a difference heatmap
ff
rithm successfully distinguished di erent kinds of trajecto-
mt_diffmap(mt_data,
ries. The first two clusters (representing 34% and 33% of
condition = "Condition",
all trajectories, respectively) consist of trajectories that are
smooth_radius = 10, n_shades = 10)
almost straight, the third cluster (15%) consists of trajecto-
ries that are somewhat curved towards the nonchosen op-
# Animate trajectories
tion, the fourth cluster (12%) consists of trajectories that
mt_animate(mt_data)
first go straight to the nonchosen option before continuing
straight to the chosen option, and the fifth cluster (6%) con-
The Bottom-Up Approach to Trajectory Types
sists of trajectories that first move towards the chosen and
The type-based approach to movement-tracking analysis
then towards the nonchosen option before eventually revers-
rests on the idea that trajectories can be separated into distinct
ing course once more to the chosen option. These clusters
types on the basis of their spatial distribution or, put sim-
and trajectories show that the data of our working example
ply, their shape. The natural first step to a type-based analy-
ff
likely consist of at least four di erent types. These types in-
sis is therefore to establish a grouping of trajectories. Here,
clude not only the two dominant types previously revealed in
two approaches have emerged: a bottom-up approach using
cluster analysis and a top-down approach based on match-
3 and 5).
ff
ing trajectories to predefined prototypes (see Wul et al.,
Bottom-up clustering is able to uncover types in trajec-
ff
2019). The two approaches di er in their suitability for dif-
ffi
tory data that are di cult to detect using visualizations alone.
ferent types of analysis: The bottom-up approach is primar-
The bottom-up clustering approach is thus a powerful tool
ily suited for exploratory analyses, such as to identify which
for data exploration, but less so for confirmatory testing, for
types of trajectories exist in a dataset, whereas the top-down
two reasons. First, results of the bottom-up approach always
approach is suited primarily for confirmatory goals, such as
depend on a match between assumptions of the clustering
ff
to test whether the distribution of trajectories types di ers
algorithm and the data at hand that is rarely perfect. This is
between conditions.
The bottom-up approach uses cluster analysis to group
ff
proach identifies two clusters (1 and 2) that e ectively con-
trajectories into a predefined number of types in two steps.
tain the same type of trajectories. This is due to a combi-
In the first step, the trajectories are compared to one an-
nation of setting the number of clusters a priori to five and
other to determine their distances (or dissimilarity) using
using an objective function that tends to create evenly sized
a distance function. A common example of a distance
clusters. As a result, the algorithm was unable to group
function is the Euclidean distance, which for a pair of
the large number of straight trajectories into a single clus-
movement trajectories determines the distance as d
i, j ter. Second, the outcome of the bottom-up approach will
(cid:112)
(cid:80)
(x − x )2 (y − y )2, with k being the index of tra-
k ik jk ik jk vary based on the data at hand. This implies that cluster-
jectory points. The calculation of distances according to this
ing solutions for two datasets may not be comparable, given
formula requires that the trajectories each consist of the same
that the clustering solutions will likely group trajectories in
number of points, which can be achieved using trajectory ff
a somewhat di erent fashion. There are ways to mitigate
resampling. The resampling method typically recruited in
these issues. For instance, it is possible to try to estimate a
type-based approaches is length normalization, as it places
suitable number of clusters in advance using k-selection al-
equal emphasis on all parts of a trajectory, which helps em- ff
gorithms (Haslbeck & Wul , 2020), which should improve
ff
phasize di erences in trajectory shapes (see section Resam-
the usefulness of a clustering solution and increase compara-
pling Trajectories). In the second step, the set of all distances
bility across datasets. However, ultimately it is not possible
between trajectory pairs, typically represented as a distance
to identify the right settings a priori, as bottom-up clustering
matrix, is analyzed using one of many clustering algorithms,
is an unsupervised learning problem (Hennig, 2015). Conse-
such as k-means or hierarchical clustering. Such algorithms
quently, confirmatory questions concerning trajectory types
group the trajectories into a typically predefined number of
should be addressed using the top-down approach.
clusters by iteratively optimizing a criterion, such as the av-
erage distance of trajectories within a group over the average 5Note that mt_animate requires installation of imagemagick.
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Clustering movement trajectories. Panel A: Five clusters identified using hierarchical clustering. Panel B: Five of the pro-
ff
totypes in the mousetrap package (see also Wul et al., 2019). Panel C: Clustering based on assigning trajectories to the
closest prototype. Thick lines in panels A and C represent the average trajectory. cCoM continuous change of mind; dCoM
= =
discrete change of mind; dCoM2 discrete double change of mind.
The Top-Down Approach to Trajectory Types neous and more meaningful, avoiding situations such as that
The top-down approach addresses the limitations of the
prototypes are defined a priori, trajectory clusters no longer
bottom-up approach by presupposing a set of prototype tra-
depend on the dataset under investigation, thereby permitting
jectories. This means that trajectories are no longer grouped
straightforward statistical comparisons of experimental con-
based on their similarity to each other. Instead, they are
ditions or covariate analyses.
grouped according to their similarity to the prototype tra-
jectories, which is achieved by mapping trajectories to the As analyses based on the top-down approach hinge
most similar prototype with respect to a distance function, strongly on the choice of prototype trajectories, how should
such as Euclidean distance. There are two reasons that this they be selected? There are at least three avenues. First,
approach is more suitable for confirmatory analyses. First, when there are clear expectations concerning the kinds of
by selecting a suitable prototype set, the top-down approach trajectories that either could occur or would matter in a given
will generate trajectory clusters that are both more homoge- study, the prototype trajectories should be defined to match
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
the expectations. For instance, in the case of the discrete
Type-Based Statistical Comparisons of Typical and Atypical
scenario discussed by Spivey et al. (2005), in which trajecto-
Trials: Frequencies and Residuals
ries may either be attracted by the competing option or not,
one could specify prototypes that capture these two discrete Type Straight Curved cCoM dCoM dCoM2
scenarios. The case of a priori expectations represents the
Frequencies
preferred scenario. Second, in the absence of a priori ex-
Typical 506 116 54 52 16
pectations, prototypes can be borrowed from existing sets,
(68%) (16%) (7%) (7%) (2%)
such as the one included in the mousetrap R package, which
Atypical 165 38 37 56 24
was derived from a large number of published datasets us-
(52%) (12%) (12%) (18%) (8%)
ff ff
ing the bottom-up approach (cf. Wul et al., 2019; Wul et
al., 2021). The set includes five prototypes: straight, curved,
residu-
continuous change of mind (cCoM), discrete change of mind
als
(dCoM), and discrete double change of mind (dCoM2) tra-
Typical 1.70 .80 −1.21 −2.71 −2.26
Atypical −2.59 −1.22 1.84 4.13 3.45
useful prior, but it may not perfectly capture the kinds of tra-
jectories occurring in a given study. Third, prototypes can be = =
Legend: cCoM continuous change of mind; dCoM dis-
generated using the bottom-up approach based on clustering. =
crete change of mind; dCoM2 discrete double change of
This approach can lead to prototypes that are more tailored to
mind.
the study at hand, but it also risks creating unwanted depen-
dencies between the identification of prototypes and down-
stream statistical analyses. One way to mitigate this risk is to
ff 2 =
icant e ect (χ (4) 57.97, p < .001). An inspection of the
base bottom-up and top-down analyses on separate datasets.
ff ff
this di erence is primarily driven by di erences in propor-
working example. Trajectories were mapped to mousetrap’s
tions of change-of-mind trajectory types.
default trajectory prototype set using Euclidean distances.
The ordinal route of analyzing trajectory types is based
The resulting grouping of trajectories shares many similar-
on ordering the trajectories along a dimension of interest.
ities with the one produced by the bottom-up approach, but
For instance, the mousetrap default prototypes can be or-
ff
there are two important di erences. First, where the bottom-
dered according to the level of competition that they might
up approach separated straight trajectories into two equally
reflect: straight trajectories representing the least amount of
sized clusters, the top-down approach reliably assigned all
competition, followed by curved, cCoM, dCoM, and finally,
straight trajectories into a single large cluster (63% of all tra-
dCoM2. The ordering can then be used as an outcome in
jectories). Second, where the bottom-up approach lumped
ordinal statistics, such as ordinal linear regression models. A
mildly and strongly curved trajectories into a single cluster,
benefit of the ordinal approach is that inferences can be made
the top-down approach was able to separate these kinds of
with reference to meaningful dimensions like competition.
trajectories more clearly (curved and cCoM). Overall, the
top-down approach produced a cleaner separation of trajecto-
Analyzing Trajectory Types Using mousetrap
ries into homogeneous clusters. This does not imply that the
The mousetrap package provides implementations of all
clustering is strictly better than others, including those pro-
type-based trajectory analyses described in the sections The
duced by the bottom-up approach (or other prototype sets).
Bottom-Up Approach to Trajectory Types and The Top-Down
ff
However, it is likely more useful, as the di erent clusters
Approach to Trajectory Types. Bottom-up clustering of a
ff
likely correspond more directly to the di erent ways that the
mousetrap object can be performed using the mt_cluster
underlying cognitive process unfolded.
function. The function will look for length-normalized tra-
jectories, but can, in principle, also work with other tra-
Statistical Comparisons of Trajectory Types
jectory transformations, including time-normalized trajecto-
There are two ways to conduct statistical comparisons of ries. If length-normalized trajectories have not yet been com-
trajectory types: treating them as nominal or ordinal. The puted, they can be added to the mousetrap object using the
nominal route is based on a comparison of type frequencies. mt_length_normalize function, which will represent each
and atypical trials in our working example, illustrating that ified using the n_points argument). The mt_cluster func-
ff
there are di erences in the frequencies of trajectory types tion extracts a default number of five clusters using agglom-
ff
between the two conditions. These di erences can be tested erative hierarchical clustering and ward.D linkage (Murtagh
against chance using a χ test for stochastic independence, & Legendre, 2014). However, key aspects of the cluster-
which in the case of our working example revealed a signif- ing procedure, including the number of clusters (n_cluster
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
argument) and the clustering algorithm (method argument), alpha =.05)
can be adjusted. The result of mt_cluster is stored in a
new data frame element within the mousetrap object called # 4) Chi-square test ------
clustering. Top-down prototype mapping can be per-
both the prototype set and the distance function can be cus- mt_data$prototyping$prototype_label)
tomized. The result of mt_map is stored in a new data frame
element in the mousetrap object called prototyping. # Perform test
The code below demonstrates the application of these ap- chisq.test(prototypes_by_condition)
proaches to our working example. The first chunk uses
mt_length_normalize to length-normalize the trajecto- # 5) Ordinal regression ------
ries, which provides the basis for the steps that follow. The
second chunk uses mt_cluster to extract the default of five # Merge trial data and prototype mapping
clusters using the bottom-up approach. mt_plot is used with prototype_data <- merge(mt_data$data,
use2 = "clustering" and facet_col = "cluster" to mt_data$prototyping,
8A (but with the clusters spread out over columns instead
of rows). The third chunk uses mt_map to perform top-down # Run ordinal regression including random
clustering using mousetrap’s standard prototype set and then # intercept per participant
similarly visualizes the resulting clustering using mt_plot. library(ordinal)
Building on the third chunk, the fourth chunk produces a ta- clmm(
ble of the prototype mapping for typical and atypical trials prototype_label ~
and compares the respective frequencies using chisq.test. Condition + (1|subject_nr),
The final chunk uses the clmm function of the ordinal pack- data = prototype_data)
age (Christensen, 2019) to perform the same comparison us-
ing ordinal statistics, with mousetrap’s prototypes ordered as The Temporal Dynamics Approach
suggested in the previous section.
The temporal dynamics approach to movement-tracking
# 1) Length-normalize trajectories ------ analysis aims to reveal and explain the development of choice
commitment or competition by analyzing the temporal devel-
mt_data <- mt_length_normalize(mt_data) opment of key trajectory features (see Stillman et al., 2018).
ff
Variants of this approach di er in their level of sophistica-
# 2) Bottom-up clustering ------ tion. Here, we focus on two variants, a basic variant recruit-
ing aggregation and a more sophisticated variant recruiting
# Perform bottom-up clustering approach regression modeling. As noted in the section Assessing Tra-
mt_data <- mt_cluster(mt_data) jectory Homogeneity, these analyses implicitly assume a ho-
mogeneous distribution of trajectories that is not met by our
# Plot bottom-up clusters in separate panels working example. We will nevertheless rely on our working
mt_plot(mt_data, example to demonstrate the temporal-dynamics approach, as
use2 = "clustering", a failure to meet the homogeneity assumption mostly con-
facet_col = "cluster", cerns the interpretation of the results, not their applicability.
alpha = .05) The basic approach to temporal dynamics is to analyze ag-
gregate trajectory features, such as position or angle, across
# Perform top-down mapping onto prototypes axis as a function of time steps, which were determined us-
mt_data <- mt_map(mt_data) ing time normalization and reflect proportions of total trial
duration (see section Resampling Trajectories). The fore-
# Plot top-down mapping in separate panels ground shows aggregate trajectories for the typical (yellow)
mt_plot(mt_data, and atypical (blue) trials; the background shows the individ-
use2 = "prototyping", ual trajectories. The plot reveals three key insights. First, on
facet_col = "prototype_label", average, trajectories turn to the chosen option (located at an x
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
of the trials, suggesting that there is a notable period of inde- ment to the chosen option in atypical trials relative to typical
cision at the beginning of trials. Second, the aggregate trajec- ones. Identifying the amount of time in which trajectories are
tory of atypical trials turns to the chosen option substantially shifted by a single categorical factor can itself be powerful,
later than the aggregate trajectory of typical trials does, sug- but the real value of temporal analyses emerges once mul-
gesting a longer period of indecision and delayed commit- tiple predictors are included in the model. For instance, in
ment to the chosen option. This is confirmed by mixed mod- the analysis of our working example, we could have consid-
ff
els that show significant di erences between time steps 51 ered word frequency as another driver of the categorization
individual trajectories show considerably more variation in Forster, 2004). Including both typicality and word frequency
both timing and location. The aggregate trajectories should in a joint model produces two sets of regression weights that
not be viewed as a representation of the unfolding cognitive can be used to infer the relative strength and order in which
processes. This does not subtract from the fact that there are the two predictors covary with the movement . Studies have
ff
reliable di erences in position across time, but it implies that used this approach, for example, to show that the tastiness
ff
these di erences must be interpreted carefully. In light of the of food is processed earlier than its healthiness (Sullivan et
analyses in the section The Top-Down Approach to Trajec- al., 2015), or that values are processed earlier than delays in
tory Types, the best interpretation of the results is one that an intertemporal choice task (Dshemuchadse et al., 2013).
ff ff
accounts for the di erent types of trajectories with di erent These inferences were based on studying the two sets of beta
temporal profiles. We will return to this issue in the section weights across time and comparing their relative magnitude
Theoretical and Practical Considerations. and temporal location. In line with most other work, these
Aggregate analyses of temporal dynamics are amenable two cases used movement angle as the dependent variable.
to any trajectory feature (Koop & Johnson, 2011). Next to However, these types of temporal analyses can also be car-
position, one popular alternative feature is movement angle, ried out using movement position or other features of the tra-
determined relative to the vertical axis. A angle of 0 there- When using the step-by-step regression approach it is im-
fore implies a movement straight upwards and π (−π) im- portant to be aware of several underlying assumptions. First,
plies a movement directed 90° to the left (right), the side of as discussed in the section Assessing Trajectory Homogene-
the chosen (nonchosen) option. Compared to the analysis ity, temporal analyses assume spatial trajectory homogeneity.
of position, the analysis of angle provides a more detailed This assumption is necessary to interpret aggregate trajectory
picture, showing that atypical and typical trials deviate at features (e.g., angle or position) as representative of the tra-
two points. First, shortly after the temporal midpoint, typ- jectories from which they are calculated, and may also be
ical trajectories show an earlier increase in angle, implying required by the statistical tests recruited. This assumption
a movement towards the chosen option. Second, before the is not met by our working example, as demonstrated in the
end of the trial, atypical trajectories have more positive an- section The Bottom-Up Approach to Trajectory Types, im-
gles than typical trajectories, suggesting that they still move plying that the temporal analyses should be interpreted with
towards the chosen option, while typical trajectories are ar- caution. Second, modeling the time steps separately assumes
riving or have already arrived at the response box of the cho- independence between time steps, which is unlikely to be the
ff
sen option. Despite the presence of two di erences in angles case for movement trajectories, thus introducing challenges
rather than one in positions, both analyses suggest that there for statistical inference in the face of multiple testing. It has
is a later choice commitment in atypical than in typical trials. been suggested that this issue can be addressed by consid-
However, the same caveats about trajectory homogeneity and ering only a certain minimum number of consecutive signifi-
aggregate trajectories apply. cant results (e.g., Dale et al., 2007). However, ultimately, the
only appropriate approach to dealing with multiple testing is
Modeling the Temporal Dynamics of Trajectories a joint statistical model 7 . Third, temporal analyses assume
that the predictors are uncorrelated with absolute trial dura-
A more sophisticated approach to temporal dynamics re-
tion. This assumption arises from the use of time normaliza-
lies on statistical models to evaluate the moderating role of
ff
tion, where trajectories of di erent durations are resampled
one or more independent variables or covariates of the tem-
to the same number of points. As a result, points at the same
poral dynamics of trajectories. The standard way of doing
this is to apply general linear models in a step-by-step fash-
6Scherbaum and Dshemuchadse (2020) proposed that Gaussian
ion, such that each time step is analyzed separately (Dale &
mixtures could be used to additionally infer the duration, peak
Duran, 2011; Scherbaum et al., 2010). With a single cat- ff ff
strength, and peak duration of the e ect of di erent predictors on
egorical predictor, this approach is equivalent to the basic
the movement trajectory.
approach comparing aggregate values per condition, which 7See Cox et al. (2012) for one proposal.
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
ff
Temporal dynamics across time steps. Panels A and B show the e ect of typicality on the trajectories’ x-axis positions (A) and
angles relative to the vertical axis (B) across 101 time steps. Aggregate trajectories of typical (yellow) and atypical (blue)
trials in the foreground are the arithmetic mean of the respective individual trajectories shown in the background. The line of
ff
asterisks at the top of each panel indicates regions where the average lines di er significantly from each other according to
separate linear mixed models per time step and α .05. See text for details on statistical analyses.
ff
relative time may be at very di erent positions in absolute ship between response time and typicality, with typical trials
time. This can be problematic when the goal is to derive (median 1, 519.5 ms) being, on average, much faster
RT
conclusions with respect to absolute time. Consider, for in- than atypical ones (median 2, 032.5 ms). However, a
RT
ff ff
stance, the di erence between the aggregate trajectories of di erence in this direction, if anything, emphasizes the claim
ff
this di erence as an early commitment for typical as com- cal trials. The second option is to rerun the temporal analysis
ff
pared to atypical trials in absolute time, typical and atypical for di erent strata of the response time distribution in which
trials must be roughly equal in their average response time. response times are comparable, to assess robustness. This
panels show an earlier commitment to typical as compared
There are ways for researchers to evaluate these assump-
to atypical trials in all three strata, suggesting once more that
tions. The assumption of spatial homogeneity can be evalu-
the qualitative results of the analysis should hold in absolute
ated using the approaches outlined in the section Assessing
ff
time. Notably, however, the magnitude and timing of e ects
Trajectory Homogeneity. The assumption of stochastic inde-
seem to vary somewhat across the strata. For small response
pendence can be tested using conventional tests of statistical
ff
times, the e ect is smallest and seems to emerge at about
dependence. Finally, the assumption of temporal consistency
ff
500 ms; for medium response times, the e ect is consider-
can be evaluated in two ways. First, researchers can inspect
ably larger and seems to emerge at about twice the absolute
the distribution of absolute response times as a function of
time (about 1,000 ms); and for large response times the ef-
the predictor variables. When relationships exist, it is impor-
fects seem largest, emerging again at about 1,000 ms. These
tant to assess whether they are in conflict with the results ob-
patterns can be traced back to the trajectory types uncovered
in the section The Bottom-Up Approach to Trajectory Types.
10A shows the distribution of response times in our working
example as a function of typicality. There is a clear relation-
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
function of trajectory types, which shows that small absolute ) +
response time trajectories are overwhelmingly straight and # Add aggregate x-positions
curved, whereas the cCoM, dCoM, and dCoM2 types only mt_plot_aggregate(
enter with larger response times, once again illustrating the mt_data, use = "tn_trajectories",
importance of change-of-mind trajectory types. x = "steps", y = "xpos",
color = "Condition",
Analyzing the Temporal Evolution Using mousetrap size = 2,
return_type = "geom"
The mousetrap package provides functions to calculate
and aggregate relevant trajectory features across time. The
mt_angles function calculates angles between two-point
# 3) Plot angles across time ------
segments and the vertical axis, as well as angles at the cen-
ter of three-point segments. The mt_derivatives function
# Calculate angles across time
calculates distances, velocities, and acceleration values. Fea-
# for time-normalized trajectories
tures are by default calculated for and added to the standard
mt_data <- mt_angles(
trajectory element. However, via the use argument they
mt_data, use = "tn_trajectories")
can also be calculated for and added to other trajectory ele-
ments available in the mousetrap object. To aggregate trajec-
# Plot individual angles
tory features across time, the mt_aggregate function can be
mt_plot(
used. To visualize trajectory features across time, mt_plot
mt_data, use = "tn_trajectories",
and mt_plot_aggregate can be used to plot the temporal
x = "steps", y = "angle_v",
development for individual and aggregated trials per condi-
alpha = .10, color = "Condition"
tion respectively.
) +
The code below shows how to compute and visual-
# Add aggregate angles
ize trajectory features across time. The first chunk uses
mt_plot_aggregate(
mt_time_normalize to add time-normalized trajectories
mt_data, use = "tn_trajectories",
to the mousetrap object, which will be used in the
x = "steps", y = "angle_v",
steps that follow. The second chunk uses mt_plot and
color = "Condition",
mt_plot_aggregate to plot the individual and aggregated
size = 2,
return_type = "geom",
addition. Setting use = "tn_trajectories" ensures the
.funs = ~ mean(.x, na.rm = TRUE)
plot is based on the time-normalized trajectories, whereas
setting x = "step" and y = "xpos" ensures that time
steps and x-position are placed on the x and y dimensions of
Theoretical and Practical Considerations
the plot. Setting color = "Condition" results in separate
This tutorial has thus far focused on how an existing
colors for trajectories belonging to typical and atypical trials.
ff
movement-tracking dataset can be analyzed in di erent ways
Note that the addition of individual and aggregate visualiza-
tions is enabled by the setting return_type = "geom" in to learn more about the underlying cognitive processes.
mt_plot_aggregate. The third chunk uses mt_angles to However, there are important theoretical and practical issues
that should be considered in the design stage of movement-
compute angles for the time-normalized trajectories and then
ff
tracking studies, as they can have large e ects on the type of
visualizes the angles in a fashion analogous to the approach
8 data produced and their interpretation. In this section, we dis-
used for x-positions .
cuss two critical issues: the theoretical view on the mapping
between movement trajectories and the role of study design
# 1) Time-normalize trajectories ------
choices.
mt_data <- mt_time_normalize(mt_data)
The Mapping Between Cognitive Process and Movement
# 2) Plot x-positions across time ------
The traditional perspective on movement tracking is that
it is a continuous process of evidence accumulation that con-
# Plot individual x-positions
tinuously translates into movement. This view is clearly
mt_plot(
mt_data, use = "tn_trajectories",
8In this case, a custom aggregation function is employed to deal
x = "steps", y = "xpos",
with the missing values arising from a lack of movement between
alpha = .10, color = "Condition"
some time stamps.
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Temporal dynamics in absolute response time. Panel A: Distribution of absolute response times of typical (yellow) and atypical
ff ff
(blue) trials in ms. Vertical dashed lines indicate the 1,500 ms and 2,500 ms cuto s used for panels B–D. Panels B–D: E ect
of typicality on the trajectories’ x-axis positions across absolute time for trials with absolute response of 0–1,500 ms (B),
1,501–2,500 ms (C), and 2,501–5,000 ms (D). Panel E: Distribution of response times as a function of trajectory type (see
> =
= =
change of mind; dCoM discrete change of mind; dCoM2 discrete double change of mind.
embodied by extant computational accounts of movement- late into features of the movement, such as its current angle
tracking processes such as attractor models (Frisch et al., (Wong et al., 2015) or location (Spivey et al., 2005), in an im-
2015; Scherbaum et al., 2016; Spivey et al., 2005; Zgonnikov mediate and continuous fashion. However, although attractor
ff ff
et al., 2017) and drift–di usion models (Calluso et al., 2018; and drift–di usion models today are widely adopted as plau-
Wong et al., 2015). According to these models, a latent sible models of human decision processes (Busemeyer et al.,
preference for the available option evolves until either a sta- 2019; Gold & Shadlen, 2007), it is not clear whether these or
ff
ble (attractor models) or an extreme enough (drift–di usion other processes translate uninterruptedly into movement.
models) point of preference for one of the options is reached.
The alternative perspective to the continuous-link view
This ongoing evolution of preference is thought to trans-
is that cognitive processes and movements are linked in a
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
straight curved cCoM dCoM dCoM2
0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100
Time step
yticolev
egarevA
straight curved cCoM dCoM dCoM2
0.01
0.00
−0.01
0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100
Time step
noitarelecca
egarevA
Velocity and acceleration profiles of trajectory types. The two panels show, respectively, the average velocity and acceleration
in pixels per time step of trajectories assigned to our five prototypes. To better align the temporal development of trajectories
and reduce noise, initiation times and idle times immediately preceding choice were cropped from the raw trajectories before
velocity and acceleration were computed. Velocity and acceleration were then time-normalized and smoothed across time
= = =
steps using a Gaussian filter. cCoM continuous change of mind; dCoM discrete change of mind; dCoM2 discrete double
change of mind.
more intermittent fashion (Friedman et al., 2013). Support tory types, with the exception of straight trajectories. These
for this position comes from research on motor control in dips reflect pauses in the movement, possibly as a result of
basic reaching tasks. According to the predominant view in the cognitive process controlling and re-orienting the move-
this field, reaching consists of multiple submovements, usu- ment at the these points. This suggests that all trajectories,
ally involving at least two stages: an initial preplanned, fast, not only discrete trajectories, have been produced by a small
ballistic movement that gets the limb into the target area and number of intermittently controlled submovements.
a smaller and slower corrective movement (Battaglia-Mayer An intermittent link between the cognitive process and
et al., 2014; Elliott et al., 2010). Similar proposals have been movement would have important implications for the inter-
made in research on human–computer interaction (Martin et pretation of movement trajectories. Consider, for instance,
al., 2021). If basic reaching movements are controlled inter- the dCoM trajectory type. Under the traditional, continuous-
mittently, then this might also hold for reaching movements link view, this trajectory type suggests a discrete decision
that are the product of higher-order cognitive processes. process that first strongly prefers the alternative option until it
almost reaches the threshold for a decision, before reversing
Recent movement-tracking studies have reported evidence
completely to a strong preference for the eventually chosen
clearly favoring the intermittent view for at least a subset
option. Under an intermittent-link view, the decisions pro-
of trajectories (Freeman, 2014; Friedman et al., 2013; Kies-
cess could still evolve gradually, with distinct points in the
ff
lich et al., 2020; Tomlinson et al., 2013; Wul et al., 2019).
decision process triggering ballistic submovements. How-
These studies have observed trajectories involving abrupt di-
ever, it is not known which points of the process triggered
rectional changes similar to those embodied by the discrete
the submovements, only that there must have been preference
change-of-mind trajectories (dCoM and dCoM2) revealed in
states consistent with their direction.
the clustering analyses in the section The Bottom-Up Ap-
It is also possible that the cognitive process itself is, at
proach to Trajectory Types. It seems probable that, at the
some level, discrete in nature, or at least can be described
very least, these trajectories are the product of large, separate
submovements. This possibility is underpinned by an analy-
9For better alignment, any initiation and idle periods before
choice have been removed from the underlying trajectories. Note
that due to the reliance on time-normalized trajectories, dips may
ff
acceleration profiles for the discrete and nondiscrete trajec- occur at di erent positions in absolute time.
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
ff
as such. Many models of cognition assume an inherently e ects being associated with lower homogeneity and small
ff
discrete process incorporating, for instance, serial memory e ects with higher homogeneity. This has, for instance, been
ff ff
search (e.g., Raaijmakers & Shi rin, 1981; Wul et al., shown for click versus hover response modes (Grage et al.,
2020), serial information acquisition (e.g., Krajbich et al., 2019; Kieslich et al., 2020), mouse as compared to touch-
ff
2012; Pachur et al., 2018; Wul et al., 2018), or lexico- screen as recording device (Wirth et al., 2020), and for in-
graphic decision rules (e.g., Hertwig et al., 2019; Johnson structing participants to initialize their movements within a
et al., 2008; S¸ ims¸ek, 2020). Such discrete processes would specific time limit as compared to no specific instructions
produce discrete movements, even if the link between pro- about movement initialization (Kieslich et al., 2020). How-
cess and movement were a continuous one. ever, this relationship has not been shown for all design as-
ff
We hope that future research will clarify the nature of cog- pects. For example, di erent settings of device sensitivity
ff
nitive processes and their link to movement trajectories. One only a ected homogeneity but not the magnitude of experi-
ff
possibility to consider in this enterprise is that the process mental e ects (Grage et al., 2019; Kieslich et al., 2020).
and the link between process and movement vary as a func- The strong role of study design could have impor-
tion of the study subject and design. Research on movement tant implications for designing and interpreting movement-
ff
tracking has identified several dimensions of study design trajectory studies. The strong e ect on homogeneity suggests
ff
that critically impact the types trajectories produced. We re- that design choices could a ect the link between cognitive
view these results next. process and movement trajectory, with designs associated
with homogeneous trajectories possibly triggering a more
The Role of Study Design continuous link and designs associated with heterogeneous
trajectories possibly triggering a more intermittent link. The
Designing movement-tracking studies involves several ff
negative association of the magnitude of experimental e ects
key choices, including selecting and setting up a recording
and trajectory homogeneity further suggests that settings in
device and selecting the starting procedure, layout, and re-
line with a continuous-link view do not necessarily result in
sponse mode used in trials of the study. Past work has shown
better signals of the underlying process. More than anything
that these choices play a critical role in shaping the move-
else, this suggests that the usefulness of movement tracking
ment trajectories recorded (Blinch et al., 2018; Burk et al.,
is not dependent on subscribing to the traditional perspective
2014; Grage et al., 2019; Kieslich et al., 2020; Scherbaum
of a continuous link between cognitive process and move-
& Kieslich, 2018; Schoemann et al., 2019; Schoemann et
ment. However, it is important to note that the understanding
of the role of study design aspects is still limited and more
of movement-tracking design aspects and empirical findings.
research is needed to investigate the many combinations of
These findings mainly concern the magnitude of the exper-
study design choices.
ff ff
imental e ects, such as the e ect of typicality on trajectory
curvature in our working example, and the homogeneity of
Summary and Recommendations
movement trajectories which show notable, albeit sometimes
Movement tracking is a relatively young methodology,
inconsistent dependencies with design aspects. These depen-
with both practical and theoretical questions yet to be set-
dencies are important as they can determine the magnitude of
tled. Even so, the literature has made considerable progress
ff
experimental e ects, the suitability of analysis pathways, and
in establishing movement tracking as a useful tool for study-
potentially even the cognitive process. However, we should
ing cognitive processes. In this final section, we summarize
note that across the existing investigations the choice of de-
several key takeaways and derive concrete recommendations
sign aspects has hardly impacted the presence or absence of
to help researchers make the best possible use of movement
ff
e ects of interest, pointing to the robustness of the movement
tracking as a means to studying psychological processes.
tracking methodology.
The reported results of design factor investigations sug-
Implementation
gest, among other findings, that larger rather than smaller dis-
tances between start and response options and a click rather Study setup. The experimental setup of movement-
than a hover response mode produce larger experimental ef- tracking studies impacts the magnitude of experimental ef-
fects. The use of robotic handles and camera-based tracking fects and trajectory homogeneity, which have been found to
devices rather than other tracking devices, dynamic rather be inversely related for many design aspects. Larger exper-
ff
than static starting procedures, and touch rather than click re- imental e ects but also fewer homogeneous trajectories are
sponse modes tend to produce larger trajectory homogeneity. associated with click rather than hover response modes and
ff
data of Kieslich et al. (2020). One emergent pattern of these a specific time window. The setup of a movement-tracking
ff
findings is that the magnitude of experimental e ects and tra- study should ultimately be chosen with the theoretical back-
jectory homogeneity tend to be inversely related, with large ground and the planned analyses in mind. Higher temporal
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
Summary of Selected Design Aspects of Movement-Tracking Studies and Findings Concerning Their Role in Shaping Move-
ment Trajectories
Aspect Option Description Findings
ff
Recording Computer Standard computer mouse (e.g., Spivey Larger experimental e ects for trajectory curvature,
device mouse et al., 2005) as well as a higher degree of responsiveness (i.e.,
Touchscreen Touchscreens of, e.g., tablets, operated faster redirection of movements in response to
using a finger (e.g., Wirth et al., 2016) changes in target location), for camera-based as
or stylus (e.g., Buc Calderon et al., compared to mouse and touchscreen tracking
2015) (Moher & Song, 2019). Smaller experimental
ff ff
Wiimote Handheld infrared pointing device e ects for curvature, larger e ects for movement
(e.g., Dale et al., 2008) initiation time, and higher trajectory homogeneity
Camera Electromagnetic tracking system (e.g., for touchscreen as compared to mouse tracking
Friedman et al., 2013) (Wirth et al., 2020).
Robotic Handle in apparatus that restricts
handle movement to the 2D plane (e.g., Resu-
laj et al., 2009)
ff
Device sen- Speed Ratio of translation between the phys- No change in experimental e ects for trajectory
sitivity ical movement and the virtual move- indices, but fewer discrete change-of-mind
ment recorded by the software trajectories for less sensitive as compared to more
Acceleration Linear or accelerated translation ratio sensitive mouse settings (Grage et al., 2019;
Kieslich et al., 2020).
ff
Starting Static Clicking on the start button triggers Larger experimental e ect on trajectory indices, but
procedure presentation of the choice-critical in- lower trajectory homogeneity under timed as
formation (e.g., Dale et al., 2007) compared to static procedures (Kieslich et al.,
ff ff
Timed Static procedure with time limits on 2020). No di erences in experimental e ects, but
movement initiation and or overall re- more curved trajectories in dynamic as compared to
sponse time (e.g., Papesh & Goldinger, static procedures (Kieslich et al., 2020). Larger
ff
2012) e ects in temporal analyses and higher trajectory
Dynamic Passing a movement threshold trig- homogeneity for dynamic compared to static
gers presentation of the choice-critical procedure (Scherbaum & Kieslich, 2018;
information (e.g., Scherbaum et al., Schoemann et al., 2019). Larger experimental
ff
2010) e ects on trajectory curvature in static as compared
to dynamic procedures (Wirth et al., 2020).
ff
Layout Button size Size of the response buttons Larger experimental e ects on trajectory curvature
Start–response Distance between start position and re- for larger distances between start and response
ff
box distance sponse boxes boxes, but no change in experimental e ects for
Response box Distance between response boxes distance between response boxes or the size of the
distance response buttons (Wirth et al., 2020). Fewer
change-of-mind trajectories for larger distances
between response boxes (Burk et al., 2014).
ff
Response Click Clicking within a designated response Larger experimental e ects on trajectory indices and
mode box or area indicates the choice in temporal analyses, but also less homogeneous
Hover Moving within a designated response trajectories for click as compared to hover response
box or area indicates the choice mode (Grage et al., 2019; Kieslich et al., 2020).
MOVEMENT TRACKING OF PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCESSES
ined in Kieslich et al. (2020). Panel A: Trajectories for four implementations of the starting procedure. Panel B: Comparison
of the click and the touch response mode. Panel C: Two common device-sensitivity settings, the default Windows settings
(medium speed and acceleration enabled) or a slow setting (reduced speed and acceleration disabled).
resolution of the cognitive process in the movement trajec- resampling by carrying out the analysis using the raw data.
tory might be achieved by designs associated with homoge- mousetrap facilitates this by storing resampled trajectories as
ff
neous trajectories. Conversely, larger e ects and likely richer new elements, retaining the raw data.
behavioral outcomes, including one or multiple changes of
mind, might be achieved by designs associated with hetero- Analysis
geneous trajectories.
Analysis pathway. There are three main analysis path-
ways, focusing on trajectory indices, on the trajectories’ tem-
Processing
poral evolution, and on trajectory types. The choice between
Filtering. Movement tracking produces data that can ben- these should be motivated by the theoretical questions and
efit from filtering. Theoretically, filtering seeks to remove should match the distribution of trajectories at hand. Analy-
trajectories that do not reflect the intended cognitive pro- ses of trajectory indices and, in particular, temporal analyses,
cesses (e.g., decision errors or lack of attention). Trajectory are based on the assumption of homogeneous trajectories.
filtering should be kept to a minimum and avoided wherever Type-based analyses are best suited for heterogeneous trajec-
possible; in any case, trajectory cleaning must be explicitly tories. Trajectory homogeneity should always be assessed,
documented. ideally using visualizations of individual, unprocessed tra-
Spatial transformations. Mapping trajectories to a single jectories.
side as well as starting point alignment are common and un- Trajectory indices. Trajectory indices characterize tra-
controversial steps during trajectory processing. Transfor- jectories along three main dimensions: curvature, complex-
mations that stretch or compress trajectories or change their ity, and time. Curvature indices characterize how strongly
original coordinate system should be avoided, unless the aim a trajectory is bent towards the nonchosen option, and can
is to render trajectories comparable across study setups. be distinguished into point-based and integrative variants.
Resampling. Trajectory resampling is a common, but Correlations among trajectory indices are usually extremely
not always necessary or inconsequential, processing step. high (r ∼ .9), implying that the choice of curvature in-
Resampling choices should be made with the analysis in dex might be motivated by ease of interpretation, which fa-
mind. Time normalization facilitates temporal analyses such vors MAD and AD. Complexity indices characterize a tra-
as step-by-step trajectory regression. Length normalization jectory’s level of disorder. Flips, reversals, and sample en-
is suitable for type-based analyses such as clustering. Wher- tropy capture the number, locations, and unpredictability of
ff
ever possible researchers should test for unexpected e ects of directional changes, respectively. Correlations among com-
WULFF, KIESLICH, HENNINGER, HASLBECK, AND SCHULTE-MECKLENBECK
plexity indices are high (r ∼ .5), yet small enough to cap- sights into their own research questions and advance move-
ture unique information. Temporal indices characterize the ment tracking as a process-tracing technology.
temporal aspects of the trajectory by decomposing the total
Declarations
response time. Initiation time measures the duration until
movement initiation, whereas motor pauses and movement
Open practices
time measure the still and active parts after initiation. Mo-
tor pauses and movement time are highly similar to response The data and code associated with this article are publicly
time (r ∼ .78), but may capture unique nuances. Initia- available via the package itself and the package web page at
tion time, however, is largely uncorrelated and could capture pascalkieslich.github.io mousetrap-resources.
unique psychological aspects. All three types of trajectory