Regression to the mean in latent change mothers who breastfeed only for a short period of
score models: an example involving time [4–6] and because intelligence is strongly
breastfeeding and intelligence hereditary [7–10]. A positive association between
breastfeeding and child intelligence has indeed been
Kimmo Sorjonen1, Gustav Nilsonne1,2, shown to be less than completely attenuated when
Michael Ingre1,3,4, & Bo Melin1
adjusting for maternal intelligence [2, 4, 5, 11].
However, since intelligence is measured with
1 Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska
imperfect reliability, breastfeeding mothers may
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
tend to have higher true intelligence than non-
2 Department of Psychology, Stockholm University,
breastfeeding mothers even if they have the same
Stockholm, Sweden
3 Department of Psychology, Linnaeus University, measured intelligence. Hence, the remaining
Kalmar, Sweden
adjusted association between breastfeeding and
4 Institute for Globally Distributed Open Research and
child intelligence could be due to residual
Education (IGDORE), Stockholm, Sweden
confounding. This example may illustrate the
susceptibility of latent change score models to
Abstract
regression to the mean, a phenomenon which is
well-understood in theory [12], but nevertheless
Latent change score models are often used to
often overlooked in practice.
study change over time in observational data.
However, latent change score models may be Galton coined the term regression toward
susceptible to regression to the mean. In the present mediocrity to describe the phenomenon that tall
study, we investigate regression to the mean in the parents tended to have tall offspring, but not quite as
case of breastfeeding and intelligence of children.
tall as themselves, while short parents tended to have
Earlier observational studies have identified a
short offspring, but not quite as short as themselves
positive association between breastfeeding and child
[13]. This phenomenon, nowadays usually called
intelligence, even when adjusting for maternal
regression to the mean, occurs because extreme
intelligence. Here, we used latent change score
outcomes usually require an extreme combination of
modeling to analyze intergenerational change in
causative factors, and the probability is higher for
intelligence, both from mothers to children and
some combination of causative factors that results in
backward from children to mothers, in the 1979
a less extreme outcome. So, even if an offspring has
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79)
partly inherited their parent’s genome that increases
dataset (N = 6283). When analyzing change from
the likelihood for tall/short stature, they may not
mothers to children, breastfeeding was found to
have a positive association with intergenerational experience the same extreme combination of other
change in intelligence, whereas when analyzing factors, such as nutrition, activity levels, and
backward change from children to mothers, a
medical conditions, and this tends to result in a less
negative association was found. These discrepant
extreme stature. An important feature of regression
findings highlight a hidden flexibility in the
to the mean is that it has an effect backward as well
analytical space and call into question the reliability
as forward in time. Tall offspring can be expected to
of earlier studies of breastfeeding and intelligence
have tall parents, but not quite as tall as themselves,
using observational data.
while short offspring can be expected to have short
parents, but not quite as short as themselves.
Keywords: analytical flexibility; breastfeeding;
The heights of parents and offspring in Galton’s
causal effect; forward and backward change; latent
example above are likely to have been measured
change score modeling; maternal and child
with very high reliability. However, if we have an
intelligence
outcome Y that is measured with less than perfect
Introduction reliability and a predictor X that has an association
with the true value on Y, we can expect an
In this article, we use the effect of breastfeeding association between X and observed change in Y
on intergenerational change in intelligence as a case between two measurements when adjusting for
study of regression to the mean in latent change initial value on Y, even if no true change in Y has
score models. The effect of breastfeeding on taken place. The reason for this spurious association
intelligence is controversial. Earlier studies using is that with a positive (negative) association between
observational data have found that breastfed X and the true value on Y, given the same initial
children have higher intelligence compared to those value on Y those with a high value on X will tend to
not breastfed [1–4]. A risk for confounding is have a higher (lower) value on true Y and,
apparent, as breastfeeding mothers tend to be more consequently, a more positive (negative) residual in
intelligent than non-breastfeeding mothers or the measurement of Y compared with those with a
lower value on X. And as residuals and association is predicted between breastfeeding and
measurement errors tend to regress toward a mean backward intergenerational change in intelligence,
value of zero, those with a high value on X will tend from child to mother, when conditioning on child
to experience a more positive (negative) change in intelligence. This negative association would
Y to a subsequent measurement compared with indicate that given the same intelligence, breastfed
those with the same initial value on Y but with a children tend to have mothers with lower
lower value on X. The effect of X on the change intelligence and have, consequently, experienced a
score in Y is less susceptible to this fallacy when not more positive intergenerational change in
adjusting for the initial value on Y [14–17]. intelligence compared with non-breastfed children.
Confounding refers to a phenomenon where two
variables X and Y are associated without having any Method
effect on each other because both of them are Participants
associated with a third variable Z. In attempting to The present study employed data from a
evaluate whether X and Y are independently nationally representative sample of 6283 American
associated, it is common to estimate the association female participants in the 1979 National
while adjusting for an indicator of Z. However, it is Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79, available
the problem completely and some degree of residual born between 1957 and 1964, as well as data from
confounding may remain. Residual confounding is the first (N = 4820) and second (N = 3328) born child
increased by higher true degree of confounding, of these women. We used this dataset because it is a
higher reliability in the measurements of X and Y, large, openly available resource well suited to the
lower reliability in the measurement of Z, and larger question at hand.
sample size [18–22].
Latent change score modeling is a form of Measures
structural equation modeling for analyzing change In 1980 a majority (N = 5939) of the women took
in an outcome between measurements [23–25]. The the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT). We
use of latent change score modeling rather than transformed the score to an IQ scale (M = 100, SD =
traditional regression models has been 15). Between 1986 and 2014 children aged five and
recommended for analyzing change over time [24]. over of the NLSY79 women could take the Peabody
However, similarly to simpler regression models, Individual Achievement Test (PIAT) in
latent change score models can be susceptible to the mathematics, reading recognition, and reading
influence of regression to the mean if regressing the comprehension. The scores were normed to an IQ
latent change score factor on the initial value on the scale by the NLS personnel. At least one PIAT score
outcome variable in addition to the predictor. For was available for 3950 first and 2996 second born
example, studies employing latent change score children, respectively. For those with more than one
modeling have demonstrated what seems to be score available, a mean across the scores was
spurious effects of vocabulary on change in matrix calculated and used as a measure of their
reasoning scores, and vice versa, and of intelligence intelligence.
on change in academic achievement, and vice versa On nine possible occasions between 1983 and
[26, 27]. Therefore, we have recommended to verify 1996 the NLSY79 women were asked if they had
effects shown in latent change score models by breastfed their first and second born child (when the
analyses where the latent change score is not child was an infant) at all. If they answered “yes” on
regressed on the initial value on the outcome at least one of these occasions and never answered
variable [27]. “no”, the child was categorized to have been
Thus, we aimed to investigate the association breastfed and if they answered “no” on at least one
between breastfeeding and child intelligence using of these occasions the child was categorized to not
two latent change score models susceptible to have been breastfed. A dichotomous breastfeeding
regression to the mean either on the mother’s or the variable can be expected to be less susceptible to the
child’s intelligence, in order to evaluate whether effect of imprecise memory compared with reports
these approaches would diverge. If breastfeeding of breastfeeding duration and, consequently, to be
has a true causal effect on child intelligence, a more reliable [28]. Data from 1983 on breastfeeding
positive association is predicted between of subsequent children after the second were also
breastfeeding and the latent intergenerational available, but the cases were few (280, 62, 16, 2, and
change score in intelligence, from mother to child, 1 for the third to the seventh child, respectively) and
both when adjusting and when not adjusting for were not included in the present analyses.
maternal intelligence. Moreover, a negative
1. We see that 39% and 40%
of the mothers breastfed their
Pearson correlation
Variable N M SD 2. 3. 4. 5. first and second child,
1. IQ, mother 5939 100.00 15.00 0.506 0.518 0.385 0.393 respectively. We also see a
2. IQ, child 1 3950 102.80 11.30 - 0.548 0.288 0.254
positive correlation between
3. IQ, child 2 2996 101.73 11.31 - 0.276 0.270
breastfeeding and child
4. BF1, child 1 4564 0.39 0.49 - 0.680
intelligence, but a stronger
5. BF1, child 2 1771 0.40 0.49 -
positive correlation between
1 Breastfeeding, dichotomous variable; Note: All correlations are significant (p <
0.001). breastfeeding and maternal
intelligence.
Statistical analyses
Non-breastfeeding mothers had lower measured
The association between breastfeeding and
intergenerational change in intelligence was
Both for first- (panel A) and second-born (panel B)
analyzed with latent change score modeling (see the
children we see that non-breastfeeding mothers were
Results section for illustrations). In one model,
a rather homogenous group of low-performers with
predicting forward intergenerational change in
a peak at approximately IQ 85 (although with a
intelligence from mothers to children, child
positive tail reaching high scores as well).
intelligence was regressed on maternal intelligence
Contrarily, breastfeeding mothers were more
and a latent change score and both regression
uniformly distributed along the IQ-scale.
weights were fixed to one. The intercept and
Predicted intergenerational changes in
variance of maternal intelligence and the change
score were freely estimated while they were fixed to
zero for the child’s intelligence, i.e. the child’s
conditioning on maternal intelligence, breastfed
intelligence was fully determined by maternal
children tended to have experienced a more positive
intelligence and the change score. The change score
was regressed on maternal intelligence as well as on
the dichotomous breastfeeding variable.
Breastfeeding and maternal intelligence were
allowed to correlate. In a second model, predicting
backward intergenerational change in intelligence
from children to mothers, maternal and the child’s
intelligence changed places in the model. In a third
model, predicting forward intergenerational change
in intelligence from mothers to children, the
regression effect between maternal intelligence and
the latent intergenerational change in intelligence
was replaced by a covariance. As the aim was to
compare models with different susceptibilities to
regression to the mean, additional covariates were
not included. For validation, models were run
separately for first and second born children. Cases
with missing values on all variables were omitted
from the analyses, and for the rest missing values
were handled by using full information maximum
likelihood estimations. This resulted in sample sizes
of N = 6172 and N = 6084 for the analyses involving
the first and the second born child, respectively.
Analyses were conducted with R 4.1.0 statistical
software [29] employing the lavaan package [30].
Script and data are available at the Open Science
separately for first (A) and second (B) child and for
Results
those who breastfed (darker gray) or did not
breastfeed (lighter gray) the child. Due to the scaling
of the original variable (percentile from 0 to 100 with
Descriptive statistics for and correlations
M = 42 and SD = 29), the range was restricted to 77.5-
131.
intergenerational change in intelligence compared expected (i.e. mean) IQ of mothers who breastfed
with non-breastfed children with equally intelligent their first child was 12.0 points higher compared
mothers (panel A); (2) If predicting change with mothers who did not breastfeed their first child.
backward in time from child to mother and If taking this difference into account, as well as the
conditioning on child intelligence, we still see a negative association between maternal intelligence
positive association between breastfeeding and and intergenerational change in IQ, the total effect
intergenerational change in intelligence, meaning of breastfeeding on the intergenerational change
that breastfed children tended to have experienced a would equal 2.67 + 12.0 × -0.648 = -5.11 , i.e. the
more negative intergenerational change in same as the effect in panel C (difference due to
intelligence compared with equally intelligent but rounding). Similarly, the expected difference in IQ
non-breastfed children (panel B); (3) If not between breastfed and non-breastfed firstborn
conditioning on maternal intelligence, the children was 6.91 and if taking this into account the
intergenerational change in intelligence from total effect of breastfeeding on backward
mothers to children was predicted to have been more intergenerational change in IQ, from child to mother
negative for breastfed compared with non-breastfed (see panel B), would equal 8.09 + 6.91 × -0.429 =
children (panel C). The results were similar for 5.13, which corresponds to the effect of -5.13 on
The association between breastfeeding and to the effects on intergenerational change in
intergenerational change in intelligence may seem intelligence from mother to her second child in row
positive and a negative effect, respectively.
However, it should be noted that the positive effect
in panel A ignores the positive association between
breastfeeding and maternal intelligence. The
BF BF BF
1.
.0
. . .
IQ IQ IQ
1 1 1
. 1
0 1 1 0 0 1
1 1 1
IQ IQ IQ IQ IQ IQ
1 1 1
D F
BF BF BF
1.
. . . . 0
IQ IQ IQ
1 1 1
. 1 1
0 0
0 1 1 0 0 1
1 1 1
IQ IQ IQ IQ IQ IQ
1 1 1
maternal intelligence (A and D), for predicting change backward in time from child to mother when conditioning on the
child’s intelligence (B and E), and for predicting change forward in time from mother to child without conditioning on
maternal intelligence (C and F). Separately for first (A-C) and second (D-F) child. Note: BF = breastfeeding; IQ =
maternal IQ, IQ = child’s IQ; the parameters are unstandardized; all parameters were statistically significant (p <
0.001, except for the effect of BF on ΔIQ in panel D, for which p = 0.012).
Discussion would be possible from observational data including
repeated measurements of mothers’ and children’s
We set out to evaluate if an observed association IQ. Repeated measures would serve to increase the
between breastfeeding and child intelligence differs reliability of measurements of mothers’ IQ and to
between two methods of analysis with different model a trajectory of children’s IQ, e.g. using
susceptibility to regression to the mean either on the growth curve analysis. Ideally, repeated measures of
mother’s or the child’s intelligence. onsistent with fathers’ IQ would also be adjusted for.
earlier studies and with a true positive causal A few studies with stronger methodology than
influence, a positive effect of 2.67 IQ points from the ones mentioned so far have investigated the
breastfeeding on the intergenerational latent change association between breastfeeding and child
in intelligence, from mothers to firstborn children, intelligence. Evenhouse and Reilly [31] compared
was observed when adjusting for maternal the intelligence of breastfed and non-breastfed
intelligence. However, contrary to a true positive siblings, thereby completely adjusting for stable,
causal effect, when adjusting for the first child’s e.g. genetically determined, maternal
intelligence, a positive effect of 8.09 IQ points from characteristics. They found a 1.68 percentile-points
breastfeeding on the backward intergenerational advantage for breastfed children compared with
change, from child to mother, was observed, their non-breastfed siblings on an abbreviated
meaning that breastfed children tended to have version of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test,
mothers with higher intelligence compared with measured in adolescence. However, the
equally intelligent but non-breastfed children and, breastfeeding or not of siblings was, of course, not
consequently, to have experienced a more negative randomized and it is possible that some child
intergenerational change in intelligence. That the characteristics that may increase the likelihood for
adjusted effect of breastfeeding on the breastfeeding (e.g. ability to focus) are also
intergenerational change in intelligence was positive positively associated with later measured
both forward and backward in time suggests that it intelligence, i.e. they act as confounders in the
may have been due to regression to the mean. Also comparison of siblings. Der et al. [28] found no
contrary to a true positive causal effect, the effect of breastfeeding on more comprehensive
unadjusted intergenerational change in intelligence measures of child intelligence when comparing
from mothers to children was more negative for siblings in the same NLSY79 cohort as in the present
breastfed children than for non-breastfed children. study. Furthermore, Der et al. combined their results
This latter negative effect should not be seen to with those by Evenhouse and Reilly [31] and found
definitively demonstrate a negative causal effect of the combined effect of breastfeeding on child
breastfeeding on children’s intelligence. As many intelligence to be weak and statistically non-
non-breastfeeding mothers had low measured significant. A cluster-randomized study found a
intelligence, there was considerable scope for a significant effect of a breastfeeding promotion
positive, and limited scope for a negative, intervention on actual breastfeeding and on child
intergenerational change in intelligence from them verbal intelligence, at age 6.5 years, but not on child
to their children. Hence, the observed negative effect full-scale IQ [32]. However, it has been argued that
could be due to a floor effect. the limited observed effect could be biased by the
The present results suggest that some of the facts that (1) the study excluded mothers who had
observed positive effects in earlier studies, including decided beforehand not to breastfeed their child, and
aggregated effects in meta-analyses, may be due (2) the pediatricians who conducted the
partly to residual confounding. Breastfeeding measurement of intelligence were not blinded to the
mothers may tend to have higher true intelligence allocated condition of the child (the differences were
than non-breastfeeding mothers with the same smaller and statistically non-significant for blinded
measured intelligence and this could be the reason auditors who assessed a subgroup of the children) [6,
why their children are predicted to have higher 33]. Moreover, at age 16 no significant non-adjusted
intelligence even when adjusting for measured differences between the promotion and the control
maternal intelligence. It is also possible that group remained, although a slight difference in
breastfed children tend to have more intelligent verbal functioning could be observed if adjusting for
fathers, even when adjusting for maternal (true) various baseline characteristics [33].
intelligence. Intelligent fathers may be better at Due to the limited, and possibly biased, findings
providing support – economic, emotional, etc. – that in the randomized trial by Kramer et al. [32], the
enables breastfeeding. Paternal intelligence is a negative finding in the comparison of siblings by
possible confounder that has received very little Der et al. [28], the risk of residual confounding in
attention in the literature. Stronger conclusions observational studies, even when adjusting for
maternal intelligence, as well as the present findings, score models are susceptible to regression to the
we think it remains premature to draw firm mean, and that this phenomenon may lead to
contradictory results. This finding calls into question
conclusions about a causal effect of breastfeeding
the reliability of earlier studies of breastfeeding and
on child intelligence.
intelligence using observational data. As studies of
The present findings illustrate that with the same
breastfeeding and intelligence using stronger
scientific question regarding breastfeeding and
designs have shown weak and inconsistent results,
intelligence, and in the same dataset, different
we conclude that a causal effect of breastfeeding on
analytical strategies can give strongly divergent
intelligence is far from established.
results. Studies using a multi-analyst approach, i.e.
where different analysts have tried to answer the