RESEARCH ARTICLE
What can we learn about integration of novel words into semantic
memory from automatic semantic priming?
a,b b c
Maria Korochkina , Lyndsey Nickels , and Audrey Bu¨rki
a b
Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway University of London, United Kingdom; School
of Psychological Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia; Department of Linguistics,
University of Potsdam, Germany
ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled December 22, 2023
ABSTRACT
According to the Complementary Learning Systems model of word learning, only
integrated novel words can interact with familiar words during lexical selection.
The pre-registered study reported here is the first to examine behavioural and
electrophysiological markers of integration in a task that relies primarily on
automatic semantic processing. 71 young adults learned novel names for two sets
of novel concepts, one set on each of two consecutive days. On Day 2, learning was
followed by a continuous primed lexical decision task with EEG recording. In the
N400 window, novel names trained immediately before testing differed from both
familiar and untrained novel words, and, in the time window between 500 −800 ms
post onset, they also differed from novel names that had undergone a 24-hour
consolidation, for which a small behavioural priming effect was observed. We
develop an account that attributes the observed effects to processes rooted in
episodic, rather than semantic, memory.
KEYWORDS
Word learning; EEG; episodic memory; semantic memory; integration; semantic
priming
Corresponding author: Maria Korochkina, Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London,
Egham, Surrey, TW20 0EX, United Kingdom; maria.korochkina@rhul.ac.uk
1. Introduction
Learning of words is a frequent experience in our lives. While the rate of words
learned may be at its highest during the school years (e.g., Anglin, 2000), vocabulary
development continues throughout adulthood (Brysbaert et al., 2016; Keuleers et al.,
2015), with most adults also learning new words in languages other than their first
language. Yet, despite the early onset and the ubiquity of word learning, its
multifaceted nature makes it no trivial task. In addition to learning a new
phonological form, the concept it refers to, and the association between them, word
acquisition entails integrating new words in a network of thousands of already
familiar words and connections (e.g., McMurray et al., 2016). In this study, we
focused on some questions pertaining to the timescale of this integration process, and
we also sought to broaden understanding of behavioural and electrophysiological
markers of integration when learning novel names for novel concepts.
Davis and Gaskell (2009) proposed an influential account of the processes by
which new words are integrated into the semantic network and achieve the same
status as already familiar words. Their account is based on the Complementary
Learning Systems (CLS) connectionist model of learning (Kumaran et al., 2016;
McClelland, 2013; McClelland et al., 1995, 2020; O’Reilly et al., 2014). This account
suggests that word learning occurs over two stages. The first stage relies on the
episodic memory system that is thought to reside in the medial temporal lobe,
specifically, the hippocampus. In contrast, the second stage is dependent on the
semantic memory system subserved by the neocortex (e.g., Squire, 2004, but see Duff
et al., 2020, for a review on the hippocampal contribution to maintenance and
retrieval of semantic memories). Whereas episodic memory refers to the capacity to
learn, store, and evoke detailed information about specific events together with their
spatiotemporal context (Dickerson & Eichenbaum, 2010), semantic memory is viewed
as a store of our knowledge about the world and the meanings of verbal symbols
(i.e., words) that we employ to make use of this knowledge (see Kumar, 2021, for a
review).
The CLS model is rooted in the notion that new memories usually start as
episodic, and later become abstracted away from the spatiotemporal context where
they were acquired, and integrated into the existing knowledge networks (e.g.,
Meeter & Murre, 2004). The CLS model of word learning also postulates that the
lexical status of the new words (i.e., whether they are treated as familiar words or as
nonwords) differs from that of already familiar words until the newly formed episodic
memory traces have been consolidated, i.e., transformed into long-term memory
(Davis & Gaskell, 2009). Consolidation is considered a pre-condition for integration
of new words into the lexicon, and it is believed to slow down the rate of forgetting,
reinforce resistance to interference from other stimuli (e.g., Dudai & Eisenberg, 2004;
Wixted, 2004), facilitate access to the meanings of the new words, and enhance the
extent to which their lexical representations impact lexical processing of familiar
words (Davis and Gaskell, 2009; Lindsay and Gaskell, 2010, and see Leach and
Samuel, 2007, for a similar two-stage model of word learning).
The CLS model of word learning was originally developed to account for learning
of (meaningless) spoken word forms; however, since Davis and Gaskell’s seminal paper,
the predictions of this model have been tested with different types of stimuli and
in different modalities, often with little regard to how the predictions of the model
might change depending on what is being learned and how. Thus, an extensive body
of literature has examined learning of (meaningless) spoken novel word forms (e.g.,
Bakker et al., 2014; Davis et al., 2009; Dumay & Gaskell, 2007, 2012; Dumay et al.,
2004; Gaskell & Dumay, 2003; Kapnoula & McMurray, 2016; Kapnoula et al., 2015;
Lindsay & Gaskell, 2013; Tamminen & Gaskell, 2008; Tamminen et al., 2010), while
other studies have focused on learning of novel words in the written modality (e.g.,
Bakker et al., 2014; Bowers et al., 2005; Walker et al., 2010). Likewise, there is a great
deal of research on learning of novel names for familiar concepts (e.g., Breitenstein
et al., 2007; Dobel et al., 2009; Elgort, 2011; Elgort & Warren, 2014; Geukes et al.,
2015; Korochkina et al., 2021; McGregor, 2014; McLaughlin et al., 2004; Mestres-
Miss´e et al., 2007, 2008; Tham et al., 2015), while a smaller literature has investigated
acquisition of novel names for novel concepts (e.g., Bakker et al., 2015; Balass et al.,
2010; Batterink & Neville, 2011; Borovsky et al., 2010, 2012, 2013; Clay et al., 2007;
Dumay et al., 2004; Fang & Perfetti, 2017; Liu & van Hell, 2020; Perfetti et al., 2005;
Tamminen & Gaskell, 2013; van der Ven et al., 2015). It is likely that the time course
of integration is dependent on whether the words-to-be-learned represent novel names
for already familiar concepts (typically, when learning a new language as an adult) or
refer to concepts not encountered previously (typically, when learning a new word in
one’s first language as an adult) (cf. Lindsay & Gaskell, 2010). In the present paper, we
are interested in how integration occurs in the latter scenario, i.e., when, in addition to
a novel name, a novel concept has to be acquired. In the remainder of this section, we
therefore restrict our literature review to research focusing on the integration of novel
names for novel concepts, with the exception of a few cases where previous research
has used exclusively familiar concepts.
In studies focusing on learning of novel names for novel concepts, integration
has been almost exclusively examined with a semantic priming paradigm in word
recognition (but see, e.g., Clay et al., 2007, for work on word production, Borovsky
et al., 2010, for use of a sentence processing task, and Dumay et al., 2018; Geukes
et al., 2015, for use of emotional and semantic Stroop tasks, respectively). In a
standard (paired) version of this paradigm, participants are presented with pairs of
stimuli (primes and targets) and asked to judge targets for lexicality (i.e.,
word-nonword discrimination) or semantic relatedness to the primes. Importantly,
the relationship between the primes and the targets is manipulated such that the
prime is either semantically related to the target (e.g., “desk” and “bed”) or not
(e.g., “hat” and “bed”). When targets are preceded by semantically related primes,
judgements are faster: there is semantic priming (see McNamara, 2005, for an
extensive review). In this condition, the prime is thought to activate its semantic
representation, and this activation spreads to representations of semantically related
words, including the (semantically related) target (e.g., Collins & Loftus, 1975;
Posner & Snyder, 1975). This pre-activation of the target means that, when the
semantically related target word is encountered, less additional activation is required,
resulting in faster response times than when the target is semantically unrelated to
the prime (but see de Wit and Kinoshita, 2015; Holender, 1992; Neely, 1991, for
alternative accounts). Crucially, when the prime is a newly learned novel word, it is
believed to be able to spread semantic activation to familiar words only if it had
been integrated into the lexical-semantic network (e.g., Davis & Gaskell, 2009;
Lindsay & Gaskell, 2010; Tamminen & Gaskell, 2013).
In the following sections, we provide a brief overview of the (behavioural and
electrophysiological) research using the semantic priming paradigm to study
integration of novel names for novel concepts.
1.1. Behavioural studies on integration of novel names for novel concepts
Although several studies have addressed integration of novel names for novel
concepts, no clear picture of the timescale of integration has emerged. Dumay et al.
(2004, Experiment 1) used a continuous primed lexical decision task (word-nonword
discrimination for both primes and targets), in which trained novel words were
primes and familiar English words were targets. They observed shorter response
times for the semantic superordinates (e.g., “vegetable”) of the novel words as
compared to semantically unrelated category names (e.g., “vehicle”) (i.e., semantic
priming). In addition, form priming was found for familiar English words (e.g.,
“cathedral”) from which the trained novel word primes were derived (e.g.,
“catherdruke”). Because these effects were present 7 days after training but not
immediately after or 24 hours after training, Dumay et al. (2004) concluded that
integration of meaningful novel words may take up to one week.
This interpretation was later challenged by Tamminen and Gaskell (2013) who
argued that the semantic priming effect in the Dumay et al. (2004) study could have
been due to co-occurrence of the novel words (primes) and their semantic categories
(targets) during training (i.e., word-to-word episodic association) rather than
integration into semantic memory. Tamminen and Gaskell (2013) addressed this issue
by teaching their participants two sets of words in two experimental sessions
conducted either on two consecutive days (1-day consolidation opportunity group) or
with a between-session interval of one week (7-day consolidation opportunity group).
The semantic priming effect was observed (in a paired primed lexical decision task),
and the size of this effect did not differ either across the groups or across the sets,
regardless of whether the primes were visible (Experiment 1) or masked (Experiment
2). However, when the data from the two experiments were combined (in attempt to
increase statistical power), the interaction between semantic relatedness and time of
testing was significant, with a stronger priming effect after a 7-day than after a 0-day
consolidation period (the 1-day vs. 0-day consolidation period was not tested).
Tamminen and Gaskell (2013) therefore inferred that novel names for novel concepts
can indeed be embedded with other lexical-semantic representations relatively
quickly, with the initially weak semantic priming effect growing stronger over time.
Following up on this work, van der Ven et al. (2015) contrasted the 1-day and 0-day
consolidation periods directly and indeed observed a priming effect of 10 ms as early
as 24 hours after training (but note that this effect was found in the by-participant
analysis only).
Summing up, behavioural studies with novel names for novel concepts do not
seem to provide an unequivocal answer regarding the time course of integration, with
van der Ven et al. (2015) arguing for a 24-hour period, Dumay et al. (2004) suggesting
a more protracted time course of one week (but with potential methodological issues),
and Tamminen and Gaskell (2013)’s findings remaining inconclusive.
1.2. Electrophysiological studies on integration of novel names for novel
concepts
Studies examining the neural signatures of integration have primarily focused on two
ERP components, the N400 and the Late Positive Component (LPC). The N400 is a
negative brain potential with a centro-parietal distribution and a slight
right-hemisphere bias that peaks approximately 400 ms after the onset of a
conceptually meaningful stimulus (e.g., a word, picture, face, sound; see Kutas and
Federmeier, 2011, for a review). Its amplitude typically becomes smaller when the
stimulus is congruent with the context it appears in (e.g., the preceding word or part
of a sentence). In the semantic priming paradigm, a larger (i.e., more negative) N400
response is typically observed when the target word (e.g., “cat”) is preceded by a
“dog”); this effect is usually referred to as the N400 priming effect. While the
functional basis of this effect is still debated, one of the most prominent theories
posits that it indexes retrieval of a word from semantic memory (e.g., Brouwer et al.,
2017; Deacon et al., 2004; Delogu et al., 2019; Kutas and Federmeier, 2000, 2011;
Lau et al., 2008, but see, e.g., Brown and Hagoort, 1993; Hagoort, 2008; Rabovsky
et al., 2018, for other accounts). When a word is encountered (e.g., “dog”), the
system makes predictions about the upcoming stimulus and pre-activates words
semantically related to the stimulus (e.g., “wolf”, “cat”, “horse”; see, e.g., Szewczyk
among the pre-activated words, a larger (more negative) N400 is elicited than when
the upcoming word is one of the pre-activated words (e.g., “cat”).
The LPC is a positive-going wave with a bilateral parietal distribution, peaking
at around 600 ms post-stimulus, and is believed to be a marker of episodic memory
retrieval (see, e.g., Rugg, 1995, for a review) . In the recognition memory literature,
it has been observed that stimuli that are correctly recognised as having been
encountered in a prior study list (“old” stimuli) evoke a larger (i.e., more positive)
LPC response than other stimuli (correctly rejected new stimuli or incorrectly judged
old stimuli, e.g., Curran, 1999; Rugg & Curran, 2007; Senkfor & Van Petten, 1998).
This old/new effect has also been found when the participants are not explicitly told
to make memory judgements, in, for example, repetition priming paradigms (e.g.,
Kazmerski & Friedman, 1997; Paller et al., 1995; Van Petten & Senkfor, 1996). In
the literature on semantic processing, the LPC has been linked to explicit processes
in semantic retrieval, contextual integration, and revision (e.g., Swaab et al., 1998;
Van Petten et al., 1991). Consequently, more positive LPC responses for semantically
and associatively related as opposed to unrelated targets (labelled the LPC priming
effect ) have been interpreted as indices of controlled and strategic semantic
processing in word recognition (e.g., Hill et al., 2002; Hoshino & Thierry, 2012;
Kandhadai & Federmeier, 2010).
Like the behavioural literature, the electrophysiological literature on integration
has yielded inconsistent results. Most studies have used the primed
semantic-relatedness judgement or standard (paired) lexical decision paradigms.
While some studies have reported an N400 priming effect immediately after learning
(Balass et al., 2010; Perfetti et al., 2005; and see Batterink and Neville, 2011;
Mestres-Miss´e et al., 2007, 2008, for studies on learning of novel names for familiar
concepts), others have failed to observe the N400 effect immediately after, 24 hours
after (Bakker et al., 2015; Liu & van Hell, 2020), or even one week after exposure
(Liu & van Hell, 2020).
With respect to the LPC, both the old/new LPC effect and the LPC priming
effect have been reported. Where an enhanced LPC response for novel versus familiar
words was observed, it was interpreted as an index of correct recognition of
previously encountered stimuli (Balass et al., 2010; Perfetti et al., 2005). In studies
where greater positivity in this spatiotemporal window was observed for related as
opposed to unrelated targets, it was taken to index non-automatic processes during
lexical retrieval and possibly incomplete integration (Bakker et al., 2015; Borovsky
et al., 2013; Liu & van Hell, 2020). In addition, some studies have found a stronger
LPC response for familiar words as compared to trained novel words and claimed
that it reflected poor recollection of the novel words’ meanings (Bakker et al., 2015;
Liu & van Hell, 2020).
Importantly, the same caveats as those from the behavioural literature must be
considered in the case of the electrophysiological studies. For instance, in Perfetti
et al. (2005), many of the targets (familiar English words) had occurred as part of
the definitions of the rare words the participants had been trained on, thus making it
possible that the observed N400 effects were at least partly due to word-to-word
association priming. While this confound was not present in Balass et al. (2010),
both Perfetti et al. and Balass et al. used the semantic-relatedness judgement task
which is thought to rely on the explicit memory system and require conscious
recollection (e.g., Batterink & Neville, 2011). Indeed, when Batterink and Neville
(2011) contrasted performance on the semantic-relatedness judgment task with a
paired primed lexical decision task immediately after training, the N400 priming
effect was observed only in the semantic-relatedness task. Batterink and Neville
therefore suggested that the primed lexical decision task is a much more reliable
measure of implicit memory and argued that explicit representations of novel word
meanings can develop rapidly, whereas implicit representations may require more
time to emerge.
In sum, integration of novel names for novel concepts into semantic memory has
been extensively studied with both behavioural and electrophysiological methods;
however, it remains unclear at what point in time and under what conditions novel
words begin to interact with familiar words during lexical selection. This is partly
because the design of some studies did not allow the disentanglement of
word-to-word association priming, arising through co-occurrence of primes and
targets during training, from priming driven by semantic relatedness. Yet, this is an
important distinction, because the CLS account of word learning predicts that
associative priming does not require integration; rather, it can be accommodated by
episodic memory.
In addition, many studies have explicitly asked participants to consider the
relationship between the primes and the targets (in the semantic-relatedness
judgement task, for example; see Bakker et al., 2015; Balass et al., 2010; Batterink
and Neville, 2011; Liu and van Hell, 2020; Perfetti et al., 2005), hence, restricting the
extent to which priming can be unequivocally attributed to automatic lexical
retrieval processes. The primed lexical decision task alleviates these concerns but, in
its most common form, where only targets are judged, it is also subject to strategic
and conscious processing as the participants are always aware of the fact that the
words are paired (e.g., Hutchison, 2003; Lucas, 2000; McRae & Boisvert, 1998). To
date, only one (behavioural) study (Tamminen & Gaskell, 2013) has used a version
of this task that is less prone to strategic influences (in their case, masked primed
lexical decision). Nonetheless, some authors have argued that, to minimise the
influence of both prospective and retrospective strategic processes (e.g.,
de Mornay Davies, 1998; McNamara and Altarriba, 1988; McRae and Boisvert, 1998,
but see Shelton and Martin, 1992, for the intra-lexical priming hypothesis), it is
necessary to use a continuous primed lexical decision task, where lexical decision is
performed on both primes and targets.
The continuous version of the primed lexical decision task is thought to be a
superior paradigm for reasons to do with the differential treatment of prime and
target trials in the standard and masked lexical decision tasks (e.g.,
de Mornay Davies, 1998). As, in these tasks, participants are not required to respond
to primes, they may generate potential (related) candidates that may appear as
targets. If the actual target matches one of these potential candidates, response
times will be shorter (the expectancy generation strategy, see Neely, 1991). Likewise,
participants may assess the semantic relationship between prime and target before
making their target decision, such that their decision (on the semantically related
trials) is aided by the presence of a relation between the two words (the post-lexical
checking strategy). Finally, if no judgements are required for the primes, the
participants may not process them fully or even ignore them, which may reduce the
likelihood of detecting the (relatively small) automatic semantic priming effect
(typically, 10 −20 ms, see, e.g., McNamara & Altarriba, 1988). Given these
considerations, we chose to use the continuous primed lexical decision task in the
present study to maximise the possibility of detecting a priming effect with novel
words especially given that this effect is likely to be even smaller than that typically
observed with familiar words.
1.3. Current study
We taught our participants novel names, one set on each of two consecutive days
(remote and recent set, respectively), and then, using continuous primed lexical
decision, studied (a) whether behavioural (faster response times for related vs.
unrelated targets) and/or electrophysiological (reduced N400 and enhanced LPC
amplitudes for related vs. unrelated targets) priming effects would emerge for the
trained novel name targets, and (b) whether these effects would vary depending on
the length of the consolidation opportunity (0 hours for the recent set vs. 24 hours
for the remote set). Furthermore, since enhanced negativity for unknown
pseudowords (compared to familiar words) in the N400 spatiotemporal window has
been suggested to reflect differences in the lexical status (e.g., Bentin, 1987; Kutas &
Federmeier, 2011), we also contrasted the ERP responses for trained novel names
with ERP responses for untrained pseudowords and with those for familiar words in
this spatiotemporal window.
stimuli, data, analysis code, and supplementary material (Appendices A-E) are
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Participants
Seventy-two participants (28 male, 44 female), aged between 18 and 35 years (µ =
20.94, σ = 3.86), took part in the experiment. All participants reported Australian
English as their first and dominant language, and none had started learning any
other languages prior to the age of six. All participants reported being right-handed
and having normal hearing, normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and no history of
neurological or psychiatric disorders. Participants received either course credits or
monetary reimbursement (70 AUD) for their participation. Prior to the start of the
experiment, participants were informed about the experimental procedure and gave
written consent. The experiment was granted ethical approval from the Macquarie
University Human Research Ethics Committee (approval (cid:155)3531).
One participant performed below chance on the continuous primed lexical decision
task; this participant’s data was discarded. The final sample thus consisted of 71
participants (27 male, 44 female; age: µ = 20.94, σ = 3.89).
2.2. General procedure
The experiment comprised two experimental sessions conducted on two consecutive
names for two sets of novel concepts (e.g., a novel bird, plant, etc.), one set in each
session (henceforth referred to as the remote and the recent set, respectively). In
Session 1, the learning phase was followed by a word recall task for the remote set
(learned in that session) and a working memory test. In Session 2, the learning phase
was followed by a word recall task for the recent set (learned in that session), a
continuous primed lexical decision task, and a word recall task for both sets (always
in that order). EEG was recorded throughout Session 2.
The experiment was run using Presentationfi software (Version 20.2, Build
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room at Macquarie University. The
mean time elapsing between the two sessions was 25.82 hours (σ = 2.80, range:
[16–31.50]). All participants reported having their usual duration and quality of sleep
the night between the two sessions. Session 1 lasted 1.5 hours and Session 2 took 2
hours, including breaks and the EEG set up. Data from the learning phase is
reported in Korochkina et al. (2023), and that from the working memory test will be
reported elsewhere.
2.3. Learning phase
Participants were required to learn novel names for 40 novel concepts having been
presented with the descriptions of those concepts.
2.3.1. Materials
Concept descriptions. Forty (existing) concepts were selected, each from a different
semantic category (e.g., one plant, one bird, one drink, etc.). From those concepts, 40
novel concepts were derived such that each novel concept represented a highly similar
category coordinate. For example, if aloe was selected as an existing concept, a novel
plant was generated that was similar to aloe but with partly different semantic features
(e.g., ability to survive extreme drought by curling into a tight ball and uncurling when
exposed to water). Each of the 40 novel concepts was described with 4 short sentences
that did not include the category name of the concept (sentence length: µ = 9.98
words, σ = 2.58). These sentences were adapted from definitions of existing concepts
extracted from online dictionaries and Wikipedia.
Twenty-three Australian native speakers (5 male, 18 female; age: µ = 36.17, σ
= 13.47) were given these descriptions along with descriptions of 20 existing concepts
(fillers) and judged whether they were familiar with the described concepts and
which semantic categories the concepts were likely to belong to. Participants
correctly identified the intended semantic categories of the novel concepts. For
concepts that the participants believed were familiar (i.e., that the description
referred to a real thing), they were asked to specify what that concept was. Those
novel concepts that more than 40% of the participants reported were existing things
(e.g., responded that the novel plant was an aloe), were replaced by new concepts or
better descriptions of the same concepts (15% of the descriptions).
If participants were not familiar with the concept (as was expected for these novel
concepts), they were asked what it reminded them of. The expected response was the
semantically related existing concept that had been used to generate the novel concept.
Those 20% of novel concepts for which participants showed less than 90% agreement in
terms of a similar concept were replaced by new concepts. Where agreement was less
than 90%, but more than 65% of the participants agreed on a similar existing concept
(e.g., cactus instead of aloe), the novel concept and its description were changed to be
more similar to the existing concept the participants supplied (e.g., to cactus).
The corrected descriptions were given to another 10 speakers of Australian
English (2 male, 8 female; age: µ = 28.20, σ = 5.75), which confirmed that there was
high (90%) agreement regarding the most closely semantically related existing
concepts (which always belonged to the same semantic category as the novel
Novel names. Forty novel words were created. The novel words were generated by
the first author, and we ensured that they were phonotactically and orthographically
legal in Australian English. To ensure that there was some variability in syllabic
structure and that the novel names were neither too easy nor too difficult to learn,
half of the stimuli were monosyllabic and half disyllabic. Ten native speakers of
Australian English judged that these novel words neither existed in English nor
elicited strong associations with existing English words. Each novel word was
audio-recorded by a male native speaker of Australian English.
Lists. Four lists were created to ensure that each concept description and each
novel name appeared in both the remote and the recent set. We first split the novel
concept descriptions and novel names into two sets of 20 each (Concept description
sets 1 and 2; Novel name sets A and B). Each set of novel names had an equal
number of monosyllabic (N = 10) and disyllabic (N = 10) novel words, and a
Bayesian alternative to a t-test (as implemented in the R packages BEST and
BayesFactor; see Appendix A for model output) confirmed that the two sets were
matched for orthographic Levenshtein distance 20 (OLD20, see Yarkoni et al., 2008;
computed using the R package vwr), number of letters, and bigram frequency (as
given in the MCWord database; Medler and Binder, 2008). The novel names were
then paired with the descriptions to create four sets of pairs with 20 pairs per set: 1A
— Description Set 1 with Novel name Set A; 1B — Description Set 1 with Novel
name Set B; 2A — Description Set 2 with Novel name Set A; and 2B — Description
Set 2 with Novel name Set B. Four lists were constructed such that there were all
possible combinations of sets across the lists: List 1 — set 1A in Session 1 and 2B in
Session 2; List 2 — 1B and 2A; List 3 — 2A and 1B; and List 4 — 2B and 1A (see
Appendix B for the concept description-novel name pairs assigned to each list). The
participants were randomly assigned to the lists, with nine participants per list.
2.3.2. Procedure
In each session, participants learned one set of 20 novel concept descriptions paired
form of a novel name (in black Arial font, size 60) appeared in the middle of the screen.
Participants were asked to view it silently for 2200 ms, during which a recording of the
spoken form of the novel name was played. Next, four sentences describing the novel
concept associated with the novel name appeared one by one (in black Arial font,
size 25), with 3000 ms between each sentence, with previous sentences remaining on
the screen. After the last sentence, all four sentences stayed on the screen for another
9000 ms, together with the novel name. Following a blank screen for 1000 ms, the
written form of the novel name (Arial font, size 60) was presented again for 3000 ms,
this time in red and with an image of a microphone above it, and the participants
were asked to read the novel name aloud. After a blank screen for 1000 ms, the next
trial began.
When all the novel names and concept descriptions had been presented once,
the set of 20 pairs was presented three more times, each time in a different order.
The presentation order was pseudo-randomised such that (a) the last novel name
shown in one round was not first in the next round, and (b) none of the novel names
appeared at the same position more than twice across the four rounds. Therefore, the
participants were exposed to each novel concept description-novel name pair 4 times.
In each session, the learning phase took approximately 45 minutes including breaks.
2.4. Recall tasks
Immediately following the learning phase, a recall task was used to enable evaluation
of learning in each session.
In the recall task, participants were presented with the concept descriptions from
the set of 20 names they had just learned (i.e., the remote set in Session 1 and the recent
set in Session 2) and asked to provide the names of the novel concepts associated with
the descriptions. Each trial started with a 500 ms fixation screen. The descriptions (sets
of four sentences) appeared on the screen (in black Arial font, size 25) with an image
of a microphone above them. The participants were required to respond orally (with
a timeout set to 5000 ms) and, after the image of the microphone disappeared, type
the written form of the novel name in a response box displayed under the description
(with a timeout of 10 000 ms). The task lasted approximately 5 minutes (including one
break). By administering single-set word recall tasks immediately after a corresponding
training phase we sought to ensure that both sets had an equal amount and type of
exposure prior to the administration of the priming task. These tasks also gave us a
measure of explicit learning (number of words recalled correctly).
Participants completed another recall task at the end of Session 2 (following the
continuous primed lexical decision task, see section 2.5 below). The procedure was
identical to that described above, however, descriptions of all novel concepts (from
both the remote and the recent set) were presented. The descriptions appeared in a
random order (i.e., not blocked by set). The task lasted approximately 10 minutes
including breaks and was used to (a) examine explicit memory for words from the
recent set after a 1-day consolidation period and (b) assess whether the priming task
has benefitted explicit memory for the remote set.
2.5. Continuous primed lexical decision task
The design of this task was based on McRae and Boisvert (1998, Experiment 1).
Following Bakker et al. (2015) and Liu and van Hell (2020), we used trained novel
names as targets and familiar words as primes. This enabled us to measure the brain
responses to the trained novel words (primed by familiar English words) which would
not have been possible if the trained novel words were used as primes. Moreover, we
wished to test whether the outcomes of the Bakker et al. (2015) and Liu and van Hell
(2020) studies could be found using a priming task that reduced the extent of strategic
processing (relative to the primed semantic-relatedness judgement task they used).
2.5.1. Materials
Eighty word pairs, each consisting of a prime word and a target word, were created.
Half of the word pairs (N = 40) comprised pairs of English words (English pairs), while
the other half (N = 40) consisted of an English prime word and a novel target name
from the learning phase (English-novel pairs). For both English and English-novel
pairs, there were 20 semantically related pairs (with primes and targets belonging
to the same semantic category; semantically related condition) and 20 semantically
unrelated pairs (primes and targets from different semantic categories; semantically
unrelated condition). The full list of stimuli used in the continuous primed lexical
decision task is provided in Appendix C.
English-novel pairs. For each of the 40 trained novel names, a semantically related
English word and a semantically unrelated English word were selected as primes. The
semantically related primes comprised the base English words from which the novel
semantically unrelated pairs (N = 40) were created by pseudo-randomly re-pairing
the primes and the targets to ensure that words from different but semantically close
categories (e.g., animals and birds, or food and drinks) were not paired as unrelated.
English pairs. We selected one pair of familiar concepts from each of the semantic
categories (N = 40) used in the English-novel pairs. We aimed to ensure that the
category coordinates were as similar as possible. However, to minimise the
“associative boost” observed when a semantic relationship is accompanied by a
normative association (e.g., Lucas, 2000), we ensured a low associative relationship
(the two words were not among the first three of each other’s associates and had the
associative strength of 0.1 or less as given in the Small World of Words association
norms; De Deyne et al., 2018). As with the English-novel pairs, the semantically
unrelated English pairs (N = 40) were created by pseudo-randomly re-pairing the
primes and the targets. Fifteen Australian native speakers (2 male, 13 female; age: µ
= 27.87, σ = 8.78) then judged the semantic relatedness of the pairs by specifying
whether the pairs of words referred to the same concept. If they responded
negatively, they were asked to rate how similar in meaning the words in the pairs
were to each other on a 7-point scale from 1 (“very different”) to 7 (“very similar”).
The mean rating for the related pairs was 5.26 (σ = 1.68) and, for the unrelated
pairs, 1.28 (σ = 0.97).
Fillers. Each list included 160 filler nonwords to equalise the number of “yes” and
“no” responses for lexical decision. These nonwords were created following the same
criteria as for the novel names used in the learning phase (equal number of
monosyllabic and disyllabic words with all words being phonotactically and
orthographically legal in Australian English) and matched with the trained novel
names for OLD20, number of letters, and bigram frequency (see Appendix A). The
same group of 10 native speakers who judged the novel names for the learning phase
confirmed that the filler nonwords neither existed in English nor elicited strong
associations with existing English words.
Lists. Eight lists were created such that, for each of the four lists used in the learning
phase, in the continuous primed lexical decision task, half of the participants saw the
trained novel words in the semantically related and the other half in the unrelated
condition. Each of the eight lists contained 80 primes, 80 targets (i.e., 80 prime-target
pairs), and 160 filler nonwords (i.e., 320 items in total). In each list, there were 40
English pairs (20 semantically related, 20 unrelated) and 40 English-novel pairs (20
semantically related, 20 unrelated). Pairs containing the trained novel names from the
remote and the recent sets were equally distributed across conditions, and, in each list,
each prime and target only appeared once. Each semantic category (N = 40) appeared
once in the English pairs and once in the English-novel pairs, counterbalanced across
list, English targets from the semantically related and unrelated pairs were matched for
OLD20, number of letters, and word frequency (obtained from the MCWord database),
while the related and unrelated novel name targets were matched for OLD20, number
of letters, and bigram frequency (see Appendix A).
2.5.2. Procedure
Both experimental (primes and targets) and filler stimuli were presented to the
participants in lowercase (in black Arial font, size 60), one stimulus at a time. For
each letter string, the participants were required to judge whether it corresponded to
a word that they knew by pressing an appropriate button (the top left button for
“yes” and the top right button for “no” on a Cedrus RB-840 button box). The
participants were instructed to respond “yes” to all words that they were familiar
with, regardless of whether they had learned them in the course of the experiment or
had known them previously. This instruction was given to ensure that there was no
confusion as to how the novel names were to be responded to, and it was also
consistent with the instruction given in the learning task (the participants were told
that they would be learning English names for unfamiliar objects).
Primes and targets were not paired explicitly but appeared as adjacent items,
with lexical decision being required for every item. The presentation order was
pseudo-randomised separately for each participant with the following constraints:
(a) a maximum of four consecutive items per condition (related, unrelated, filler),
(b) a maximum of four consecutive items where the novel names (targets) were from
the same set (remote or recent). This design and the low proportion of semantically
related pairs (25%) was used to minimise strategic processing and awareness of the
experimental manipulation by the participants.
The task started with 20 practice trials. The experimental trials were presented
in blocks of 20, with short breaks in between. Each block started with a filler trial.
The participants were told to respond as quickly and as accurately as possible upon
the presentation of the stimulus. Independent of whether and when a response was
given, the stimulus stayed on the screen for 1000 ms (timeout). This was followed by
a blank screen for 200 ms. The blank screen was replaced by the next stimulus, either
experimental or filler.
2.6. Pre-processing of behavioural data
Recall tasks. The accuracy of the participants’ vocal responses was manually checked
using Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2014), and only responses that corresponded to
the trained phonological form were counted as correct. The judge was blind to the
experimental condition in which the responses were collected. The accuracy of the
typed responses was evaluated automatically by the Presentation software and only
responses that exactly matched the trained orthographic form were coded as correct.
Continuous primed lexical decision task. Prior to conducting any descriptive
or inferential statistical analysis, we inspected the distribution of the response times
(for correct responses) across participants and items. Data points that clearly stood
outside the distribution (response times shorter than 250 ms or longer than 950 ms)
were removed (Baayen, 2008). This resulted in less than 1 per cent data loss.
2.7. Acquisition and pre-processing of electrophysiological data
EEG was recorded using a 64-channel BioSemi ActiveTwo electrode system
(Amsterdam, Netherlands) at a sampling rate of 2048 Hz. The Ag-AgCl-tipped
electrodes were attached to an electrode cap using the 10/20 system. The signal was
recorded relative to an additional (active) electrode, the common mode sense (CMS),
which formed a feedback loop with another additional (passive) electrode, the driven
right leg (DRL). These two electrodes replaced the ground electrode of more
conventional systems. Further electrodes were placed on the left and right mastoid as
well as at the outer canthus of the left eye. The raw EEG signal was pre-processed in
MATLAB (version R2020b; Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc), using the
EEGLAB toolbox (Delorme & Makeig, 2014). Two datasets were created. For both
datasets, the continuous signal was re-sampled at 500 Hz and filtered with a 1 Hz
high pass filter (Kaiser windowed sinc FIR filter, order = 802, beta = 4.9898,
transition bandwidth = 2 Hz) and a 40 Hz low pass filter (Kaiser windowed sinc FIR
filter, order = 162, beta = 4.9898, transition bandwidth = 10 Hz). Line noise removal
and bad channel detection were performed using the cleanLineNoise and
findNoisyChannels functions from the PREP pre-processing pipeline
(Bigdely-Shamlo et al., 2015), and both datasets were re-referenced to the algebraic
average of the left and right mastoid. Subsequently, one of the datasets (excluding
the bad channels) was subjected to Independent Component Analysis (ICA;
Chaumon et al., 2015), while the other dataset was high pass filtered at 0.1 Hz
(Kaiser windowed sinc FIR filter, order = 8008, beta = 4.9898, transition bandwidth
= 0.2 Hz).
The demixing matrix obtained from the ICA (run on dataset 1) was then
applied to the second dataset (filtered at 0.1 Hz). ICLabel, an automated EEG
independent component classifier (Pion-Tonachini et al., 2019), was used to exclude
individual components corresponding to activity originating from the eyes and
groups of muscle motor units as well as the electrocardiographic signals. Next, the
noisy channels identified earlier were spherically interpolated. The signal was then
segmented into epochs of 1.2 s, from 200 ms before the stimulus onset to 1 s after the
stimulus onset. The epochs were baseline corrected using the mean of the signals
between −200 ms and 0 ms relative to the stimulus onset. Finally, epochs with the
amplitude below −100 (cid:181)V or above 100 (cid:181)V were excluded. At the end of the
pre-processing, a mean of 3.73 epochs per participant (σ = 9.30, range: [0–62]) were
excluded (note that epochs corresponding to the primes were not analysed). In the
semantic priming analysis for the English pairs (Preliminary analysis, see below), a
mean of 0.32 epochs per participant per condition (related: σ = 0.89, range: [0–5];
unrelated: σ = 0.95, range: [0–5]) were excluded. In the semantic priming analysis for
the English-novel pairs (Main analysis), a mean of 0.20 epochs per participant were
removed for the recent set (σ = 0.69, range: [0–5]; related: µ = 0.20, σ = 0.62, range:
[0–4]; unrelated: µ = 0.21, σ = 0.75, range: [0–5]) and 0.12 epochs per participant for
the remote set (σ = 0.40, range: [0–3]; related: µ = 0.10, σ = 0.34, range: [0–2];
unrelated: µ = 0.14, σ = 0.46, range: [0–3]). For the filler nonwords in the lexicality
analysis (Main analysis), a mean of 2.44 epochs per participant (σ = 5.98, range:
[0–41]) were discarded. Finally, epochs corresponding to trials with incorrect
behavioural responses to the target words were removed, which, together with the
epochs excluded earlier, constituted 13.7% of the data. As with the behavioural data,
prior to conducting any descriptive or inferential statistical analysis, we inspected
the distribution of the amplitudes across participants and items, and one additional
data point (in the dataset restricted to the novel name targets, i.e., Main analysis)
was removed.
3. Analysis
We used analytical tools from both the Bayesian and the frequentist frameworks to
analyse the data. All Bayesian models (behavioural and electrophysiological, see below)
were performed in R, version 4.1.1 (R Core Team, 2021) using the brms package
(Bu¨rkner, 2017a, 2017b). For each model, four sampling chains were run, each with
10000 iterations. Of the 10000 iterations, the initial 2000 were warm-up iterations.
Thus, there were a total of 32000 sampling iterations available for analysis. For each
parameter of interest, we report the estimate of the posterior mean with its 95%
credible interval (95% CrI ), which denotes the range of values within which we can
be 95% certain that the true value of the parameter falls (e.g., Nicenboim & Vasishth,
2016).
In the Bayesian analyses, hypothesis testing used Bayes factors (e.g., Heck
et al., 2020; Jeffreys, 1939; Kass & Raftery, 1995; Scho¨nbrodt & Wagenmakers, 2018)
via the bridgesampling algorithm (Bennett, 1976; Meng & Wong, 1996; Schad,
Nicenboim, Betancourt, & Vasishth, 2021; Schad, Nicenboim, Bu¨rkner, et al., 2021)
as implemented in the R package bridgesampling (Gronau et al., 2020). Bayes
factors are reported representing the ratio of the likelihood of a more complex
hypothesis to the likelihood of a simpler hypothesis (BF ), and we interpret the
strength of change of evidence in favour of one model over another using the Jeffreys
(1939) Bayes factor scale.: BF > 1 provides evidence for a more complex model
(1 < BF < 3: anecdotal evidence, 3 < BF < 10: moderate evidence,
10 10
10 < BF < 30: strong evidence, 30 < BF < 100: very strong evidence,
10 10
BF > 100: extreme evidence), BF = 1 provides no evidence, and BF < 1
10 10 10
provides evidence for a less complex model (0.33 < BF < 1: anecdotal evidence,
0.10 < BF < 0.33: moderate evidence, 0.03 < BF < 0.10: strong evidence,
10 10
0.01 < BF < 0.03: very strong evidence, BF < 0.01: extreme evidence).
10 10
In addition to the R packages listed above, we used: openxlsx, tidyverse,
lme4, MASS, scales, rstan, rethinking, designr, reshape, RColorBrewer,
gridExtra, bayesplot, EnvStats, cowplot.
Note that analyses reported below differ from those reported in an earlier
priors following a reviewer’s comments. While this modification does not change the
results and their interpretation in any substantial way, we believe that the updated
analyses facilitate comparison with previous research and ultimately provide a more
comprehensive understanding of our data. For readers interested in the original
analyses and in how they compare to those reported below, the code and the
outcomes of the original analyses are available on OSF and their discussion can be
3.1. Behavioural data
Response times (RTs) for correct responses were analysed using Bayesian Linear Mixed
Effects models (e.g., Nicenboim & Vasishth, 2016). Two analyses were pre-registered:
the preliminary analysis examined whether there was a semantic priming effect for the
English targets, while the main analysis examined (a) whether there was a semantic
priming effect for the trained novel name targets, and (b) whether this effect was
modulated by the length of the consolidation period (24 hours for the remote set, 0
hours for the recent set). There were no deviations from the pre-registered analyses.
All models included the maximal random effects structure for the location
parameter µ (i.e., correlated varying intercepts and slopes for subjects and items, see
e.g., Barr et al., 2013). The contrasts of interest were defined using sum contrast
coding such that the model coefficients corresponded to the difference between the
two conditions (e.g., for the effect of semantic relatedness, targets preceded by
semantically related primes were coded as −0.5 and those preceded by semantically
unrelated primes as 0.5 ). We used the lognormal distribution to specify all model
parameters except for the correlation matrix for the random effects, which was
defined with an LKJ-prior (Lewandowski et al., 2009; Stan Development Team,
2017). For this prior, we chose a diffuse parameter value of 2 as it allows
regularisation of the distributions of the correlation parameters such that extreme
values such as 1 and −1 are less likely a priori.
The priors for the preliminary (English pairs) and main (English-novel pairs)
analyses differed only in terms of the priors for the intercept. These priors were
based on average response times typically reported in the literature in the (paired
and continuous) primed lexical decision tasks as well as on our expectation that
mean lexical decision times would be slightly faster for familiar words than for the
trained novel names. Thus, for the intercept in the preliminary analysis, we assumed
a normal distribution with a mean of 6.3 and a standard deviation of 0.3, reflecting a
mean RT of about 570 ms (with a median of about 545 ms and SD of about 361 ms),
with 95% of the values falling roughly within the 300 −990 ms interval (recall that
RTs below 250 ms and above 950 ms were excluded during pre-processing). In
contrast, for the intercept in the main analysis, we defined a normal distribution
with a mean of 6.4 and a standard deviation of 0.35, which corresponds to a
distribution with 95% of the values lying between about 270 ms and 1090 ms, with a
mean RT of about 640 ms, median RT of about 602 ms, and a SD of about 413 ms.
All models were fitted using four sets of priors (as part of a sensitivity analysis)
all sets of priors, the prior was sampled from a normal distribution centred around 0,
reflecting no commitment to the direction of the effect. The standard deviation of the
distribution differed across the sets: σ = 0.001 in prior set 1 (i.e., 95% of the values lie
within a −1 ms and to 1 ms range; no priming effect), σ = 0.008 in prior set 2 (i.e., 95%
of the values within a −10 ms and to 10 ms range; small priming effect), σ = 0.02 in
prior set 3 (i.e., 95% of the values within a −24 ms and to 24 ms range; medium-sized
priming effect), and σ = 0.025 in prior set 4 (i.e., 95% of the values within a −28 ms
and to 28 ms range; large effect). These definitions of effect sizes (no effect, small effect,
medium-sized effect, large effect ) were based on average effect sizes reported in mega-
studies using the standard lexical decision task (e.g., Brysbaert & Stevens, 2018). For
lack of better estimates, priors for other effects of interest (in the main analysis, main
effect of time of learning, remote vs. recent, and the interaction between this effect
and the priming effect) were based on those for the effect of semantic relatedness. In
the following section, we report the back-transformed model estimates as milliseconds
for ease of interpretation. Please note that, in all figures, error bars and uncertainty
intervals represent one standard error from the mean, whereby standard errors were
corrected for within-subjects variability unless stated otherwise (note that, as this
also applies to EEG data figures, we do not repeat this information in the following
subsection).
3.2. Electrophysiological data
Electrophysiological data were analysed with Bayesian Distributional Regression
models (e.g., Rigby & Stasinopoulos, 2005) and Mass Univariate analysis (e.g.,
Groppe et al., 2011a, 2011b). Two analyses were pre-registered: the preliminary
analysis examined whether there were differences in mean amplitudes between the
semantically related and unrelated English targets in the N400 and in the LPC
spatiotemporal windows. The main analysis examined, in the semantic priming
analysis, (a) whether there were differences in mean amplitudes between the
semantically related and unrelated trained novel name targets in the N400 and in the
LPC spatiotemporal windows, and (b) whether this effect was modulated by the
length of the consolidation period (0-hour consolidation for the recent set and
24-hour consolidation for the remote set). Then, in the lexicality analysis, we
examined (c) whether there were differences in mean amplitudes between the
semantically unrelated English targets, the semantically unrelated trained novel
name targets, and the nonwords.
Analysis of mean amplitudes in two pre-defined spatiotemporal windows.
The dependent variable was amplitude averaged across all time points and electrodes
within the pre-defined spatiotemporal windows, the N400 and the LPC. We selected
23 centro-parietal electrodes (C5, C3, C1, Cz, C2, C4, C6, CP5, CP3, CP1, CPz,
CP2, CP4, CP6, P7, P5, P3, P1, Pz, P2, P4, P6, P8) between 300 ms and 500 ms
after word onset for the N400 spatiotemporal window, while the LPC spatiotemporal
window spanned 9 frontal (F7, F5, F3, F1, Fz, F2, F4, F6, F8) and 9 parietal (P7, P5,
P3, P1, Pz, P2, P4, P6, P8) electrodes between 500 ms and 800 ms post onset. This
choice was based on which channels are typically selected in the literature (for the
N400 see, e.g., Cheimariou et al., 2018; Liu and van Hell, 2020; Nieuwland et al., 2019;
Payne et al., 2015; Szewczyk and Schriefers, 2018; and for the LPC, e.g., Bakker et al.,
2015; Batterink and Neville, 2011; Peters and Daum, 2009; Rugg and Curran, 2007).
The frontal electrodes were included in the LPC spatiotemporal window because it
has been suggested that electrophysiological correlates of recollection differ depending
upon the type of information that must be retrieved from episodic memory (e.g., Peters
& Daum, 2009).
In line with the pre-registered plan, we first fitted Linear Mixed Effects models
with a maximal random effects structure for the location parameter µ; however, these
models misfitted the by-subject standard deviations. We then fitted Distributional
Regression models with a group-level random effects structure for both the location
and the scale (σ) parameters, and these models provided a much better fit for our data.
All models included varying intercepts for the scale parameter, while, for the location
parameter, models testing for priming effects included correlated varying intercepts
and slopes for subjects and items, and models testing for lexicality effects contained
correlated varying intercepts and slopes for subjects and varying intercepts for items
(because one item could be either an English word, or a novel name, or a nonword, but
never all). In the priming analysis, sum contrast coding (−0.5 , 0.5 ) was used to define
the contrasts of interest. For the lexicality analysis, sum contrasts were specified in
the pre-registration, however, this contrast coding would have been unsuitable given
that each item could only be either a nonword, or an English word, or a trained novel
word (from either set). We therefore employed repeated contrasts, and, given that
the independent variable (word type) had 4 levels, we could only run 3 contrasts at
a time: (1) nonwords vs. English words, (2) recent novel names vs. nonwords, and
(3) remote vs. recent novel names. These three comparisons were chosen for several
reasons. Firstly, in the literature, the lexicality effect refers to the difference between
the nonwords and the familiar, existing, words, and, by running this contrast, we
wished to see whether we could replicate the lexicality effect in our study. Secondly,
we wished to see whether processing of the trained novel names would be different
from that of the nonwords as well as whether it would vary as a function of the
length of consolidation. To explore whether consolidation resulted in more word-like
processing of the trained novel names, we also performed an exploratory analysis
with three more contrasts: (1) remote novel names vs. English words, (2) recent novel
names vs. English words, and (3) nonwords vs. remote novel names; the results of
this exploratory analysis with a brief discussion are provided in Appendix D. Another
deviation from the pre-registered plan was that we fitted separate models for the
frontal and parietal electrodes in the 500 −800 ms time window to avoid estimation of
a three-way interaction.
As with the behavioural data, four sets of priors were defined, and they differed
Correlation matrices were specified using the LKJ-prior, whereas, for all other model
parameters, normal distribution was used (note that we used the lognormal
distribution to define the prior for the standard deviation for the prior for the
intercept of sigma only to ensure that negative by-subject adjustments to the
intercept did not cause sigma to become negative). In choosing the plausible ranges
for the effects of interest, we relied on the fact that, across published studies, both
the N400 and the LPC effects are typically rather small, ranging from 5% to 30% of
the standard deviation of the EEG signal, which, for N400 and LPC averages,
usually falls between 8 (cid:181)V and 15 (cid:181)V. As with the behavioural data, all priors were
centred around 0, reflecting an assumption that the effect could be either positive or
negative, while the standard deviations differed across the four sets. In prior set 1,
σ = 0.5, suggesting that the difference between the two conditions would be about
5% of the upper bound of the SD of the signal (i.e., a very small difference, with 95%
of the values falling between −1 (cid:181)V and 1 (cid:181)V). Prior set 2 (σ = 1) assumed an effect
of about 10% of the SD of the signal, with 95% of the values falling between −2 (cid:181)V
and 2 (cid:181)V. Finally, priors 3 (σ = 2) and 4 (σ = 3) assumed effects of about 20% and
30% of the SD of the signal, with 95% of the values lying between −4 (cid:181)V and 4 (cid:181)V
and −6 (cid:181)V and 6 (cid:181)V, respectively.
Mass univariate analysis. This analysis was employed to explore latencies and
locations other that the N400 and the LPC spatiotemporal windows as the mass
univariate analysis allows testing for significant differences between the conditions of
interest across the whole scalp and at every time point (see, e.g., Groppe et al., 2011a,
2011b, for details). The analysis was conducted using LIMO, an open-source MATLAB
toolbox (Pernet et al., 2011). In LIMO, the data is analysed using a Hierarchical
General Linear model. In our study, model parameters (i.e., beta coefficients for the
predictor of interest) were first estimated (using trial-based Ordinary Least Squares)
separately for each participant at each time point and electrode (first-level analysis; see
Bellec et al., 2012). These parameter estimates were then used to test the statistical
significance of the predictors at a group level (using robust paired t-tests; second-
level analysis). Finally, we corrected for multiple comparisons using the Threshold
Free Cluster Enhancement technique (TFCE; see, e.g., Pernet et al., 2015; Smith and
Nichols, 2009). This method was chosen because it avoids some of the known issues of
other cluster-based correction approaches (e.g., high sensitivity to the initial cluster-
forming threshold), while it provides an equally strong control of the family-wise error
rate. There were two deviations from the pre-registered analysis: (1) we used the
same contrast coding as in the Bayesian analysis (repeated contrasts) because the pre-
registered contrasts proved to be inappropriate for the data, and, (2) while correcting
for multiple comparisons, we relied on bootstrapping rather than on permutation tests
because bootstrap techniques have been shown to, in most cases, perform similarly to,
and, under certain conditions, even outperform permutation techniques, and can thus
be considered more versatile (Pernet et al., 2011; Wilcox, 2005).
4. Results and discussion
In the recall task immediately after learning of the remote set, mean response accuracy,
for the spoken responses, was 42% (SD = 13%) and, for the typed responses, 51% (SD
= 12%). Mean accuracy in the recall task immediately after learning of the recent set
was very similar, with 44% correct (SD = 12%) for the spoken and 50% correct (SD =
12%) for the typed responses. The seemingly higher accuracy for the typed responses
is probably due to the fact that these were collected after the spoken responses such
that the participants had more time for retrieval. In the recall task at the end of the
second session which probed both sets, mean accuracy, for the recent set, was 43%
(SD = 12%) for the spoken and 49% (SD = 12%) for the typed responses, and, for
the remote set, 30% (SD = 13%) and 34% (SD = 13%), respectively. We take these
results to indicate that the participants learned both sets to the same extent, but that
some forgetting happened overnight (for the remote set). Because we did not have
any research questions with respect to the recall data, we did not analyse it further;
however, we elaborate on the possible implications of the relatively low recall accuracy
in the General Discussion.
Response accuracy for all targets used in the continuous primed lexical decision
4.1. Preliminary analysis
This analysis – the semantic priming analysis for the English prime-target pairs –
provides a baseline against which the novel names can be compared; however, the goal
of this study was to examine integration of novel words. Therefore, to conserve space,
we report the results of this preliminary analysis in Appendix E. In the paragraph
below, we provide a summary of the results of this analysis, and a more detailed
discussion is available in Appendix E.
We found evidence for both behavioural and N400 priming effects with the
English prime-target pairs; however, only a very small effect was observed in the
LPC spatiotemporal window. Our finding of a behavioural priming effect replicates
some of the previous studies (e.g., de Mornay Davies, 1998; McRae & Boisvert, 1998)
and shows that semantic priming can be found even if the (semantically related)
primes are not associatively related to the targets. As to the N400 priming effect, to
our knowledge, this is the first study to report this effect for using a continuous
primed lexical decision task. We take the outcomes of our preliminary analysis to
indicate that the paradigm used in our study was indeed sensitive enough to tap into
automatic processes of lexico-semantic retrieval. With this in mind, we now turn to
our findings for the trained novel names.
4.2. Main analysis: Semantic priming for the English-novel name
prime-target pairs
4.2.1. Behavioural data
targets. The models included two predictors, semantic relatedness (unrelated vs.
related, coded as 0.5 and −0.5 , respectively) and time of learning (recent vs. remote,
coded as 0.5 and −0.5 , respectively), and their interaction, with four sets of priors
When the effects of interest were assumed to lie between −1 ms and 1 ms (i.e., the
most constraining prior in our analysis, which corresponded to the prior distribution of
N (0, 0.001)), the Bayes factor analysis did not provide much evidence either in favour
of or against any of the effects. When effects within a range of −10 ms and 10 ms were
assumed (i.e., the prior allowed for more variability, prior distribution of N (0, 0.008)),
the analysis showed extreme evidence (BF = 179.41) for an interaction, reflecting
a greater difference between the unrelated and related targets in the remote (7 ms)
than in the recent (1 ms) set. However, a further increase in the assumed range of the
interaction effect (effects ranging between −20 ms and 20 ms and between −30 ms and
30 ms, corresponding to prior distributions of N (0, 0.02) and N (0, 0.025), respectively)
resulted in agnostic Bayes factors (no evidence). With respect to the main effects,
Bayes factors for the effect of semantic relatedness, across different priors, provided
anecdotal evidence against a difference between the novel names preceded by the
unrelated (607 ms) as opposed to the related (603 ms) primes. In contrast, there was
anecdotal to moderate evidence in favour of a small effect of time of learning, with
recent novel names (600 ms), on average, being responded to 11 ms faster than the
remote novel names (611 ms).
4.2.2. Electrophysiological data
Analysis of mean amplitudes in the (pre-defined) spatiotemporal windows.
For both spatiotemporal windows, fixed effects in all models included semantic
relatedness and time of learning, as well as their interaction. For both windows,
evidence against all main effects and interactions, suggesting that there were no
differences in the mean amplitudes for the semantically related versus unrelated
(Figures 5 and 6) spatiotemporal windows.
Mass univariate analysis. The analysis showed that the recent novel names
elicited more positive amplitudes than the remote novel names (main effect of set)
between about 506 ms and 588 ms across a set of frontal, central, and parietal
electrodes, and more negative amplitudes than the remote novel names between
about 700 ms and 735 ms across a set of parietal, as well as at some frontal and
semantic relatedness or for the interaction between time of learning and semantic
relatedness, no significant t-values remained after TFCE correction.
4.2.3. Semantic priming analysis: Results summary and discussion
In the behavioural data, we obtained (moderate) evidence that response times for the
novel name targets trained in the remote set were about 11 ms slower than for the novel
name targets trained in the recent set. This difference could mean that discriminating
the novel names from nonwords was more difficult for the remote names, possibly
due to a longer delay between the time of training and the priming task than for
the recent set. This interpretation is in line with our finding that, compared to the
remote set, the novel names in the recent set elicited more positive amplitudes between
about 506 −581 ms and more negative amplitudes between 707 −735 ms, respectively,
suggesting differences in familiarity and recollection across the two sets (see General
Discussion).
Moreover, in the behavioural data, there was also evidence for a small interaction
between time of learning and semantic relatedness, indicating that, while there were no
differences in response times for the related versus the unrelated targets trained in the
recent set, a small priming effect of about 7 ms was present for the remote novel names.
One possible account of this finding could be that the semantically related, familiar,
English words facilitated recognition of the trained novel names that had undergone
a 24-hour consolidation opportunity (remote set), while no such facilitation occurred
for those novel names that had no such opportunity (recent set).
At the electrophysiological level, in the analysis of mean amplitudes in the N400
and the LPC pre-defined spatiotemporal windows, we obtained moderate evidence
against a difference between the related and the unrelated conditions in either window,
irrespective of the length of the consolidation opportunity. While we acknowledge that
evidence in favour of the null hypothesis can have many causes and whether it signals
a true absence of an effect may warrant further investigation, we think that potential
explanations for an absence of priming effects in these two spatiotemporal windows
should still be considered, and we do so in the General Discussion.
Notably, while both mean amplitude and mass univariate analyses seem to
suggest that there were no differences between the two sets of words in the time
window typically associated with the N400 ERP component (300 −500 ms post
onset), the results of these analyses appear to conflict regarding latencies after
500 ms post onset (no differences between the remote and the recent names in the
pre-defined LPC window but significant effects between 500 −600 ms and
700 −800 ms in the mass univariate analysis). This contradiction could be due to the
fact that different sets of electrodes were included in the two analyses: the mass
univariate analysis showed that, between 500 ms and 600 ms, the differences between
the two sets of novel names were present across a set of mostly frontal and central
electrodes and, between 700 ms and 735 ms, across a (small) set of mostly central and
parietal electrodes. In contrast, the LPC spatiotemporal window was defined as
mean amplitude across a set of frontal and parietal electrodes between 500 ms and
800 ms post onset. Therefore, it is possible that evidence against an effect in the LPC
window could be the result of the amplitude averaging procedure rather than the
true absence of an effect.
Summing up, with the trained novel words, a behavioural priming effect was
observed after a 24-hour consolidation opportunity, however, this priming effect was
smaller (7 ms) than that observed with the English words (20 ms) and was
accompanied by amplitude modulations at latencies later than those typically
associated with the N400 ERP component. Furthermore, on average, the remote
novel names were responded to more slowly than the recent novel names. Taken
together, these results could indicate that the behavioural effects observed with the
trained novel words are more likely to have been subserved by processes rooted in
episodic rather than semantic memory.
4.3. Main analysis: Lexicality effects
4.3.1. Analysis of mean amplitudes in the (pre-defined) N400 spatiotemporal window
Three contrasts were tested in this analysis: (1) nonwords versus the English words,
(2) recent novel names versus the nonwords, and (3) remote versus recent novel names.
For all three contrasts, as the range of the assumed effect increased, the Bayes factor
recent novel names and the nonwords, Bayes factors showed extreme evidence in favour
of an effect with all four priors, suggesting that amplitudes for recent novel names
(−1.69 (cid:181)V) were, on average, more negative than for nonwords (−0.70 (cid:181)V). Regarding
the contrast between the nonwords and the English words, the nonwords elicited more
negative amplitudes (−0.70 (cid:181)V) than the English words (−0.26 (cid:181)V). Regarding the
contrast between the two sets of novel names, Bayes factors showed anecdotal (when
a 1 (cid:181)V difference was assumed) to moderate (when a 6 (cid:181)V difference was assumed)
evidence against a difference between the remote (−1.23 (cid:181)V) and the recent (−1.69 (cid:181)V)
for a full report) showed that the recent names elicited more negative amplitudes
(−1.69 (cid:181)V) than the English words (−0.26 (cid:181)V).
4.3.2. Mass univariate analysis
Nonwords vs. English targets preceded by semantically unrelated primes.
The nonwords differed from the English words between about 425 ms and 598 ms and
then again between 650 ms and 904 ms post onset, with the differences first appearing
across a small set of central and parietal electrodes, then extending over the whole
Between 425 ms and 598 ms post onset, the amplitudes were more negative for the
nonwords than for the English words, and, between 650 ms and 904 ms, more positive
for the nonwords than for the English words.
Recent novel name targets preceded by semantically unrelated primes vs.
nonwords. The novel name targets trained in the recent set differed from the
nonwords between about 74 ms and 286 ms post onset across a set of frontal and
central electrodes, between 364 ms and 464 ms and between 486 ms and 698 ms post
onset across sets of frontal, central, and parietal electrodes, and between 711 ms and
names elicited more negative amplitudes than the nonwords in all the
above-mentioned time windows except for the time window between 486 ms and
698 ms, in which the values for the recent novel names were more positive than for
the nonwords.
Remote vs. recent novel name targets preceded by semantically unrelated
primes. The remote and recent novel names differed between about 538 ms and
577 ms post onset across a set of frontal and central electrodes, with more negative
amplitudes for the remote than the recent novel names, and between 707 ms and
758 ms post onset across a set of frontal, central, and parietal electrodes, with more
4.3.3. Lexicality analysis: Results summary and discussion
In the literature on visual word recognition, it is assumed that, when a stimulus,
either a word or a nonword, is encountered, it activates its lexical neighbours and
their semantic representations, with this activity giving rise to negative amplitudes in
the N400 spatiotemporal window (Grainger & Jacobs, 1996; Holcomb et al., 2002).
As processing continues, if the stimulus is a word, lexical activity associated with it
is thought to suppress the activity of its lexical neighbours, leading to a reduction in
the N400 response. However, if the stimulus is a nonword, no suppression can occur,
resulting in larger (more negative) N400 responses as compared to those for the familiar
words (e.g., Bentin, 1987; Bentin et al., 1985; Holcomb et al., 2002). Applying this logic
to word learning, shortly after training (when integration is still ongoing), trained novel
names could be expected to elicit more positive responses than the nonwords but more
negative responses than the familiar words. However, the more the lexical status of
the trained novel words approaches that of familiar words, the less negativity in the
N400 spatiotemporal window they should exhibit.
In line with previous findings, we found greater negativity in the N400
spatiotemporal window for nonwords than for English words. In addition, the mass
univariate analysis also suggested that the amplitudes for the nonwords were more
positive than for the English words at later latencies (approx. 650 −900 ms). To
foreshadow the argument that we develop in the General Discussion, this difference
could be due to participants’ attempts to recall whether the words they could not
immediately recognise (i.e., nonwords or trained novel words that were forgotten)
were presented during training.
Regarding our findings with the trained novel names, differences in the N400
spatiotemporal window were observed only between the recent novel names and the
English words (see Appendix D) and between the recent novel names and the
nonwords. Critically though, while the direction of the effect between the recent
novel names and the English words was as expected (greater negativity for the recent
novel names), greater positivity was observed for the nonwords relative to the recent
novel names – an unexpected effect. Furthermore, compared to the recent novel
names, the nonwords also elicited more positivity early (approx. 70 −290 ms) and late
(approx. 710 −760 ms) in processing, but showed more negative responses in the time
window in between (approx. 490 −700 ms). Interestingly, within this time window
(albeit for a shorter period of time), the ERPs for the remote novel names were also
more negative than those for the recent novel names, with this effect being reversed
later in processing. We explore these findings further in the General Discussion.
5. General Discussion
The present study investigated behavioural and electrophysiological markers of
integration in learning of novel names for novel concepts. Participants learned two
sets of novel names, one set on each of two consecutive days (remote and recent
sets), and performed a continuous primed lexical decision task immediately after
learning of the recent set. In the priming task, familiar English words were primes,
and (semantically related and unrelated) familiar English (Preliminary analysis) and
trained novel names (Main analysis) were targets.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to use the continuous primed lexical
decision task to assess integration, and the first study to examine the N400 and the
LPC components in this task (with both familiar and trained novel names). With the
English targets, we found strong evidence for both behavioural and N400 semantic
priming effects and weak evidence for a small LPC priming effect. Our study thus both
replicates earlier (behavioural) reports in the literature and provides new insights into
the neural correlates of behavioural priming. Below, we provide a possible account for
our results with the trained novel names. However, we note that not all our results allow
for a straightforward interpretation, and therefore our account remains preliminary
and there may be other possible interpretations.
The small behavioural semantic priming effect (7 ms) for the novel names
trained 24 hours previously (remote set) is in accordance with and extends the
results of the previous behavioural studies: van der Ven et al. (2015) reported a
10 ms priming effect after a 24-hour consolidation opportunity, while they found no
such effect immediately after training . However, their study used a paired primed
lexical decision task which, as we have argued earlier, does not permit the
disentanglement of automatic lexical-semantic retrieval processes from controlled
processes resulting from the task demands (see also Neely, 1991). Tamminen and
Gaskell (2013) observed priming effects of similar magnitudes (8 ms) across different
consolidation opportunities (0, 1, and 7 days) with both masked and unmasked
standard (paired) primed lexical decision tasks. Tamminen and Gaskell (2013)
suspected that the lack of differences between the three consolidation periods was
due to low power, however, combining the data from the two tasks did not allow
them to test the contrast between the 0-day and the 1-day consolidation
opportunities and, consequently, their results remain inconclusive with respect to the
comparison examined in our experiment.
Consequently, our study extends the previous results by showing that, even
when the influence of explicit and strategic processing is minimised in the continuous
primed lexical decision task, recognition of trained novel names may be facilitated
(behaviourally) by familiar words as early as 24 hours after exposure. It is intriguing
that the behavioural priming effects observed in both our study and previous studies
are rather small relative to those for familiar words, and it remains unclear whether
effects of such magnitude can be considered theoretically meaningful or how they are
to be interpreted. It is possible that, had the consolidation period been longer, this
effect may have approached those found for the familiar words (20 ms in our study);
however, Tamminen and Gaskell (2013) found an effect of a size similar to that
reported here even after a 7-day consolidation period.
Likewise, one could argue that our participants have received too little exposure
to the novel names as there were only four trials per word-definition pair. However,
we note that the training in our study was quite intensive: during each trial, the
novel name was presented twice and remained on the screen for a total of 30 s, with
the participants being exposed both to the spoken and to the written form of the
novel name and also repeating it aloud. In addition, the participants’ accuracy on
the lexical decision task was around 90%, suggesting that they were able to recognise
most of the trained novel names; this accuracy rate is similar to that reported in other
studies in the literature (e.g., Bakker et al., 2015; Liu & van Hell, 2020). While the
relatively low recall accuracy (30 −50% across the recall tasks) is potentially indicative
of difficulties retrieving the correct novel name when cued by its definition, it does not
necessarily imply that the participants have not learned enough to form mappings
between the new concept and the novel word form, or between the novel and the
familiar word forms. In fact, Tamminen and Gaskell (2013) argued that the semantic
priming effect is independent of explicit recall because the priming tasks tap into more
implicit semantic activation (we note, however, that this hypothesis requires further
investigation).
It is also important to recognise that most of the earlier studies (e.g., Bakker et al.,
2015; Batterink & Neville, 2011; Liu & van Hell, 2020) did not assess the participants’
ability to recall the novel names (as opposed to, for example, their ability to recall
the definitions of the novel names or their ability to provide English equivalents of the
novel names), and it is unclear how well their participants would have performed if they
had. Therefore, a more likely interpretation of the smaller behavioural priming effect
is that it reflects ongoing integration, but that, 24 hours after exposure, the processing
of the novel names is still quite different from that of the familiar words. The fact that
this behavioural effect was not accompanied by a modulation of the N400 component,
as was the case with the English words, is also in line with this interpretation. Indeed,
those previous EEG studies where the experimental design was most similar to ours,
also found no N400 priming effects either immediately after, or one day after, or even
seven days after exposure (Bakker et al., 2015; Liu & van Hell, 2020, but note that
these studies used the semantic-relatedness judgement task to assess integration).
While there are some studies where an N400 priming effect was observed
immediately after training (Balass et al., 2010; Borovsky et al., 2012, 2013; Perfetti
et al., 2005), it is contentious whether these effects can be ascribed to integration, for
several reasons. Firstly, the N400 component is known to be sensitive to task
demands, with larger priming effects when instructions explicitly call for semantic
analysis (e.g., Chwilla et al., 1995), and can therefore index both automatic and
controlled processes of lexical retrieval (Kutas & Federmeier, 2011). Yet, both the
paired primed lexical decision task and the semantic-relatedness judgment task are
paradigms that, by design, involve controlled semantic processing. Secondly, in at
least one of the studies reporting the immediate N400 effect (Perfetti et al., 2005),
the primes had been associated with the targets during training, which would have
enhanced the contribution of controlled processing to task performance. Finally, in
some studies (Borovsky et al., 2012, 2013), the priming task was interleaved with
training, which required the participants to read and make sense of sentences rather
than learn the new words that appeared (in the sentence-final position) in these
sentences. In a design like this, it is feasible that priming is, at least to some extent,
driven by integrative discourse processing which entails activation of semantic and
syntactic features of words constituting the sentences, retrieval of world knowledge,
and prediction of the upcoming information, among other processes (e.g., Sparks &
Rapp, 2010). Because discourse processing is known to modulate both the N400 and
the LPC components (e.g., Brouwer et al., 2012; van Berkum, 2009; van Berkum
et al., 1999), the presence of the immediate N400 priming effects in Borovsky et al.’s
studies cannot be unequivocally attributed to automatic processes of lexical-semantic
retrieval and, consequently, their insights regarding integration are uncertain.
To summarise, the results of the priming analysis in our study as well as the
findings of other studies capitalising on the priming task suggest that neurocognitive
processes that give rise to the behavioural priming effects either immediately after or
24 hours after learning may differ from those that drive such effects for the familiar
words . We thus hypothesise that behavioural priming with the remote novel words
found in our study could be due to changes in these words’ representations in
episodic memory and ensuing differences in the words’ lexical status. We elucidate
this hypothesis further below and start by considering the outcomes of our study
regarding the contrast between the recent (0-hour consolidation) and the remote
(24-hour consolidation) novel names.
Taken together, our findings in the semantic priming analysis suggested that,
while there were no differences between the two sets of novel names in the
pre-defined N400 spatiotemporal window, the two sets did differ from each other at
later stages of processing. A similar pattern of results was obtained in the lexicality
analysis, which compared ERPs for the remote and recent novel names preceded by
semantically unrelated primes. More specifically, both in the priming and in the
lexicality analysis, the recent novel names elicited more positive amplitudes than the
remote novel names between about 500 ms and 600 ms post onset and more negative
amplitudes between about 700 ms and 760 ms post onset across a set of frontal,
central, and parietal electrodes.
Given the temporal and spatial distributions of these effects, one possible
account of these differences could be that they index two distinct processes in
recognition memory, familiarity and recollection (see Yonelinas, 2002, for a review).
While familiarity is thought to reflect the experience of recognising a stimulus as
familiar, recollection has been associated with the ability to retrieve the associative
information about an event in which the stimulus was encountered (e.g., when and
where a particular word was trained). Most models of memory recognition assume
that, at retrieval, recollection and familiarity are initiated in parallel, but do not
depend on each other (Yonelinas, 2002), rely on different brain regions (e.g., Diana
et al., 2007; Eichenbaum et al., 2007), and have different electrophysiological
correlates (e.g., Cansino & Trejo-Morales, 2008; Rugg & Curran, 2007; Yu & Rugg,
2010). Familiarity is believed to occur quicker than recollection and has been linked
to modulations of the Frontal N400 (or, FN400) component, with familiar items
exhibiting more positivity than new items at frontal-central sites between 400 ms and
600 ms post stimulus onset , while better recollection has been associated with an
increase in the LPC.
Therefore, in our study, the enhanced positivity for the recent novel names
between 500 −600 ms post onset could be indicative of higher familiarity for those
names compared to the remote novel names. Indeed, since the priming task was
administered immediately after learning of the recent set but about 24 hours after
learning of the remote set, higher familiarity and better recollection seem likely for
the recent compared to the remote set. One could further hypothesise that, for the
remote novel names, familiarity may have been too low to enable their discrimination
from the nonwords, prompting the participants to attempt to remember whether
they had seen these novel names during training. These attempts to retrieve
episode-specific information, whether successful or not, could have given rise to
(a) more positive amplitudes for the remote novel names between 700 −800 ms post
onset, and (b) longer response times for the remote novel names observed in our
study. This explanation is also in line with reports in the literature suggesting that
modulations of the late ERP components that are like the LPC in latency but have a
slightly broader distribution (as was the case in our study) may reflect low
recognition confidence (e.g., Addante et al., 2012). Nevertheless, while this
preliminary interpretation appears feasible, it requires further investigation in the
future.
Summing up, we suggest that the differences in the behavioural priming effect
observed between the recent and the remote novel names could be due to some
transient changes of these words’ representations in episodic memory. Considering
the differences in processing of the two sets of novel words across both the priming
and the lexicality analysis, we hypothesised that these differences could have emerged
due to higher familiarity for, and better recollection of, the recent as opposed to the
remote novel names. In our view, this interpretation is also in accordance with the
remaining results of the lexicality analysis, to which we now turn.
One finding that, in our opinion, may offer an interesting insight in the
mechanisms of word learning is that of more negative amplitudes for the recent novel
names than for the English words and for the previously unseen nonwords, both in
the pre-defined N400 window and beyond it. One possible account of this outcome is
as follows. There is growing consensus in the literature that episodic and semantic
memories for specific events can co-exist and interact dynamically with each other
such that, at any given time point, general knowledge about an event is available
together with specific details associated with the original experience of this event
(e.g., Winocur & Moscovitch, 2011). It follows that an attempt to retrieve
episode-specific details about an event would lead to a reinstatement of this event’s
representation in semantic memory, and vice versa. In the context of our study, at
the time of the administration of the primed lexical decision task, the representations
of the recent novel names were likely still highly active in episodic memory (because
of the recent exposure). These high levels of activation may have therefore prompted
a “search” for a corresponding representation in semantic memory. However, because
no lexicalised entries would have been available for the novel names, no semantic
memory would have been reinstated, leading to a larger (more negative) N400
response.
Interestingly, in our study, the differences between the recent novel names and
the nonwords emerged very early, at about 70 ms post onset, and persisted up to
almost 300 ms post onset (which was then followed by the N400 lexicality effect).
According to models of psycholinguistic information processing, electrophysiological
effects occurring before 250 ms post stimulus onset could index initial lexical,
semantic, and syntactic processes which are crucial for unambiguous identification of
language elements (see, e.g., Fodor, 1983; Friederici, 2002, for a cascaded model of
information processing, and Pulvermu¨ller et al., 2009, for a parallel model of
psycholinguistic information access). The literature on visual word recognition lends
support for these assumptions: retrieval of lexical-semantic information has been
shown to be underway as early as at around 160 ms post word onset (Amsel et al.,
2013; Hauk et al., 2012), with differences between familiar words and nonwords
emerging already during the N100-P200 ERP complex (Rugg, 1983), while posterior
negativity at 200 ms post onset (the so-called N200 component) has been linked with
initial orthographic processing (Dehaene et al., 2001; McCandliss et al., 2003). In
line with this literature, our finding could indicate that the trained novel names were
already distinguished from the nonwords in the earliest stages of processing.
The electrophysiological correlates of the nonwords and the recent novel names
also differed later in the processing, between about 480 ms and 700 ms post onset, with
the trained novel names showing more positivity across a large set of frontal, central,
and parietal electrodes. This effect was followed by enhanced negativity for the trained
novel names across a few frontal electrodes between about 710 ms and 760 ms post
onset. As we argued earlier in this section, one possible account of these effects could be
that they reflect differences in recognition confidence and the ability to retrieve episodic
information related to training. Prior to the start of the priming task, our participants
were told that they would see familiar English words, novel names trained during the
experiment, and words that they might not know. Consequently, having encountered
a stimulus they were not familiar with (low recognition confidence), they may have
tried to remember if this stimulus had been presented earlier by consciously retrieving
episode-specific information associated with the training sessions. Nevertheless, while
this interpretation is intuitively appealing, it must be taken with caution because the
temporal and the spatial distributions of the observed effects overlap with both the
FN400 (400 −600 ms post onset at frontal and central sites) and the LPC (500 −800 ms
at parietal sites) components. Further research involving paradigms such as source
memory and item recognition tests would be required to separate the involvement of
familiarity and recollection processes to item recognition.
To conclude, we showed that, in learning of novel names for novel concepts,
behavioural priming effects can be observed after a 24-hour consolidation
opportunity even when controlled and strategic processing is reduced. However, our
electrophysiological findings suggest that this behavioural effect may not be
indicative of integration, but rather could be accounted for by differences in
processes of familiarity and recollection, which are typically linked with recognition
memory. We have suggested that, immediately after exposure to novel names, the
system may still rely on episodic memory to distinguish these names from those
acquired one day earlier (remote set) or previously unseen stimuli (nonwords).
Author contributions
Maria Korochkina: Conceptualisation, methodology, software, validation, formal
analysis, investigation, data curation, writing (original draft), writing (review and
editing), visualisation. Lyndsey Nickels: Conceptualisation, methodology, writing
(review and editing), supervision. Audrey Bu¨rki: Conceptualisation, methodology,
writing (review and editing), supervision.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Andrew Roberts for his help in recording the
stimuli, Nicholas Cooney and Ryssa Moffat at for their help in the pilot phase and
with participant recruitment, and Robert Taferner for his help in preparation of the
visual elements for the Methods section.
Funding
MK was supported by a PhD stipend from Macquarie University [CTiMQRES
IDEALAB; Allocation (cid:155)2019129]. Costs for participant reimbursement were covered
by Macquarie University under the Cognitive Science Postgraduate Grant [CPGR4
2020] to MK. LN received support from by the Australian Research Council under
Discovery Project Grant [DP190101490]. Funding sources had no involvement in
study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, in the writing of the
report, or decision to submit the article for publication.
Declaration of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability statement
Pre-registration, stimuli, participant data, analysis scripts, and pre-print are publicly
(doi: 10.17605/OSF.IO/YCUKN).
Notes
This literature has examined word learning in young adults; for work with older adults see, e.g., Kurdziel
et al. (2017); and for work with children, e.g., Henderson et al. (2012, 2013), James et al. (2017, 2019), and
Weighall et al. (2016).
We note that the LPC has also been linked to other late positive components (e.g., P3 and P600) and we
refer the reader to excellent reviews by Brouwer et al. (2012) and Van Petten and Luka (2012) on the differences
and similarities between these ERP responses.
We did not pre-register a sample size for this study, as we were not able to conduct a power analysis
due to lack of information necessary for data simulation (e.g., prior distributions of model parameters and
hyperprior distributions for the parameters of the random effects distributions). In addition, while it is possible
to determine what sample size is needed to obtain 95% credible intervals for the parameters of interest that do
not contain zero within their bounds (e.g., De Santis & Gubbiotti, 2021; Gelfand & Wang, 2002; Spiegelhalter
et al., 2003), there is currently no established method to determine a sample size that would allow for model
selection (but see Vasishth et al., 2021). Moreover, some authors have argued that there is no need for pre-
planned sample sizes in the Bayesian framework (e.g., Lilford et al., 1995). We did, however, pre-register that
all data would be collected within a 6-month time window. Our final sample size (N = 71) is considerably
larger than that of previous studies with similar designs (e.g., N = 22 in Bakker et al., 2015, and N = 23 in
Liu and van Hell, 2020).
In addition to analyses reported in this section, we pre-registered another analysis to examine whether the
process of integration is modulated by individual differences in working memory capacity (see Pre-registration).
This analysis has not been performed yet and will be reported elsewhere.
Note that the values given here are approximations: because the prior on a log scale specifies an effect size
which is a multiplicative factor, the priors (and hence, the predictions) for the effects of interest are necessarily
dependent on the intercept.
This pattern of results was obtained through an ANOVA model with Day (1 vs. 2) and Modality (Spoken
vs. Written) as independent variables. There was no interaction, but a main effect of Day (10 ms priming effect
on Day 2 and no effect on Day 1) and a main effect of Modality (larger effects when word meanings were
studied in written than in spoken modality).
That said, it is of note that, in our study, the participants were asked to respond “yes” to words that they
knew, including the words that they had encountered during the experiment. This feature of the task makes
it similar to recognition memory tasks (e.g., the old/new recognition memory task), and it is unclear how the
neurocognitive processes involved in recognition memory tasks compare to those involved in lexical decision
where a “yes”-response is given only for real words. While this issue is beyond the scope of this article, it could
be a possible avenue for future research.
Note, however, that some studies have argued that the FN400 is not a separate ERP component but the
N400 elicited when processing is facilitated by prior exposure to the stimulus, see, for example, Paller et al.
(2007) and Voss and Paller (2007).
6. References
Addante, R. J., Ranganath, C., & Yonelinas, A. P. (2012). Examining ERP
correlates of recognition memory: Evidence of accurate source recognition
without recollection. NeuroImage, 62, 439–450.
Amsel, B. D., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2013). Alive and grasping: Stable and rapid
semantic access to an object category but not object graspability. NeuroImage,
Anglin, J. M. (2000). Vocabulary Development: A Morphological Analysis. Wiley.
Baayen, R. (2008). Analyzing Linguistic Data. A Practical Introduction to Statistics
Using R. Cambridge University Press.
Bakker, I., Takashima, A., van Hell, J. G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J. M. (2014).
Competition from unseen or unheard novel words: Lexical consolidation across
10.1016/j.jml.2014.03.002
Bakker, I., Takashima, A., van Hell, J. G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J. M. (2015).
Tracking lexical consolidation with ERPs: Lexical and semantic-priming effects
on N400 and LPC responses to newly-learned words. Neuropsychologia, 79,
Balass, M., Nelson, J. R., & Perfetti, C. A. (2010). Word learning: An ERP
investigation of word experience effects on recognition and word processing.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 35, 126–140.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effects structure
for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Batterink, L., & Neville, H. (2011). Implicit and explicit mechanisms of word learning
in a narrative context: An event-related potential study. Journal of Cognitive
Bellec, P., Lavoie-Courchesne, S., Dickinson, P., Lerch, J., Zijdenbos, A., & Evans, A.
(2012). The pipeline system for Octave and Matlab (PSOM): A lightweight
scripting framework and execution engine for scientific workflows. Frontiers in
Bennett, C. H. (1976). Efficient estimation of free energy differences from Monte Carlo
1016/0021-9991(76)90078-4
Bentin, S. (1987). Event-related potentials, semantic processes, and expectancy factors
1016/0093-934X(87)90077-0
Bentin, S., McCarthy, G., & Wood, C. C. (1985). Event-related potentials, lexical
decision, and semantic priming. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 60 (4), 343–355.
Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Su, K., & Robbins, K. A. (2015). The
PREP pipeline: Standardised preprocessing for large-scale EEG analysis.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 9 (16).
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2014). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer (Version
Borovsky, A., Elman, J. L., & Kutas, M. (2012). Once is enough: N400 indexes
semantic integration of novel word meanings from a single exposure in
context. Language Learning and Development, 8 (3), 278–302.
Borovsky, A., Kutas, M., & Elman, J. (2010). Learning to use words: Event-related
potentials index single-shot contextual word learning. Cognition, 116 (2),
Borovsky, A., Kutas, M., & Elman, J. (2013). Getting it right: Word learning across
j.neuropsychologia.2013.01.027
Bowers, J., Davis, C., & Hanley, D. (2005). Interfering neighbours: The impact of
novel word learning on the identification of visually similar words. Cognition,
Breitenstein, C., Zwitserlood, P., de Vries, M. H., Feldhues, C., Knecht, S., & Dobel, C.
(2007). Five days versus a lifetime: Intense associative vocabulary training
generates lexically integrated words. Restorative Neurology and Neuroscience,
25, 493–500.
Brouwer, H., Crocker, M. W., Venhuizen, N. J., & Hoeks, J. C. J. (2017). A
neurocomputational model of the N400 and the P600 in language processing.
Brouwer, H., Fitz, H., & Hoeks, J. (2012). Getting real about semantic illusions:
Rethinking the functional role of the P600 in language comprehension. Brain
Brown, C., & Hagoort, P. (1993). The processing nature of the N400: Evidence from
org/10.1162/jocn.1993.5.1.34
Brysbaert, M., & Stevens, M. (2018). Power analysis and effect size in mixed effects
Brysbaert, M., Stevens, M., Mandera, P., & Keuleers, E. (2016). How many words do
we know? Practical estimates of vocabulary size dependent on word definition,
the degree of language input and the participant’s age. Frontiers in Psychology,
Bu¨rkner, P. (2017a). Advanced Bayesian multilevel modeling with the R package brms.
arXiv:1705.11123
Bu¨rkner, P. (2017b). Brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models using Stan.
Journal of Statistical Software, 80 (1), 1–28. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18637 / jss .
v080.i01
Cansino, S., & Trejo-Morales, P. (2008). Neurophysiology of successful encoding and
retrieval of source memory. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience,
Chaumon, M., Bishop, D. V., & Busch, N. A. (2015). A practical guide to the selection
of independent components of the electroencephalogram for artifact correction.
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 250, 47–63. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
jneumeth.2015.02.025
Cheimariou, A., Farmer, T. A., & Gordon, J. K. (2018). Lexical prediction in the
aging brain: The effects of predictiveness and congruency on the N400 ERP
component. Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 26 (5), 781–806. https :
//doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2018.1529733
Chwilla, D. J., Brown, C. M., & Hagoort, P. (1995). The N400 as a function of the level
1469-8986.1995.tb02956.x
Clay, F., Bowers, J., Davis, C., & Hanley, D. (2007). Teaching adults new words:
The role of practice and consolidation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
7393.33.5.970
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-activation theory of semantic
0033-295X.82.6.407
Curran, T. (1999). The electrophysiology of incidental and intentional retrieval: ERP
old/new effects in lexical decision and recognition memory. Neuropsychologia,
Davis, M. H., Di Betta, A. M., Macdonald, M. J., & Gaskell, M. G. (2009). Learning
and consolidation of novel spoken words. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
Davis, M. H., & Gaskell, M. G. (2009). A complementary systems account of word
learning: Neural and behavioural evidence. Philosophical Transactions of the
rstb.2009.0111
De Deyne, S., Navarro, D. J., Perfors, A., Brysbaert, M., & Storms, G. (2018). The
‘Small World of Words’ English word association norms for over 12,000 cue
s13428-018-1115-7
De Santis, F., & Gubbiotti, S. (2021). Sample size requirements for calibrated
approximate credible intervals for proportions in clinical trials. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18, 595.
Deacon, D., Grose-Fifer, J., Yang, C. M., Stanick, V., Hewitt, S., & Dynowska, A.
(2004). Evidence for a new conceptualization of semantic representation in the
10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70140-0
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Cohen, L., Le Bihan, D., Mangin, J., Poline, J., & Rivi`ere,
D. (2001). Cerebral mechanisms of word masking and unconscious repetition
Delogu, F., Brouwer, H., & Crocker, M. W. (2019). Event-related potentials index
lexical retrieval (N400) and integration (P600) during language comprehension.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2014). EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal
2003.10.009
de Mornay Davies, P. (1998). Automatic semantic priming: The contribution of lexical-
and semantic-level processes. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 10 (4),
de Wit, B., & Kinoshita, S. (2015). The masked semantic priming effect is task
dependent: Reconsidering the automatic spreading activation process.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
Diana, R. A., Yonelinas, A. P., & Ranganath, C. (2007). Imaging recollection and
familiarity in the medial temporal lobe: A three-component model. Trends in
Dickerson, B. C., & Eichenbaum, H. (2010). The episodic memory system:
Neurocircuitry and disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35 (1), 86–104.
Dobel, C., Lagemann, L., & Zwitserlood, P. (2009). Non-native phonemes in adult
word learning: Evidence from the N400m. Philosophical transactions of the
10.1098/rstb.2009.0158
Dudai, Y., & Eisenberg, M. (2004). Rites of passage of the engram: Reconsolidation
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.003
Duff, M. C., Covington, N. V., Hilverman, C., & Cohen, N. J. (2020). Semantic memory
and the hippocampus: Revisiting, reaffirming, and extending the reach of their
org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00471
Dumay, N., & Gaskell, M. G. (2007). Sleep-associated changes in the mental
representation of spoken words. Psychological Science, 18, 35–39.
Dumay, N., & Gaskell, M. G. (2012). Overnight lexical consolidation revealed by speech
2011.12.009
Dumay, N., Gaskell, M. G., & Feng, X. (2004). A day in the life of a spoken word. In
K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 339–344). Erlbaum.
Dumay, N., Sharma, D., Kellen, N., & Abdelrahim, S. (2018). Setting the alarm: Word
emotional attributes require consolidation to be operational. Emotion, 18 (8),
Eichenbaum, H., Yonelinas, A. P., & Ranganath, C. (2007). The medial temporal
lobe and recognition memory. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 30, 123–152.
Elgort, I. (2011). Deliberate learning and vocabulary acquisition in a second language.
00613.x
Elgort, I., & Warren, P. (2014). L2 vocabulary learning from reading: Explicit and
tacit lexical knowledge and the role of learner and item variables. Language
Fang, X., & Perfetti, C. (2017). Perturbation of old knowledge precedes integration
neuropsychologia.2017.03.015
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The Modularity of Mind. MIT Press.
Friederici, A. D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence processing. Trends
01839-8
Gaskell, M. G., & Dumay, N. (2003). Lexical competition and the acquisition of novel
Gelfand, A. E., & Wang, F. (2002). A simulation-based approach to Bayesian sample
size determination for performance under a given model and for separating
models. Statistical Science, 17 (2), 193–208. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1214 / ss /
Geukes, S., Gaskell, M. G., & Zwitserlood, P. (2015). Stroop effects from newly learned
color words: Effects of memory consolidation and episodic context. Frontiers
Grainger, J., & Jacobs, A. M. (1996). Orthographic processing in visual word
recognition: A multiple read-out model. Psychological Review, 103 (3),
Gronau, Q. F., Singmann, H., & Wagenmakers, E. (2020). Bridgesampling: An R
package for estimating normalizing constants. Journal of Statistical Software,
Groppe, D. M., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2011a). Mass univariate analysis of event-
related brain potentials/fields I: A critical tutorial review. Psychophysiology,
01273.x
Groppe, D. M., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2011b). Mass univariate analysis of event-
related brain potentials/fields II: Simulation studies. Psychophysiology, 48 (12),
Hagoort, P. (2008). Should psychology ignore the language of the brain? Current
1467-8721.2008.00556.x
Hauk, O., Coutout, C., Holden, A., & Chen, Y. (2012). The time-course of single-word
reading: Evidence from fast behavioral and brain responses. NeuroImage, 60,
Heck, D., B¨ohm, U., B¨oing-Messing, F., Bu¨rkner, P., Derks, K., Dienes, Z., Fu, Q.,
Gu, X., Karimova, D., Kiers, H. A. L., Klugkist, I., Kuiper, R. M.,
Lee, M. D., Leenders, R., Leplaa, H. J., Linde, M., Ly, A.,
Meijerink-Bosman, M., Moerbeek, M., . . . Hoijtink, H. (2020). A review of
applications of the Bayes factor in psychological research.
Henderson, L. M., Weighall, A. R., Brown, H., & Gaskell, M. G. (2012).
Consolidation of vocabulary is associated with sleep in children.
Developmental Science, 15 (5), 674–687.
Henderson, L. M., Weighall, A. R., Brown, H., & Gaskell, M. G. (2013). Online lexical
competition during spoken word recognition and word learning in children and
Hill, H., Strube, M., Roesch-Ely, D., & Weisbrod, M. (2002). Automatic vs. controlled
processes in semantic priming — differentiation by event-related potentials.
10.1016/S0167-8760(01)00202-1
Holcomb, P. J., Grainger, J., & O’Rourke, T. (2002). An electrophysiological study
of the effects of orthographic neighborhood size on printed word perception.
Holender, D. (1992). Expectancy effects, congruity effects, and the interpretation of
response latency measurement. In J. Alegria, D. Holender, J. Junca de Morais,
& M. Radeau (Eds.), Analytic Approaches To Human Cognition (pp. 351–375).
North-Holland.
Hoshino, N., & Thierry, G. (2012). Do Spanish-English bilinguals have their fingers in
two pies — or is it their toes? An electrophysiological investigation of semantic
fpsyg.2012.00009
Hutchison, K. A. (2003). Is semantic priming due to association strength or feature
overlap? A microanalytic review. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 785–813.
James, E., Gaskell, M. G., & Henderson, L. M. (2019). Offline consolidation
supersedes prior knowledge benefits in children’s (but not adults’) word
learning. Developmental Science, 22, e12776.
James, E., Gaskell, M. G., Weighall, A. R., & Henderson, L. M. (2017). Consolidation
of vocabulary during sleep: The rich get richer? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Jeffreys, H. (1939). Theory of Probability. Clarendon Press.
Kandhadai, P., & Federmeier, K. D. (2010). Automatic and controlled aspects of
lexical associative processing in the two cerebral hemispheres.
Psychophysiology, 47 (4), 774–785.
Kapnoula, E., & McMurray, B. (2016). Newly learned word forms are abstract and
integrated immediately after acquisition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23,
Kapnoula, E., Packard, S., Gupta, P., & McMurray, B. (2015). Immediate lexical
1016/j.cognition.2014.09.007
Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of the American Statistical
Kazmerski, V. A., & Friedman, D. (1997). Old/new differences in direct and indirect
memory tests using pictures and words in within- and cross-form conditions:
Event-related potential and behavioral measures. Cognitive Brain Research,
Keuleers, E., Stevens, M., Mandera, P., & Brysbaert, M. (2015). Word knowledge in
the crowd: Measuring vocabulary size and word prevalence in a massive online
experiment. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68 (8), 1665–1692.
Korochkina, M., Bu¨rki, A., & Nickels, L. (2021). Apples and oranges: How does
learning context affect novel word learning? Journal of Memory and
Korochkina, M., Sowman, P. F., Nickels, L., & Bu¨rki, A. (2023). Neural correlates
of encoding in novel word learning. Collabra: Psychology, 9 (1), 57525. https:
//doi.org/10.1525/collabra.57525
Kumar, A. A. (2021). Semantic memory: A review of methods, models, and current
3758/s13423-020-01792-x
Kumaran, D., Hassabis, D., & McClelland, J. L. (2016). What learning systems do
intelligent agents need? Complementary learning systems theory updated.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20, 512–534.
Kurdziel, L. B. F., Mantua, J., & Spencer, R. M. C. (2017). Novel word learning
in older adults: A role for sleep? Brain and Language, 167, 106–113. http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.05.010
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2000). Electrophysiology reveals semantic memory
use in language comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4 (12), 463–470.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: Finding meaning
in the N400 component of the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual
093008.131123
Lau, E. F., Phillips, C., & Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for semantics:
(De)constructing the N400. Nature Review Neuroscience, 9 (12), 920–933.
Leach, L., & Samuel, A. (2007). Lexical configuration and lexical engagement: When
10.1016/j.cogpsych.2007.01.001
Lewandowski, D., Kurowicka, D., & Joe, H. (2009). Generating random correlation
matrices based on vines and extended onion method. Journal of Multivariate
Lilford, R. J., Thornton, J. G., & Braunholtz, D. (1995). Clinical trials and rare
diseases — a way out of a conundrum. British Medical Journal, 311 (7020),
Lindsay, S., & Gaskell, M. (2013). Lexical integration of novel words without sleep.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39,
Lindsay, S., & Gaskell, M. G. (2010). A Complementary Systems Account of word
learning in L1 and L2. Language Learning, 60, 45–63. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1111/j.1467-9922.2010.00600.x
Liu, Y., & van Hell, J. (2020). Learning novel word meanings: An ERP study on
lexical consolidation in monolingual, inexperienced foreign language learners.
Lucas, M. (2000). Semantic priming without association: A meta-analytic review.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 618–630.
McCandliss, B. D., Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2003). The visual word form area:
Expertise for reading in the fusiform gyrus. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7 (7),
McClelland, J. L. (2013). Incorporating rapid neocortical learning of new schema-
consistent information into complementary learning systems theory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 142, 1190–1210. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1037/a0033812
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & Lampinen, A. K. (2020). Integration of
new information in memory: New insights from a complementary learning
systems perspective. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why there are
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights
from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 419–457.
McGregor, K. K. (2014). What a difference a day makes: Change in memory for newly
learned word forms over twenty-four hours. Journal of Speech, Language, and
13-0273
McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Kim, A. (2004). Neural correlates of second language
learning: Minimal instruction produces rapid change. Nature Neuroscience, 7,
McMurray, B., Kapnoula, E., & Gaskell, M. G. (2016). Learning and integration of
new word-forms: Consolidation, pruning, and the emergence of automaticity.
In M. G. Gaskell & J. Mirkovi´c (Eds.), Speech Perception and Spoken Word
Recognition (pp. 116–142). Psychology Press.
McNamara, T. P. (2005). Semantic Priming: Perspectives from Memory and Word
Recognition. Psychology Press.
McNamara, T. P., & Altarriba, J. (1988). Depth of spreading activation revisited:
Semantic mediated priming occurs in lexical decisions. Journal of Memory and
McRae, K., & Boisvert, S. (1998). Automatic semantic similarity priming. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 558–572.
Medler, D. A., & Binder, J. R. (2008). MCWord: An On-Line Orthographic Database
Meeter, M., & Murre, J. M. J. (2004). Consolidation of long-term memory: Evidence
1037/0033-2909.130.6.843
Meng, X., & Wong, W. H. (1996). Simulating ratios of normalizing constants via
a simple identity: A theoretical exploration. Statistica Sinica, 6 (4), 831–860.
Mestres-Miss´e, A., Camara, E., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., Rotte, M., & Munte, T. F.
(2008). Functional neuroanatomy of meaning acquisition from context. Journal
Mestres-Miss´e, A., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., & Munte, T. F. (2007). Watching the brain
10.1093/cercor/bhl094
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word recognition: A selective
review of current findings and theories. In D. Besner & G. W. Humphreys
(Eds.), Basic Processes in Reading: Visual Word Recognition (pp. 264–336).
Erlbaum.
Nicenboim, B., & Vasishth, S. (2016). Statistical methods for linguistic research:
Foundational Ideas — Part II. Language and Linguistics Compass, 10,
Nieuwland, M. S., Barr, D. J., Bartolozzi, F., Busch-Moreno, S., Darley, E., Donaldson,
D. I., Ferguson, H. J., Fu, X., Heyselaar, E., Huettig, F., Husband, E. M., Ito,
A., Kazanina, N., Kogan, V., Kohu´t, Z., Kulakova, E., M´ezi`ere, D., Politzer-
Ahles, S., Rousselet, G., . . . Von Grebmer Zu Wolfsthurn, S. (2019). Lexical
prediction in the aging brain: The effects of predictiveness and congruency on
the N400 ERP component. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
O’Reilly, R. C., Bhattacharyya, R., Howard, M. D., & Ketz, N. (2014). Complementary
learning systems. Cognitive Science, 38 (6), 1229–1248. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01214.x
Paller, K. A., Kutas, M., & McIsaac, H. K. (1995). Monitoring conscious recollection
via the electrical activity of the brain. Psychological Science, 6 (2), 107–111.
Paller, K. A., Voss, J. L., & Boehm, S. G. (2007). Validating neural correlates of
1016/j.tics.2007.04.002
Payne, B. R., Lee, C., & Federmeier, K. D. (2015). Revisiting the incremental effects
of context on word processing: Evidence from single-word event-related brain
psyp.12515
Perfetti, C. A., Wlotko, E. W., & Hart, L. A. (2005). Word learning and individual
differences in word learning re?ected in event-related potentials. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31 (6),
Pernet, C. R., Chauveau, N., Gaspar, C., & Rousselet, G. A. (2011). LIMO EEG: A
toolbox for hierarchical LInear MOdeling of ElectroEncephaloGraphic data.
10.1155/2011/831409
Pernet, C. R., Latinus, M., Nichols, T. E., & Rousselet, G. A. (2015). Cluster-based
computational methods for mass univariate analyses of event-related brain
potentials/fields: A simulation study. Journal of Neuroscience Methods,
Peters, J., & Daum, I. (2009). Frontal but not parietal positivity during source
recollection is sensitive to episodic content. Neuroscience Letters, 454 (3),
Pion-Tonachini, L., Kreutz-Delgado, K., & Makeig, S. (2019). ICLabel: An
automated electroencephalographic independent component classifier,
dataset, and website. NeuroImage, 198, 181–197.
Posner, M. I., & Snyder, C. R. R. (1975). Attention and cognitive control. In R. L.
Solso (Ed.), Information Processing and Cognition: The Loyola Symposium
(pp. 55–85). Erlbaum.
Pulvermu¨ller, F., Shtyrov, Y., & Hauk, O. (2009). Understanding in an instant:
Neurophysiological evidence for mechanistic language circuits in the brain.
Brain and Language, 110 (2), 81–94.
R Core Team. (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria.
Rabovsky, M., Hansen, S. S., & McClelland, J. L. (2018). Modelling the N400 brain
potential as change in a probabilistic representation of meaning. Nature Human
Rigby, R. A., & Stasinopoulos, D. M. (2005). Generalized additive models for location,
scale and shape. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied
Rugg, M. D. (1983). Further study of the electrophysiological correlates of lexical
934x(83)90060-3
Rugg, M. D. (1995). ERP studies of memory. In M. D. Rugg & M. G. H. Coles
(Eds.), Electrophysiology of Mind: Event-Related Brain Potentials and
Cognition (pp. 133–170). Oxford University Press.
Rugg, M. D., & Curran, T. (2007). Event-related potentials and recognition memory.
2007.04.004
Schad, D., Nicenboim, B., Betancourt, M., & Vasishth, S. (2021). Toward a principled
Bayesian workflow in cognitive science. Psychological Methods, 26 (1), 103–126.
Schad, D., Nicenboim, B., Bu¨rkner, P., Betancourt, M., & Vasishth, S. (2021).
Workflow techniques for robust use of Bayes factors. arXiv:2103.08744v2
Sch¨onbrodt, F. D., & Wagenmakers, E. (2018). Bayes factor design analysis:
Planning for compelling evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 25 (1),
Senkfor, A. J., & Van Petten, C. (1998). Who said what? An event-related potential
investigation of source and item memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
0278-7393.24.4.1005
Shelton, J. R., & Martin, R. C. (1992). How semantic is automatic semantic priming?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18 (6),
Smith, S., & Nichols, T. (2009). Threshold-free cluster enhancement: Addressing
problems of smoothing, threshold dependence and localisation in cluster
inference. NeuroImage, 44 (1), 83–98.
Sparks, J. R., & Rapp, D. N. (2010). Discourse processing — examining our everyday
language experiences. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews Cognitive Science, 1,
Spiegelhalter, D. J., Abrams, K. R., & Myles, J. R. (2003). Bayesian Approaches to
Clinical Trials and Health?Care Evaluation. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. https:
//doi.org/10.1002/0470092602
Squire, L. R. (2004). Memory systems of the brain: A brief history and current
perspective. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 82 (3), 1710177.
Stan Development Team. (2017). Stan Modeling Language Users Guide and Reference
Swaab, T. Y., Brown, C., & Hagoort, P. (1998). Understanding ambiguous words in
sentence contexts: Electrophysiological evidence for delayed contextual
selection in Broca’s aphasia. Neuropsychologia, 36 (8), 737–761.
Szewczyk, J. M., & Schriefers, H. (2018). The N400 as an index of lexical
preactivation and its implications for prediction in language comprehension.
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 33 (6), 665–686.
Tamminen, J., & Gaskell, M. G. (2008). Newly learned spoken words show long-term
lexical competition effects. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
Tamminen, J., & Gaskell, M. G. (2013). Novel word integration in the mental lexicon:
Evidence from unmasked and masked semantic priming. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 66 (5), 1001–1025. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 /
17470218.2012.724694
Tamminen, J., Payne, J., Stickgold, R., Wamsley, E., & Gaskell, M. G. (2010). Sleep
spindle activity is associated with the integration of new memories and existing
knowledge. Journal of Neuroscience, 30, 14356–14360. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1523/JNEUROSCI.3028-10.2010
Tham, E., Lindsay, S., & Gaskell, M. G. (2015). Markers of automaticity in sleep-
associated consolidation of novel words. Neuropsychologia, 71, 146–157. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.03.025
van der Ven, F., Takashima, A., Segers, E., & Verhoeven, L. (2015). Learning word
meanings: Overnight integration and study modality effects. PLoS ONE, 10,
Van Petten, C., Kutas, M., Kluender, R., Mitchiner, M., & McIsaac, H. (1991).
Fractionating the word repetition effect with event-related potentials. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3 (2), 131–150.
Van Petten, C., & Luka, B. J. (2012). Prediction during language comprehension:
Benefits, costs, and ERP components. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 83 (2), 176–190.
Van Petten, C., & Senkfor, A. J. (1996). Memory for words and novel visual
patterns: Repetition, recognition, and encoding effects in the event-related
brain potential. Psychophysiology, 33 (5), 491–506.
van Berkum, J. J. (2009). The ‘neuropragmatics’ of simple utterance comprehension:
An ERP review. In U. Sauerland & K. Yatsushiro (Eds.), Semantics and
Pragmatics: From Experiment to Theory (pp. 276–316). Palgrave Macmillan.
van Berkum, J. J., Hagoort, P., & Brown, C. M. (1999). Semantic integration in
sentences and discourse: Evidence from the N400. Journal of Cognitive
Vasishth, S., Yadav, H., Schad, D., & Nicenboim, B. (2021). Sample size
determination for Bayesian hierarchical models commonly used in
Voss, J. L., & Paller, K. A. (2007). Neural correlates of conceptual implicit memory and
their contamination of putative neural correlates of explicit memory. Learning
Walker, S., Henderson, L. M., Fletcher, F., Knowland, V., Cairney, S. A., & Gaskell,
M. G. (2010). Learning to live with interfering neighbours: The influence of
time of learning and level of encoding on word learning. Royal Society Open
Weighall, A. R., Henderson, L. M., Barr, D. J., Cairney, S. A., & Gaskell, M. G. (2016).
Eye-tracking the time-course of novel word learning and lexical competition in
j.bandl.2016.07.010
Wilcox, R. R. (2005). Introduction to Robust Estimation and Hypothesis Testing.
Academic Press.
Winocur, G., & Moscovitch, M. (2011). Memory transformation and systems
consolidation. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 17,
Wixted, J. T. (2004). The psychology and neuroscience of forgetting. Annual Review
Yarkoni, T., Balota, D., & Yap, M. (2008). Moving beyond Coltheart’s N: A new
measure of orthographic similarity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15,
Yonelinas, A. P. (2002). The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30
years of research. Journal of Memory and Language, 46 (3), 441–517. https :
//doi.org/10.1006/jmla.2002.2864
Yu, S. S., & Rugg, M. D. (2010). Dissociation of the electrophysiological correlates of
familiarity strength and item repetition. Brain Research, 1320, 74–84. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.071
a shark, and (B) a novel plant similar to a cactus.
A B
It lives in saltwater and has a prominent dorsal fin. It has tiny round leaves and very strong roots.
It is able to detect electromagnetic fields that living things produce. It is only found in deserts.
It has a small body and an even smaller head and moves very slowly. It can survive extreme drought by curling into a tight ball.
It always swims near the surface. It uncurls when exposed to water.
decision task.
Semantically related Semantically unrelated
English pairs
Targets from categories 1–20 Targets from categories 21–40
N = 40
English-novel pairs Targets from categories 21–30 (Set 1) Targets from categories 1–10 (Set 1)
N = 40 Targets from categories 31–40 (Set 2) Targets from categories 11–20 (Set 2)
Analysis
Model parameter Prior set
Preliminary Main
Intercept 1-4 N (6.3, 0.3) N (6.4, 0.35)
1 N (0, 0.001)
2 N (0, 0.008)
Effect of interest
3 N (0, 0.02)
4 N (0, 0.025)
SD 1-4 N (0, 0.05)
σ 1-4 N (0, 0.5)
Note: Models in the preliminary analysis only included one fixed
effect (semantic relatedness, related vs. unrelated), while models in
the main analysis included two fixed effects (semantic relatedness
and time of learning, remote vs. recent) and their interaction.
Model parameter Prior set 1 Prior set 2 Prior set 3 Prior set 4
Intercept N (0, 5)
Effect of interest N (0, 0.5) N (0, 1) N (0, 2) N (0, 3)
SD N (0, 5)
Intercept for σ N (0, log(10))
SD for σ N (0, 5)
Target type Semantic relatedness to prime Percentage of correct responses
Mean SD
Related 93% 0.07%
English word
Unrelated 90% 0.07%
Related 89% 0.10%
Recent novel name
Unrelated 90% 0.10%
Related 86% 0.11%
Remote novel name
Unrelated 87% 0.12%
Nonword - 86% 0.12%
target pairs.
Effect of interest Prior Estimate (ms) 95%CrI BF
N (0, 0.001) 0.06 [−1.09 , 1.21] 1.08
N (0, 0.008) 2.00 [−4.63 , 8.55] 0.03
Semantic relatedness
N (0, 0.02) 3.48 [−5.47 , 12.44] 0.56
N (0, 0.025) 3.67 [−5.58 , 12.79] 0.42
N (0, 0.001) −0.18 [−1.33 , 0.97] 0.96
N (0, 0.008) −5.79 [−12.45 , 1.00] 0.50
Time of learning
N (0, 0.02) −10.04 [−18.78 , −1.41 ] 5.04
N (0, 0.025) −10.49 [−19.34 , −1.46 ] 4.59
N (0, 0.001) −0.04 [−1.20 , 1.13] 0.66
N (0, 0.008) −1.91 [−10.02 , 6.17] 179.41
Relatedness × time
N (0, 0.02) −5.54 [−19.37 , 8.21] 0.98
N (0, 0.025) −6.29 [−19.37 , 8.21] 0.79
pairs.
Spatiotemporal window Effect of interest Prior Estimate ((cid:181)V) 95%CrI BF
N (0, 0.5) −0.11 [−0.48, 0.26] 0.42
N (0, 1) −0.12 [−0.52, 0.28] 0.29
Semantic relatedness
N (0, 2) −0.13 [−0.52, 0.27] 0.13
N (0, 3) −0.13 [−0.53, 0.28] 0.08
N (0, 0.5) −0.24 [−0.60, 0.14] 0.84
N400 N (0, 1) −0.26 [−0.65, 0.12] 0.47
Time of learning
Centro-parietal electrodes N (0, 2) −0.27 [−0.66, 0.12] 0.32
N (0, 3) −0.27 [−0.66, 0.12] 0.16
N (0, 0.5) −0.20 [−0.80, 0.41] 0.66
N (0, 1) −0.28 [−0.98, 0.43] 0.44
Relatedness × time
N (0, 2) −0.31 [−1.06, 0.44] 0.27
N (0, 3) −0.31 [−1.07, 0.44] 0.17
N (0, 0.5) −0.13 [−0.45, 0.19] 0.61
N (0, 1) −0.14 [−0.48, 0.20] 0.23
Semantic relatedness
N (0, 2) −0.14 [−0.48, 0.20] 0.10
N (0, 3) −0.14 [−0.49, 0.20] 0.06
N (0, 0.5) 0.16 [−0.24, 0.40] 0.34
LPC N (0, 1) 0.08 [−0.25, 0.42] 0.17
Time of learning
Frontal electrodes N (0, 2) 0.08 [−0.25, 0.43] 0.14
N (0, 3) 0.09 [−0.25, 0.43] 0.06
N (0, 0.5) 0.12 [−0.45, 0.69] 0.62
N (0, 1) 0.16 [−0.53, 0.82] 0.51
Relatedness × time
N (0, 2) 0.17 [−0.55, 0.88] 0.24
N (0, 3) 0.17 [−0.55, 0.90] 0.11
N (0, 0.5) 0.02 [−0.29, 0.33] 0.32
N (0, 1) 0.02 [−0.30, 0.34] 0.23
Semantic relatedness
N (0, 2) 0.02 [−0.31, 0.35] 0.09
N (0, 3) 0.02 [−0.31, 0.35] 0.04
N (0, 0.5) 0.26 [−0.06, 0.58] 1.42
LPC N (0, 1) 0.29 [−0.05, 0.63] 0.94
Time of learning
Parietal electrodes N (0, 2) 0.30 [−0.04, 0.63] 0.32
N (0, 3) 0.30 [−0.05, 0.64] 0.28
N (0, 0.5) −0.34 [−0.90, 0.23] 1.61
N (0, 1) −0.45 [−1.10, 0.21] 1.16
Relatedness × time
N (0, 2) −0.49 [−1.17, 0.19] 0.52
N (0, 3) −0.50 [−1.19, 0.18] 0.35
Contrast Prior Estimate (ms) 95%CrI BF
N (0, 0.5) −0.21 [−0.42, 0.01] 31.82
N (0, 1) −0.21 [−0.43, 0.01] 25.65
Nonwords vs. English words
N (0, 2) −0.21 [−0.43, 0.01] 17.25
N (0, 3) −0.21 [−0.43, 0.01] 5.30
N (0, 0.5) −0.44 [−0.67, −0.21] 2122.85
N (0, 1) −0.46 [−0.70, −0.23] 1334.37
Recent names vs. nonwords
N (0, 2) −0.47 [−0.71, −0.23] 781.47
N (0, 3) −0.47 [−0.71, −0.23] 393.46
N (0, 0.5) 0.17 [−0.08, 0.41] 0.37
N (0, 1) 0.19 [−0.07, 0.45] 0.28
Remote vs. recent names
N (0, 2) 0.19 [−0.07, 0.44] 0.10
N (0, 3) 0.19 [−0.06, 0.45] 0.06


Note: The graph shows probability density, means, medians, and interquartile range for
response times (for correct responses) for the semantically related and unrelated novel name
targets trained in the recent vs. in the remote set. A small amount of random jitter was added
name targets.
Note: The N400 time window is shaded grey.
targets.
Note: The LPC time window is shaded grey.
targets.
Note: The LPC time window is shaded grey.
novel name targets.
Note: The graph shows significant t-values before and after TFCE correction (panel A),
topographic maps of amplitudes between 510 ms and 580 ms and between 710 ms and 730 ms
post onset (panel B; thick black dots correspond to the electrodes with significant t-values
after TFCE), and mean amplitudes in both sets at the electrode CP4, where significant t-
values were found in both time windows (panel C; the time windows between 506 ms and
581 ms, and between 707 ms and 735 ms, where the t-values were significant at this particular
electrode, are shaded grey).
of semantic relatedness and interaction between semantic relatedness and time of
learning.
Note: Panel A (effect of semantic relatedness) and Panel B (interaction between time of learning
and semantic relatedness) show that, for either predictor, no significant t-values remained after
correction with TFCE.
and trained novel name targets (from both sets) at centro-parietal electrodes.
Note: The N400 time window is shaded grey.
English targets.
Note: The graph shows significant t-values before and after TFCE correction (panel A),
topographic maps of amplitudes between 430 ms and 580 ms and between 700 ms and 880 ms
post onset (panel B; thick black dots correspond to the electrodes with significant t-values
after TFCE), and mean amplitudes at the electrode C5, where the t-value was maximal (panel
C; time windows 442 −577 ms and 663 −863 ms, where the t-values were significant at this
particular electrode, are shaded grey).
targets and the nonwords.
Note: The graph shows significant t-values before and after TFCE correction (panel A),
topographic maps of amplitudes between 150 ms and 750 ms post onset (panel B; thick black
dots correspond to the electrodes with significant t-values after TFCE), and mean amplitudes
at the electrode FC1, where the t-values were significant in all four time windows (panel C;
time windows 74 −269 ms, 364 −416 ms, 486 −581 ms, and 737 −759 ms, where the t-values
were significant at this particular electrode, are shaded grey).
novel name targets.
Note: The graph shows with significant t-values before and after TFCE correction (panel A),
topographic maps of amplitudes between 540 ms and 750 ms post onset (panel B; thick black
dots correspond to the electrodes with significant t-values after TFCE), and mean amplitudes
at the electrode Fz, where the t-values were maximal (panel C; time windows 533 −572 ms and
715 −730 ms, where the t-values were significant at this particular electrode, are shaded grey).