This is a preprint that has not been peer-reviewed yet (2021-12-30).
Feedback related to the typology, non-cited relevant literature, or suggestions for suitable research
outlets, are very welcome.
A new typology of psychological mechanisms underlying prosocial decisions
Arvid Erlandsson, Hajdi Moche and Stephan Dickert
Corresponding author arvid.erlandsson@liu.se
Abstract
Charitable giving, volunteering, climate-friendly choices, and most recently changing one’s lifestyle to
stop the spread of the coronavirus are all examples of prosocial behavior. Prosociality can be
investigated from different perspectives including the “who-question” (which people are more likely
to help), and the “when-question” (which situational factors stimulate helping?), but in this article we
focus primarily on the “why-question” (which emotions and cognitions motivate helping?)
Specifically, this article tries to organize and synthesize literature related to emotions, thoughts, and
beliefs (i.e. psychological mechanisms) that motivate or demotivate human helping behavior. To do
this, we present a new typology including four overarching interrelated categories, each encompassing
multiple subcategories.
(1) Emotions: (a) emotional reactions elicited by the need situation such as empathic
concern/sympathy, (b) positive or negative attitudes toward the beneficiary or the requester, (c)
incidental mood.
(2) Moral principles: (a) personal responsibility, (b) fairness-concerns, (c) aversion towards causing
harm.
(3) Anticipated impact: (a) self-efficacy (e.g. “can I make a difference?”) and (b) response-efficacy
(e.g., “is this cause/project efficient and worthwhile?”).
(4) Anticipated personal consequences: (a) material, (b) social and (c) emotional costs and benefits
that the helper expects will follow if she helps or if she does not help.
Increased knowledge about the “who” (e.g. individual differences in demography or personality) and
“when” (situational antecedents such as characteristic of those in need, or type of solicitation) can
surely help predict and even increase prosociality, but we argue that to understand the psychology of
helping we need to also consider the psychological mechanisms underlying prosocial decisions (the
“why-question”).
We compare our typology against related theoretical frameworks, and present the pros and cons with
different methodological approaches of testing psychological mechanisms of helping, with the aim to
help researchers and practitioners better organize and understand the many psychological factors that
influence prosocial decisions.
Keywords: Psychological mechanisms of helping; Prosocial motivation; Emotional reactions; Moral
principles; Altruism; Perceived impact; Egoistic motives; Emphatic concern; Emotion regulation;
Impression management; Anticipated costs and benefits
Acknowledgement: The authors thank the JEDI-Lab and especially Per A. Andersson, Amanda
Lindkvist and Daniel Västfjäll for constructive feedback.
Introduction
The recent upsurge of research on prosocial behavior has led to a large number of emotions and
cognitions being proposed as explanations for why some groups of people help more than others, and
why some situations make us help more than others. The typology presented in this paper is intended
to provide a conceptual overview of these emotions and cognitions and offer a tool to organize
existing and future research about psychological mechanisms underlying helping, so that it becomes
more comprehensible, as well as to generate testable hypotheses. The typology synthesizes and
organizes psychological mechanisms that motivate or demotivate prosocial behavior, into four
overarching, interrelated categories: (1) Emotions; (2) Moral principles; (3) Anticipated impact; (4)
We begin by explaining how “prosocial behavior” and “psychological mechanisms” should and should
not be understood when reading this article. The second section introduces the typology and
distinguishes the “why-question” of helping, from the “when-question”, and the “who-question”.
Sections 3-6 describe each of the four overarching categories and their respective subcategories.
Section 7 compares our typology against the eight mechanisms suggested in the influential paper by
Bekkers and Wiepking (2011a). The final section discusses different methodological approaches when
testing psychological mechanisms underlying prosocial decisions.
1. Definitions
What is prosocial behavior?
Prosocial behavior, or helping (we will use these terms interchangeably) is here used as an umbrella
term for behaviors that imply some type of cost for the helper (the person doing the act), while
improving (or at least intending to improve) the situation for the beneficiary. A beneficiary can be a
single person or non-human animal in need, but also a group, an organization, or some larger entity
(such as Planet Earth). The cost for the helper can vary in magnitude and involve money such as when
giving to charitable organizations or panhandlers (Bhati & Hansen, 2020; Lee & Farrell, 2003;
Oppenheimer & Olivola, 2011; Zagefka & James, 2015), or time such as when volunteering (Ferguson
et al., 2019; Moseley et al., 2018). The cost could also involve personal discomfort or risk, such as
when donating blood or organs (Ferguson & Lawrence, 2016; Wang, 2011), or emergency helping
such as saving someone from a fire (Latane & Darley, 1970). Helping can also be done by “sacrificing
personal enjoyment”, such as abstaining from traveling by plane in order to help fight climate change
(Sachdeva et al., 2015; Tobler et al., 2012;), or wearing a mask, adjusting one’s way of living, and
taking the vaccine, in order to help the fight against the novel coronavirus (Erlandsson, 2021a; Lunn et
al., 2020; Vacondio et al., 2021).
What are underlying psychological mechanisms?
In this article, psychological mechanisms are referred to as conscious emotions, thoughts, or beliefs
that influence helping decisions.1 Helping decisions can relate to how to distribute helping among
different beneficiaries (allocations in helping dilemmas, Baron & Szymanska, 2011; Erlandsson, 2020;
1 That an emotion, thought, or belief is conscious does not imply that it is deliberate, only that the person
experiencing it is aware of it to some extent. It can be argued that we sometimes help without any preceding
conscious emotions, thoughts, or beliefs, but out of pure instinct, e.g. reacting immediately when someone falls,
or automatically mimicking someone else’s helping behavior. The typology is compatible with the idea that
helping behavior sometimes occur without any intermediating psychological mechanisms (Clark & Word, 1974).
Erlandsson et al., 2020a), but in this article we focus primarily on the most typical helping decisions
— whether to help or not (likelihood), and how much to help (magnitude; Dickert et al., 2011a). In
this context, psychological mechanisms can be understood as emotions, thoughts or beliefs that
motivate (increase) or demotivate (decrease) helping.
It should be clarified that underlying mechanisms of human behavior can be investigated on different
levels (Preston & de Waal, 2002). Evolutionary psychologists typically focus on the “ultimate causes”
of human prosociality and explain prosocial behavior in terms of natural selection (Burnstein et al.,
1994; Burum et al., 2020; Goetz et al., 2010; van Vugt & van Lange, 2006), whereas medical
scientists focus on biological or chemical mechanisms (e.g. oxytocin; de Dreu et al., 2010; 2011;
Marsh et al., 2020), and neuroscientists investigate activation in certain brain areas when people
respond to prosocial decisions (Cutler & Campbell-Meiklejohn, 2019; Genevsky et al., 2013;
Harbaugh et al., 2007; Mayr et al., 2009).
The different levels of analysis should be seen as complementary accounts. We are not denying the
evolutionary origin of prosocial emotions, that increased activity in a specific brain area makes us
experience these emotions, or that thoughts and beliefs are represented in the brain. Still, in this article
we understand psychological mechanisms as emotions, thoughts, or beliefs that, in theory, could be
measured by asking helpers to introspect e.g. why they helped or why they did not help in a specific
flaws. People do not always have full access to, forget, or are not able to verbalize, all their reasons for
their behaviors (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Ross & Nisbett, 2011). Also, even when people are aware of
the reasons for their helping or non-helping, they tend to justify their decisions post-hoc so that they
appear more moral and socially acceptable than they actually are (Danioni & Barni, 2021). We discuss
these methodological issues further in Section 8.
2. Four overarching categories
We propose a typology with four overarching categories: (1) Emotions; (2) Moral principles; (3)
Anticipated impact; and (4) Anticipated personal consequences. Each overarching category includes
psychological mechanisms that increase (motivate) helping as well as mechanisms that decrease
isolation, but we argue that they can be distinguished theoretically as well as empirically and that all
four can increase or decrease helping motivation independently of each other.
The overarching categories can be understood as four psychological strings (or decision processes),
that one can play on in order to influence helping (the heart, head, book, and binoculars; loosely
inspired by Weber, 1998; Weber et al., 2004; Weber & Lindemann, 2007). Appealing to the heart
means trying to increase helping by making people experience intense compassionate feelings
(emotions, e.g. Slovic et al., 2017; Small, 2011), whereas appealing to the head implies trying to make
people think that their helping would be effective and impactful (anticipated impact, e.g., Camilleri &
Larrick, 2019; Lewis & Small, 2019). Further, appealing to the book implies trying to make people
acknowledge a personal responsibility to help (moral principles, e.g., Everett et al., 2020; Goldstein et
al., 2011), whereas appealing to the binoculars means trying to make people help by emphasizing the
large personal benefits, or small personal costs, of helping (anticipated personal consequences, e.g.
Feiler et al., 2012; White & Peloza, 2009). Each motive can also be made more salient for participants
through various priming techniques (e.g. Barth & Stürmer, 2016; Oceja, 2008; Small et al., 2007).
The first dimension differentiates psychological mechanisms that are strongly linked to the helper
(internal focus; Emotions and Anticipated Personal Consequences) from mechanisms that are
primarily linked to something outside the helper such as the beneficiaries or the world as a whole
(external focus; Moral principles and Anticipated impact).2 The second dimension differentiates
psychological mechanisms that are inherently forward-looking and dependent on what the helper
anticipates will happen if he/she helps or does not help (future-oriented; Anticipated Personal
Consequences and Anticipated impact), from mechanisms that are determined more by what is
experienced at the moment or what has happened previously (past or present-oriented; Emotions and
Moral Principles).
(including illustrative symbol) and how they differ on two dimensions.
The who-, when- and why-questions
This article distinguishes between three questions that are central in research on prosociality; “the
Who?”, “the When?” and “the Why?” (Bhati & Hansen, 2020; Erlandsson, 2014).
The who-question is about which individual differences predict helping and whether some groups of
people (e.g. women, educated, extroverts) help more than others (e.g. Bekkers & Wiepking, 2011b;
Wiepking & Bekkers, 2012; see also Erlandsson et al., 2018a; Nilsson et al., 2016; 2020).
The when-question is about how different situational factors influence helping — for instance how a
charity appeal is framed, the characteristics of those in need, or how a request for help is made — and
how these situational differences increase or decrease helping (e.g. Erlandsson et al., 2016a;
2 “Internal vs. external” should not be understood as the same as “Egoistic vs. altruistic”. Internally focused
mechanisms can be both typically egoistic (e.g. anticipated material or social rewards if helping) or typically
altruistic (e.g. feeling strong empathic concern). Likewise, external mechanisms can be perceived as very
altruistic (e.g. a desire to help as many as possible) or as not altruistic at all (e.g. a perceived duty to comply with
the moral rules or a desire to make a large personal impact). The distinction between altruistic and egoistic
motives for helping has been important in most past literature about mechanisms underlying helping (e.g.
Batson, 2011), but it is less central in this typology.
Erlandsson et al., 2018b; Weyant, 1996). In our own research, we sometimes use the term “helping-
effects” to refer to situational factors that influence helping (Erlandsson, 2021b).
The why-question is instead about the psychological and motivational aspects of helping. It is about
what goes on in our heads, and what types of feelings, thoughts, and beliefs that increase or decrease
our helping. Understanding which situational and individual factors increase helping is certainly
important and can help us predict the future, but understanding also which emotions, thoughts and
beliefs best explain these increases adds an extra layer to our understanding of human prosociality
(Butts et al., 2019; Cryder et al., 2013a; Dickert et al., 2016; Erlandsson et al., 2014; 2015; Lee et al.,
2014).
The who-, the when- and the why-questions of helping are not always clearly separated in the
literature. In one of the most ambitious reviews about prosocial behavior to date, Bekkers and
Wiepking 2011a) suggested a theoretical framework including eight psychological mechanisms: (1)
awareness of need, (2) solicitation, (3) cost & benefits, (4) altruism, (5) reputation, (6) psychological
benefits, (7) efficacy, and (8) values.
Bekkers and Wiepking did an outstanding job in summarizing literature on charitable giving from
different fields, but we argue that they used an overly broad definition of psychological mechanisms,
and mixed what we would refer to as individual differences (the who-question), situational differences
(the when-question), and psychological mechanisms (the why-question). The typology that we suggest
is inspired by, and has considerable overlap with the framework by Bekkers and Wiepking (2011a;
2011c), but focuses exclusively on the why-question of helping. We compare our typology against
their eight mechanisms more in detail in Section 7.
Although this paper is devoted to psychological mechanisms (emotions, thoughts, and beliefs that can
influence helping), these mechanisms can be used to elucidate why some situations, requests, or
charity-appeals make people help more than others (the when-question), and also why some groups of
people generally help more than others (the who-question; Bekkers & Wiepking, 2011b; Piff et al.,
2010; Wang, 2008; Wiepking & Bekkers, 2012).
Overarching Examples of underlying psychological mechanisms Corresponding mechanism
categories in Bekkers & Wiepking’s
Subcategories framework
Motivating Demotivating
emotions/thoughts/beliefs: emotions/thoughts/beliefs:
(“I helped because….”) (“I did not help because…”)
Emotions
Emotional reactions ” …seeing the suffering made me (awareness of need)
feel sad/sympathy/compassion (solicitation)
for the beneficiary” (empathic (altruism)
concern)
”…seeing the suffering made me
feel sad/upset” (distress)
Linked to entity ” …I admire/respect the ” …I am annoyed with/dislike the (awareness of need)
beneficiary/requester” beneficiary/requester” (solicitation)
Incidental mood ” …I received good news and “…I received bad news and feel (awareness of need)
feel great today” terrible today”
Moral principles
Responsibility ” …I was morally obliged to ” …the beneficiaries were morally (values)
help” (because of role, relation, obliged to help themselves” (awareness of need)
or situation) (solicitation)
” …someone else was/others were
morally obliged to help the
beneficiaries”
Fairness “…not helping would be unfair “…helping would be unfair to (values)
to someone” someone”
Not causing harm “…helping would imply actively (values)
harming someone”
Anticipated impact
Self-efficacy ” …my contribution would make ”my contribution would not make altruism
a significant difference for the any difference for the (efficacy)
beneficiaries” beneficiaries” (solicitation)
Response-efficacy ”…this helping project/cause is ”this helping project/cause is efficacy
efficient/worthwhile/legitimate” inefficient/misguided/fake” (altruism)
(solicitation)
Anticipated personal
consequences
Material if helping “ …it will benefit me materially “…I would not be able to pay the costs/benefits
in the future” bills then” (solicitation)
Material if not helping ”… I believed that I would get “…I could travel more if I stopped costs/benefits
robbed if I did not help” helping” (solicitation)
Social if helping ” …others will perceive me as ”…others would see me as an reputation
kind-hearted or rich” irritating do-gooder if I helped” (solicitation)
Social if not helping “…others would perceive me as ”…not helping would signal my reputation
cold-hearted or ungenerous if I loyalty to my ingroup who (solicitation)
did not help” dislikes the beneficiary”
Emotional if helping ”…helping makes me feel ”…helping would expose me to psychological costs and
happy/proud/meaningful” more suffering and increase benefits
expectations” (solicitation)
Emotional if not helping ”…not helping would make me ”…not helping would make me psychological costs and
feel guilty/ashamed/like a bad feel schadenfreude” benefits
person” (solicitation)
3. Emotions
Emotions, feelings, and affect have been intimately linked to moral attitudes and behavior in general
(Greene et al., 2001; Haidt, 2001), and even stronger so to attitudes and behavior related to helping
(van Kleef & Lelieveld, 2021; Loewenstein & Small, 2007; Slovic, 2007). Prosocial emotions are
often strongly related to helping motivation and feeling more compassionate emotions is sometimes
equalized to helping more.
Crucially, emotions can refer to many things in relation to helping. A person faced with a helping
situation can help because: (1) she feels sad for the person in need (emotional reaction elicited by the
need-situation); (2) she has affectionate emotions toward the beneficiary or the requester (emotions
linked to a specific entity); (3) she is happy because of an unrelated event (incidental mood); (4) she
desires the positive emotions that she expects as a result of helping (anticipated warm glow due to
helping); (5) she wants to avoid the negative emotions that she expects as a result of not helping
(anticipated guilt due to not helping). Moreover, other emotions involved in helping decisions can be
(6) emotions, feelings, or attitudes toward the very act of helping, and (7) emotions that are
experienced as a result of helping or non-helping.
An important feature of this typology is that it treats helping driven by experiencing an emotion, as
different from helping driven by wanting to regulate one’s emotions (Baumeister et al., 2007).
Emotions of the first three types (emotional reactions, entity-linked emotions, and incidental mood)
can influence helping simply by being experienced and are therefore included in the Emotion-
category. In contrast, Types 4 and 5 (anticipated emotions) represent emotion regulation strategies that
are included in the anticipated personal consequences-category discussed later.
Type 6 (emotions towards helping) is almost indistinguishable from helping motivation, which is the
proposed dependent variable, and therefore outside the scope of this article.3 Finally, Type 7 (emotions
experienced after helping decision) is a consequence rather than an antecedent of helping – even if
emotions felt as a response of an earlier helping decision can reinforce future helping by influencing
one’s mood (Aknin et al., 2012). Next, we explain and exemplify the three subcategories of emotions
(Types 1-3 above).
Emotional reactions felt as a response to a need situation
Emotional reactions are immediately experienced emotions felt as a response to being exposed to a
need situation (e.g. hearing a story about a child who is about to die from malnourishment). Some
words used for describing these emotional reactions are empathic concern, empathic arousal, empathy,
sympathy, pity, distress, tenderness, compassion, and sadness. Pinpointing the nuances between these
are outside the scope of this article (see e.g. Batson, 2011; Cuff et al., 2016; Decety & Cowell, 2014;
Goetz et al., 2010), but one distinction should be clarified.
Empathic concern (also often referred to as sympathy; Small et al., 2007; Small, 2010; 2011) refers to
the other-oriented emotion that is elicited by and congruent with the perceived welfare of someone
else (Batson, 2011).4 Items for measuring empathic concern typically include sympathetic, warm,
compassionate, softhearted, and touched (Dovidio et al., 2006). Distress refers to the negative inward-
3 Some definitions of empathy, sympathy or compassion include a behavioral component (e.g. Betancourt, 1990;
Goetz et al., 2010). Although people are free to define concepts as they like, we argue that including helping
behavior as one part of the definition of emotions (or affect) begs the question when trying to determine the
psychological mechanisms of helping.
4 Note that empathic concern (feeling for the person in need) is sometimes used slightly different from empathy
(feeling as the person in need; Cuff et al., 2016; Hein & Singer, 2008; Zaki, 2014). Still, there are several studies
that use the terms interchangeably (e.g. Pavey et al., 2012).
directed feeling a helper might experience when seeing a need-situation. Distress is often measured
with items such as worried, uneasy, distressed, and upset (Davis, 1983a, 1983b; Kogut & Ritov,
2005a) but it can also include less aroused emotional reactions such as sad, downhearted, and
depressed (Dovidio et al., 2006).
Both empathic concern and distress are emotions with negative valence that are typically experienced
when learning about a need situation (Batson, 2011; Dickert & Slovic, 2009). However, whereas
distress is directed inwards (I feel bad), sympathy is directed outwards (I feel bad for the person in
need). Sometimes, distress and empathic concern can motivate identical behaviors, but if there are
alternative ways to feel better (such as switching channel to a comedy rather than keep watching the
news), the person feeling distress is likely to do so whereas the person feeling empathic concern is not
(Cialdini & Kenrick, 1976).
Empathic concern clearly fits in the emotional reaction subcategory. Distress, on the other hand, can
be categorized as either an emotional reaction, or as an anticipated personal consequence. This
depends on whether the person believes that engaging in helping will reduce the personal distress or
not. Helping as a result of feeling sad from hearing about a need-situation (an emotional reaction) is
different from helping because one anticipates feeling better if one helps (a type of emotion
regulation). Helping in order to avoid feeling bad, and helping in order to feel good, will be covered
more in Section 6.
Many studies include one or several types of emotional reactions as a possible psychological
mechanism underlying helping (e.g. Bagozzi & Moore, 1994; Fisher & Ma, 2014; Graziano et al.,
2007; Kogut & Ritov, 2005b; 2007; Pagano & Huo, 2007; Pavey et al., 2012; Pfattheicher et al., 2020;
Saito et al., 2019; Västfjäll, et al. 2014). Empathic concern has been found to predict helping rather
well in many situations but less well in other situations. For example, in one study, native Germans
and Turkish immigrants read either about Markus (a German) or Mohammed (a Turk) who had
problems. When hearing about an in-group victim (but not when hearing about an out-group victim),
empathic concern predicted helping motivation (Stürmer, et al., 2006; see also Maner & Gailliot,
2007).
Empathic concern (and similar emotional reactions) has been suggested as the mediating
psychological mechanism of both individual differences (e.g. on a group-level, women are more prone
than men to feel and to express emotions when observing a need situation, Rueckert et al., 2011), and
helping effects (e.g. people help identified beneficiaries more than statistical because a face and a
name of a single person in need make us feel more empathic concern; Erlandsson et al., 2015; 2017).
Emotions linked to a specific entity
Not all emotions that influence helping behavior are elicited by the need-situation. Some emotions
such as admiration, respect, attraction, and “aww” (the feeling of cuteness; Buckley, 2016), are linked
to a specific entity (e.g. a person, an animal, or an organization). Unlike empathic concern and
distress, these attitude-like emotions are present also in the absence of a need situation, but if an
individual that we admire or find unusually cute is in need, the emotions elicited by the need situation
are likely boosted to higher levels. In line with this, Batson (2011) argues that a perception of need
together with valuing the beneficiary’s welfare are necessary antecedents for empathic concern.
Entity-linked emotions can be positive (e.g. respect, awe; Keltner & Haidt, 2003), but also negative
(e.g. anger or irritation; van Diepen et al., 2009; Fong, 2007), and thus both motivate and demotivate
helping.
Liking of the beneficiary predicts helping for some types of helping. Cryder et al. (2017) suggest that
people have an intuitive push towards helping more attractive beneficiaries. Relatedly, the research by
Stürmer et al. (2005; 2006; Stürmer & Snyder, 2010), found that whereas empathic concern was a
stronger predictor of helping one’s ingroup, liking and perceived attractiveness were stronger
predictors of helping people from one’s outgroup. Also, small details about beneficiaries’ worldviews
or prior behavior can increase as well as decrease their perceived attractiveness and consequently
influence helping towards them (Gershon & Fridman, 2020; Sole et al., 1975).
Entity-related emotions can be directed toward the beneficiary, but also toward the requester.
Sometimes the beneficiary and the requester are the same (such as panhandling, or when an injured
person screams for help), but often the requester and the beneficiary are different (such as when giving
to a charitable organization). Physically attractive requestors made people donate more in a door-to-
door fundraiser (Landry et al., 2006), and requestors who show gratitude (with kind words or smiles)
will likely successfully solicit help also in the future, as emotions toward the requester become more
positive (Merchant et al. 2010). A solicitation for help can also induce negative emotions toward the
requester, if the solicitation is aggressive, annoying, or perceived as manipulative (Cotte et al., 2005;
Hibbert et al., 2007). Requests such as “you simply have no choice - from a moral perspective you
must help” can induce psychological reactance meaning that people feel that their free will is
threatened, and stop helping in order to reinstate their sense of autonomy (Berkowitz, 1973; Dillard &
Shen, 2005; Quick, 2012; Reinhart et al., 2007).
Incidental mood
Emotions that are totally unrelated to the helping situation can also influence decisions to help (Anik et
al., 2011; Carlson et al., 1988; Isen & Levin, 1972; Small & Lerner, 2008; Västfjäll et al., 2016). A
positive mood makes it more likely that we notice need situations whereas a negative incidental mood
makes us more self-focused. A happy mood makes us more energetic, approach-oriented and
interested in others’ well-being (Carlson et al., 1988; Dovidio et al., 2006; Frederickson, 2001; van
Kleef & Lelieveld, 2021), and when in a positive mood e.g. because one passed an exam, helping can
be done as a way to “commemorate” one’s personal success. Participants who are smiled at by an
unrelated person tend to help more when seeing a need situation, possibly as a result of an improved
mood (Guéguen & de Gail, 2003), and an induced positive mood in combination with a high self-
awareness has been suggested to increase helping (Berkowitz, 1987). In contrast, experiencing
unrelated negative emotions (e.g. anger; Gummerum et al., 2016; van Kleef & Lelieveld, 2021) or
negative visceral states (e.g. hunger; Harel & Kogut, 2014), makes people focus on their own suffering
more than others’ suffering.
Still, the finding that a positive mood increases (and that a negative mood decreases) helping is
disputed. If a happy person needs to be exposed to a situation that will make her distressed, or if
helping is costly, it is possible that she will refrain from helping in order to maintain her positive mood
(Isen & Simmonds, 1978; Sabato & Kogut, 2021). Also, if a person in a negative mood believes that
helping will make her feel better (due to an increased sense of meaningfulness or because of
anticipated social or emotional benefits), she is more likely to help (Cunningham, 1990, Dovidio et al.,
2006). These findings suggest that people in an incidental negative mood (as well as people
experiencing personal distress from observing a need situation), sometimes help more because helping
can be a way to regulate their emotions and improve their mood (c.f. the negative-state-relief model,
Cialdini et al., 1987; Cialdini & Fultz, 1990). This is surely an important motive, but helping to
improve one’s mood is future-focused and therefore included in the anticipated personal
consequences-category, discussed in Section 6.
To say that emotions often motivate helping is not the same as to say that feeling more intense
prosocial emotions necessarily make us help more. Also, it is not the same as to say that a change in
helping is always a result of a change in emotions. In our conceptualization, emotions can increase
even without a subsequent increase in helping, and helping can increase even without a preceding
increase in emotions. We will now look at other psychological mechanisms that can motivate or
demotivate helping.
4. Moral principles
The second overarching category is based on perceived rules, obligations, and personal norms and
here referred to as moral principles (Bekkers & Ottoni-Wilhelm, 2016; Kouchaki et al., 2018;
Schwartz & Howard, 1984; Tomasello, 2020). Whereas the emotion-category includes mechanisms
about “wanting to help”, the mechanisms in the moral principle-category are more about “believing
that one should help” (Cryder et al., 2017; Janoff-Bulman et al., 2009). Framed differently, moral
principles illustrate a pressure-based prosocial motivation, as it implies helping, not primarily because
one desires to help, but because one believes one is obliged to help (Gebauer et al., 2008; Pavey et al.,
2012).5
Several types of moral principles are involved when making helping decisions. For instance, religious
people might follow the decrees stated in their holy scriptures because they believe that they ought to.
Likewise, many non-religious people are primarily motivated to abide the law, act justly, do their duty,
not violate others’ rights, and to “do the right thing” (Capraro & Rand, 2018; Tappin & Capraro,
2018). Loosely inspired by the moral foundation theory (Haidt, 2012; Nilsson et al., 2020; 2016), the
three subcategories of moral principles are: (1) Responsibility, (2) Fairness, (3) Not causing harm.
Responsibility
Sometimes helping others is perceived as mandatory, so not helping implies that one has failed to
fulfill one’s moral responsibility. At other times, helping is over and above one’s moral responsibility,
and therefore optional (Leliveld et al. 2008; McManus et al., 2020). Responsibility in helping
situations can refer to a causal responsibility (I caused the need-situation) or to a moral responsibility
(I am responsible to help). We are primarily focusing on the latter, but causal responsibility is typically
strongly related to moral responsibility. To exemplify; if someone is suffering because of my mistake,
I will believe that I have an immense responsibility to rectify my mistake by helping, but if the same
person is suffering because of her own mistake or because of someone else’s mistake, my perceived
personal responsibility to help will be weaker, and helping is less likely (Clayton et al., 2013; Henry et
al., 2004).6 In one study where different costs of helping and different costs of not helping were tested
as predictors of helping motivation, having caused the situation was the best predictor (Fritzsche et al.,
2000).
There are also other types of contextual factors that can render a high perceived responsibility
(Erlandsson et al., 2016b). For example, some occupations (a police officer or a nurse), or social roles
Jeske, 2008). Similarly, people feel a greater responsibility to help children, elderly, and kittens or
puppies because they are perceived as vulnerable and defenseless whereas non-disabled adults are
typically perceived to have a greater responsibility to take care of themselves (e.g. Back & Lips, 1998;
Chasteen & Madey, 2003; Moche & Västfjäll, 2021a).
Another factor that can increase our perceived responsibility to help is promise-making. We perceive
ourselves to be more responsible to act when we have made a promise to do so, than if we have not
(Kerr et al., 1997; Moriarty, 1975; Vanberg, 2008). To a lesser extent, just the mere existence of an
expectation to receive support could increase the perceived personal responsibility to actually support
(Goldstein et al., 2011; Nagatsu et al., 2018).
Importantly, perceived moral responsibility to help can be diluted by the mere presence of other
potential helpers (i.e. the bystander effect; Cryder & Loewenstein, 2012; D’Antonio, 2014; Darley &
Latane, 1968). In such a situation, the responsibility to help is perceived to be split between all
bystanders meaning that the personal responsibility to help is smaller, than when one is the only
5 Emotions (wanting to) and moral principles (believing that one is obliged to) can certainly co-occur, but they
can also motivate helping independently.
6 To say that a personal responsibility to help increases helping does not mean that it is necessary for helping.
People do help also in situations when they think they are not obliged to.
potential helper. One study found that people (no matter their own financial situation) believed that
those richer than themselves had a responsibility to help more (Berman et al., 2020). Moreover, people
in countries with a sophisticated welfare system tend to believe that the governments are responsible
for providing health care and social services to those worse off, and consequently perceive a weaker
personal responsibility to help (Nelson et al., 2006; Vamstad & von Essen, 2013). Simply put, the
amount of perceived responsibility can be understood as a zero-sum game, where an increased
responsibility of others (the beneficiary or other potential helpers) decreases one’s own responsibility
to help.
Individual and cultural differences in perceived personal responsibility to help have been suggested as
dispositional or cultural variables that determine people’s motivation to engage in helping behavior
(Baron & Miller, 2000; Barrett et al., 2004; Schwartz & Howard, 1980). To illustrate, Ottoni-Wilhelm
and Bekkers (2010) suggest that the predictive power of dispositional empathy drops in magnitude and
often loses significance after internalized moral principles about helping are controlled for (see also
van der Linden, 2011), and Winterich and Zhang (2014) found that the main reason for people high on
power-distance (those accepting inequalities) helping less is that their perceived personal
responsibility to help is lower.
Perceived responsibility is frequently included in studies on helping, sometimes as a proxy for helping
motivation (e.g. Jenni & Loewenstein, 1997; Nagel & Waldmann, 2012) but more often as a possible
underlying mechanism of helping (e.g. Basil et al., 2006; Cameron & Payne, 2011; Duval et al., 1979;
Friedrich et al., 2005; Greitemeyer et al., 2006; Kleber et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2014). In our own
research, we have found that perceived personal responsibility was the best mechanism for
understanding the ingroup-effect (Erlandsson et al., 2015; 2017). We help ingroup beneficiaries
(distant relatives and fellow countrymen) more than outgroup beneficiaries (non-relatives and
foreigners) primarily because we believe that we have a personal responsibility to do so (see also
Baron et al., 2013).
Fairness
Fairness is another moral principle that people care about and want to uphold, both on a procedural
level and on an outcome level (Ajzen et al., 2000; Greenberg, 1987; Tyler, 2000). Most people value
equality (equal outcomes) and to an even greater extent equity (equal outcomes to equal inputs), and
both these concepts are closely linked to perceived fairness (Gordon-Hecker et al., 2017a; Shaw, 2013;
Shaw & Olson, 2012).
In prosocial situations, fairness-concerns can increase helping, for instance when helping improves the
lives for those who are worse off, reduces inequalities, or when helping is provided to those who
deserve it the most (Shaw & Olson, 2012). Fairness-concerns can also decrease helping, when helping
implies that one must give unequal treatment to two equally deserving beneficiaries, or when the
beneficiaries one can help are extremely privileged (Bradley et al., 2019; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999).
People are even prepared to sacrifice efficiency by discarding resources, when they cannot help
everyone equally much (Choshen-Hillel et al., 2015; Gordon-Hecker et al., 2017b; Shaw & Knobe,
2013).
Another way that fairness-concerns influences helping is that people can feel obliged to help after
learning that others have helped, in order to avoid unfair free-riding (Frey & Meier, 2004; Goldstein et
al., 2011; Trivers, 1971). To illustrate, an intervention intended to recruit blood donors with the help
of making reciprocity norms salient involved first asking “Would you be willing to accept a
transfusion if you needed one in the future” before asking “are you willing to donate blood?” (Landry,
2006).
Research suggests that people value fairness in itself in anonymous situations, but that upholding
fairness becomes even more important in public situations because an aversion towards appearing
partial (Choshen-Hillel et al., 2015; Gordon-Hecker et al., 2017a; Shaw, 2013). Similarly, studies
suggest that people are aversive towards unfair outcomes, but even more aversive towards the notion
of being responsible for implementing unfairness (Beattie et al., 1994; Shaw & Olson, 2014). For
instance, people are more willing to create inequitable outcomes when they can let a random device
determine which of two possible beneficiaries will be helped, than if they must make the decision
themselves (Gordon-Hecker et al., 2017b). Helping or not helping in order to appear moral in the eyes
of others will be discussed more in Section 6.
Not causing harm
Moreover, people normally think that an omission to help is less morally bad than a helpful action that
inadvertently cause harm to innocent bystanders. This is clearly illustrated in the classical sacrificial
dilemmas that are often used in moral psychology (Bauman et al., 2014; Kahane et al., 2018). Some
people prefer not to help five (or more) innocent people about to be run over by an out-of-control
trolley, if helping implies killing one innocent person (especially if the killing implies physical force;
Greene, 2008; 2013). This tendency can be explained by an internalized aversion towards causing
harm that is stronger than the aversion towards allowing harm to happen (omission bias; e.g. Baron,
2008; Ritov & Baron, 1990; 1999). Expressed differently, actively harming someone is equivalent to
breaking a moral rule or violating a protected value, whereas omitting to help is normally more
excusable (Baron & Spranca, 1997; Janoff-Bulman et al., 2009; Krettenauer & Johnston, 2011). This
type of thinking sometimes makes people refrain from helping, not only when they know that helping
will harm others, but also when there is uncertainty about possible side-effects of prosocial behavior
(Anderson, 2003; Everett et al., 2015; Sunstein, 2005).
5. Anticipated impact
Whereas emotions and moral principles focused primarily on the past and on the present, the
remaining two categories focus on the anticipated future consequences of helping decisions.
Anticipated consequences for the beneficiaries (how will those in need be affected if I help?) will be
discussed in this section whereas anticipated consequences for the helper (how will I be affected if I
help?) will be discussed in Section 6.
Anticipated impact represents a more calculating psychological mechanism compared to emotions or
moral principles, and concepts such as perceived impact, utility, effectiveness, efficiency and “making
a difference” are all included in this category. People value effectiveness and efficiency when making
decisions about themselves, but also when making decisions about others (Duncan, 2004), and help
more when they can perceive that their help is improving the beneficiary’s condition (Smith et al.,
1989).
On the other hand, we are demotivated when we expect that our helping will not do any difference, or
be a “drop in the bucket”, and even more demotivated if we expect that helping will worsen the need
situation. Anticipated impact is often measured next to some type of emotional reaction when trying to
determine if a helping effect is driven by quick emotion-based System 1-like processes or by more
calculative, reason-based System 2-like processes (Butts et al., 2019; Cameron & Payne, 2011;
Camilleri & Larrick, 2019; Cryder, et al., 2013a; 2013b; Dickert et al., 2011b; Grant et al., 2007;
Friedrich & McGuire, 2010; Verkaik, 2016).
We distinguish two types of anticipated impact — Self-efficacy and Response-efficacy (e.g. Bandura,
1977; Basil et al., 2008; Block & Keller, 1997; Sharma & Morwitz, 2016). In a helping context, self-
efficacy refers to the belief that “I am able to make a difference”, whereas response-efficacy refers to a
belief that “a difference can be made”, or that a specific project or helping enterprise is effective and
worthwhile.
Self-efficacy
Helpers who have a desire to personally make a difference are referred to as “Impact philanthropists”.
This desire can give rise to a preference to give directly to a homeless person rather than to an
organization, or to a preference to devote one’s helping effort to a small, clearly defined, cause
(Caviola et al., 2020; Duncan, 2004; Lewis & Small, 2019). The prospect of “fixing a small problem”
once and for all is more appealing than the prospect of making an equally big contribution to a much
larger problem, despite that the actual amount of good one can do is typically greater when focusing
on large-scale problems (Li & Chapman, 2009; Zhang & Slovic, 2018). Likewise, people are the most
likely to provide support when a fundraiser is close to its goal (e.g. we want to raise $10000 and we
have already obtained 90% of our goal), and this “goal gradient effect” has been linked to perceived
self-efficacy (Cryder et al., 2013b; Kuppuswamy & Bayus, 2017). Similarly, we found support for the
notion that perceived impact mediates the proportion dominance effect. People are more motivated to
rescue 10 out of 12 otters for $200, than they are to rescue 10 out of 1000 otters for the same amount.
The reason for this is that the anticipated impact is perceived to be higher when helping 10 out of 12
(83.3%) than if helping 10 out of 1000 (1%; Erlandsson et al., 2014; 2015; 2017).
A field study by Gneezy et al. (2014), showed that if a large sum of money is used to cover all
administrative costs of a charity organization (implying that 100% of the subsequently donated money
will reach the beneficiaries), donations from the public will increase more than if the large sum of
money is used as seed money or as matching money (even if these ways to use money also increased
helping; Cryder et al., 2013b; List, 2011). The authors suggested that this is because people perceive
that the impact of their own contribution is greater when someone else has paid for all overhead costs.
Response-efficacy
Whereas an impact philanthropist is primarily interested in self-efficacy and in “making a personal
difference”, other impact-motivated helpers focus on response-efficacy, which means that they want to
help in ways that are as effective as possible. Perceived response-efficacy (or outcome-efficacy) can
differ as a function of charitable cause (some problems in the world are perceived as more alterable than
others) or as a function of charitable organization (some organizations are perceived to be more
competent than others). A higher perceived organizational effectiveness has been shown to increase
helping motivation and non-profit organizations perceived as professional, credible, and trustworthy
typically elicit more support (Jones, 2017; Sargeant & Woodliffe, 2007).
On the contrary, organizations that have a relatively high overhead cost or reside in a fancy office space
are perceived as wasteful and inefficient, whereas low overhead costs or modest salaries to employees
are typically (often mistakenly) seen as evidence for an effective charity (Caviola et al., 2014; Newman
et al., 2019; Portillo & Stinn, 2018). Sending out a charity appeal in a gloss envelope with a printed
color-picture to sporadic givers rendered fewer donations than an identical charity appeal in a blank
simple envelope (Bekkers & Crutzen, 2007). In another study, the efficiency of a charity organization
(a 2-star rating or a 4-star rating from a homepage rating how efficiently charities use their money)
increased the proportion of people who donated money by forfeiting a personal discount (Winterich &
Barone, 2011).
Importantly, anticipated, or perceived response-efficacy is not the same as actual response-efficacy. Due
to framing effects and heuristics, we sometimes perceive effective helping as ineffective and vice versa
(Slovic, 2007). The well-known effective altruism movement argues that people should maximize
response-efficacy when making prosocial decision. However, rather than using crude heuristics (such
as minimizing overhead costs, or as always giving to those worse off; e.g. Baron & Szymanska, 2011;
Sunstein, 2005), effective altruists are explicitly motivated to help in the ways that do the most good
from an impartial and universal point of view, and devoted to using scientific methods to determine the
anticipated response-efficacy of different helping behaviors in a more objective way (MacAskill, 2015;
Singer, 2009; 2011; 2016).
Both types of efficacies can be linked to individual differences in trust in the charitable sector and more
generally to social capital (Konrath & Handy, 2018; Sargeant & Lee, 2004). Some people have much
confidence in charitable organizations whereas others are inherently skeptical. Also, some people
believe that they have the resources and the ability to help in efficient ways, whereas others do not. One
study investigating gender differences in volunteering found that women help primarily through
emotional reactions and moral principles, whereas men’s helping is motivated more through trust and
social networks (i.e. an anticipated impact motive; Einolf, 2011). Other studies found that impact
information increase helping only among the relatively educated (Verkaik, 2016), and among large prior
donors (Karlan & Wood, 2017).
6. Anticipated personal consequences
The final overarching category includes different types of anticipated consequences for the person
faced with the helping decision (Dovidio et al., 2006). Anticipated consequences for oneself can be
classified as positive (personal benefits due to helping), or negative (personal costs due to helping). In
addition, both the benefits and the costs can be categorized as material (e.g. money), social (e.g.
reputation) or emotional (e.g. well-being; Carlson & Zaki, 2018; Kawamura et al., 2021). Moreover,
when pondering on whether to help or not, people can anticipate not only the personal consequences if
different (but related) subcategories of anticipated personal consequences that can influence helping
decisions.
Anticipated personal consequences that motivate helping
Anticipated positive material consequences due to helping
People sometimes see helping as an investment in that a smaller personal cost now will pay back in the
future because of reciprocity norms (Leimgruber, 2018; Trivers, 1971). Prosocial activities can be
done to gain material benefits, for instance by boosting one’s chances of being hired by adding
volunteering activities to their resume (Handy et al., 2010). People might also help in order to be
eligible for a tax deduction (Duquette, 2016), or to obtain a symbolic gift or a free health check when
donating blood (Goette & Stutzer, 2019).
Anticipated negative material consequences due to not helping:
It is possible to help primarily in order to avoid a greater material loss (e.g. being robbed) or even a
physical loss (being assaulted). To exemplify, a person who encounters a stranger who behaves
erratically in a deserted place, might lend his/her cell phone, or give $20, in order to “tend and
befriend” and reduce the risk of being the target of aggression (Taylor, 2006). There is also some
evidence for “protective donations” meaning that some anticipate that “bad things happen to bad
people” and help because they believe that a decision to not help might affect their “karma” and
physical well-being negatively (Converse et al., 2012; Kogut & Ritov, 2011b; Lerner, 1980).
Anticipated positive social consequences due to helping
Even in the absence of any tangible benefits, people can help in order to expand their social network
(meet new friends), or to receive praise and improve their reputation among others (Anderson et al.,
2020; Exley, 2017; Milinski et al., 2002; Raihani & Smith, 2015; Tosi & Warmke, 2016). Helping is
usually seen as a social norm, and as social norms get more important in the presence of others, people
help more when they believe they are being observed (Caviola & Faulmüller, 2014; Rayniers &
Bhalla, 2013; Solomon et al., 1981). For instance, people offer to volunteer more if they believe their
decision is made in public rather than in private, and offering to volunteer (vs. not doing it) typically
improves one’s social reputation within the group (Bereczkei et al., 2007; Fisher & Ackerman, 1998).7
Individual and situational factors influence anticipated social benefits of helping. Men help more when
they believe they are being observed by an attractive female than if they believe they are being
observed by a male or not observed by anyone (van Vugt & Iredale, 2013, see also Landry et al.,
2006). Similarly, helping can be used as a humble way to show others one’s prosperity (Hardy & van
Vugt, 2006; Bagwell & Bernheim, 1996). A person who gives away tens of thousands of dollars to
help sick children, communicates both “I am a nice person” and “I am a rich person” to observers in
general, and to potential romantic partners in particular.
Anticipated negative social consequences due to not helping
Whereas non-helping is rarely associated with material personal costs, it is often associated with social
personal costs. A person who decides not to help when aware of a need situation runs the risk of being
perceived as a callous and unsympathetic person by observers (Vonasch et al., 2018). People who find
themselves in a public helping situation are often aware of this, and might therefore help in order to
avoid the social condemnation or loss in reputation that they expect will follow if they do not help
(Bradley et al., 2018). This type of helping can be referred to as “giving in”, meaning that the helper
prefers not to be asked but still helps in order to avoid the social costs associated with saying no (Cain
et al., 2014; see also Andreoni et al., 2017; DellaVigna et al., 2012; Flynn & Lake, 2008; Lin et al.,
2016).
Helping in order to avoid negative social consequences (avoiding blame) is not the same as helping in
order to obtain positive social consequences (approaching praise; Wiltermuth et al., 2010). Helping to
avoid blame is typically done in situations where perceived external expectations are high (e.g. when
the norm is to help; Cialdini et al., 1990), whereas helping to obtain praise is typically done in
situations where helping is costly or perceived as extraordinary (Berman & Silver; 2022; Wiepking &
Heijnen, 2011).
Anticipated positive emotional consequences due to helping
Most people can benefit personally from helping, also in the absence of any material or social benefits.
Even helping that is performed totally in private, such as anonymously donating money to a charity
fundraiser, can reward the helper by making her feel meaningful or self-satisfaction as a result of the
prosocial act (Baumann et al., 1981; Cialdini & Kenrick, 1976; Duclos & Barasch, 2014; Moche &
Västfjäll, 2021; Williamson & Clark, 1989). The positive emotion that is felt after a moral decision is
often referred to as “warm glow” or “emphatic joy”, and anticipating these positive emotions can
7 It should be noted that people might help more in public than in private situations not through social image
concerns, but through a motivation to inspire others to help as well (Engelen et al., 2018; Karlan & McConnell,
2014; van de Ven et al., 2018). The motive to inspire others belongs in the anticipated impact category rather
than in the anticipated personal consequences category (but the two motives can surely co-occur).
motivate helping (Andreoni, 1990; Batson et al., 1991; Butts et al., 2019; Smith et al., 1989; Västfjäll
et al., 2015).
A relevant finding is that material or social rewards associated with helping, tend to reduce the
anticipated emotional rewards of helping (Mellström & Johannesson, 2008; Rayniers & Bhalla, 2013;
Wang & Tong, 2015). Consequently, helpers who are primarily motivated by anticipated emotional
rewards, prefer non-incentivized helping done in private over incentivized helping done in public.
Relatedly, people help more when a helping behavior is framed as a “charitable purchase” rather than
as a “donation rewarded with a gift”. The reason for this is that a “charitable purchase” is internally
compared against other (non-charitable) purchases, which provides the helper with warm glow for
doing something relatively moral. “Donation rewarded with a gift” is instead internally compared
against other non-rewarded donations, thus not eliciting as much warm glow (Chao, 2017; Krishna,
2011; Savary et al., 2020; Zlatev & Miller, 2016).
Another robust finding is that mechanisms in the anticipated impact category influence anticipated
warm glow. Several studies have shown that when people believe that their helping is directed to
credible and worthwhile causes or organizations (i.e. high response-efficacy), and when they believe
that their personal effort is making a noticeable difference (i.e. high self-efficacy), they also
experience (and anticipate to experience) more warm glow (Aknin et al., 2013; Cryder et al., 2013b;
Keenan & Gneezy, 2016).
Anticipated negative emotional consequences due to not helping
Just as anticipated warm glow (if one is helping) can motivate prosocial behavior, so can anticipated
guilt (or other anticipated negative emotions or cognitions) in the case one would not help, motivate us
to help even in the absence of any observers (Ahn et al., 2014; Basil et al., 2008; Elgaaied, 2012;
Lindsey, 2005; Malti & Krettenauer, 2013; Powell et al., 2012; Wang, 2011).8 People try to forecast
their own emotional responses, and as we are more motivated to avoid the negative than to approach
the positive (e.g. Rozin & Royzman, 2001), we tend to adjust our behavior so that we avoid negative
emotions as much as possible.
As with praise and blame, the helping situations that we anticipate will make us feel warm glow are
different from the situations that we anticipate will make us feel guilt (Erlandsson et al., 2016b;
Krettenauer & Johnston, 2011). Specifically, perceived moral principles predicts anticipated emotional
consequences. We anticipate feeling guilt as a result of non-helping primarily in situations where we
believe we are responsible to help, but anticipate feeling warm glow as a result of helping primarily
when there is no external or internal pressure to help (c.f. Dunn et al., 2014).
8 Guilt can motivate helping in different ways. Guilt can be understood as a form of distress if elicited by the
need situation, or as a form of negative incidental mood if elicited by something unrelated to the need situation,
and can then influence helping through the Emotion-category. Guilt can also be anticipated, such as when one is
aware of a need-situation and ponders how one will feel as a result of helping or not helping. Anticipated guilt
due to not helping predicts helping through the anticipated personal consequenses-category (Baumeister et al.,
1994).
Anticipated personal consequences that demotivate helping
Anticipated negative material consequences due to helping
The most obvious reason for deciding not to help is that helping typically comes with a cost (Ferguson
et al., 2019; Kelting et al., 2918; Rubaltelli et al., 2020; Thaler, 1985). The material cost can be
monetary (giving away money will reduce my disposable income), temporal (volunteering will take
time from more enjoyable activities), physical (donating blood is painful), or psychological (living a
carbon neutral life is boring). Some types of digital helping behaviors might also increase the risk of
being scammed. All of these personal costs can be avoided simply by deciding not to help.
Anticipated positive material consequences due to not helping
This is a different framing of the abovementioned mechanism. If I opt out from my monthly $100
donation to a charitable cause, I will have an additional $100 to spend on myself or my family.
Illustrated differently, people tend to help less when reminded of alternative (possibly more attractive)
ways to spend their money (i.e. opportunity costs; Moche et al., 2020).
Anticipated negative social consequences due to helping
One robust finding in the existing moral impression formation literature is that helping is not
unequivocally perceived in positive lights (Berman & Silver, 2022; Cramwinckel et al., 2015; Critcher
& Dunning, 2011). At times, helping is perceived as a sign that the helper is either motivated for “the
wrong reasons” or helps in order to put others in a bad light (Erlandsson et al., 2020b; Newman &
Cain, 2014; Raihani & Power, 2021).
Derogatory terms such as “do-gooder” or “goodness-junkie” suggest that helping, at times, does not
only “not improve”, but even worsen the helper’s reputation (Minson & Monin, 2012; Monin, 2007;
Monin et al., 2008; Silver et al., 2021). For example, although people like helpers and promise-
keepers, they do not like those who help too much or those who exceed their promises (Gneezy &
Epley, 2014; Klein & Epley, 2014; Pleasant & Barclay, 2018).
To the extent people are aware of this, they might refrain from helping, if the helping is inherently
public, and if they believe that helping is not the local norm (Jones & Linardi, 2014). Similarly, when
helping publicly, people are careful not to appear motivated by ulterior motives (Lin-Healy & Small,
2012; Scopelliti et al., 2015), which can even result in less helping in some situations. In one study
where participants could help a well-liked charity-organization by pressing on a button, performance
was lower if participants also had (publicly known) egoistic incitements for pressing (Ariely et al.,
2009, see also White & Peloza, 2009). On the other hand, helping that comes with a high physical pain
(e.g. pouring an ice bucket over oneself to raise awareness of a disease) are more socially and
emotionally rewarding than pleasurable helping (e.g. a charity picnic; Gneezy et al., 2012; Olivola &
Shafir, 2013; 2018).
Anticipated positive social consequences due to not helping:
In circumstances involving intergroup animosity or beneficiaries from stigmatized groups, a potential
helper seeing an outgroup member in need might help if the helping is made in private (e.g. because of
empathic concern or moral principles), but refrain from helping when in public (Snyder et al., 1999).
Both helping and non-helping can signal one’s loyalty and group-belonging, and if I anticipate that
non-helping will improve my status within the group, that could result in less helping. To exemplify,
one study found that people dislike coworkers who act prosocially toward superiors (Vonk, 1998).
Another found that people want to interact with people who “do their part” but not with those who
behave extraordinary unselfish (Parks & Stone, 2010), because extreme helpfulness can be perceived
negatively as it sets undesired norms and make others look bad in comparison. To the extent that
people are aware of this, they might consciously reduce their helping in some public situations.
Anticipated negative emotional consequences due to helping
Sometimes helping is emotionally difficult as it exposes oneself to needs and sufferings that one was
previously blissfully unaware of (Cameron & Payne, 2011; Kirby et al., 2019; Shaw et al., 1994).
Also, agreeing to help once tends to increase the number of requests one will get in the future, and
intensify expectations that one will continue to help henceforward. By committing to help someone in
acute need, one also faces the risk of failure (e.g. a person dying while you are performing CPR), and
this can be traumatic as well as reduce your self-confidence.
Again, people can predict these consequences, and anticipation of an increased exposure of suffering
(with subsequent personal distress), of more requests and greater expectations to help, or a fear of not
being able to help successfully can demotivate people from helping in the first place (Cameron et al.,
2015). Providing indirect support for this mechanisms, one study gave donors the option to donate
once and never be contacted again, and this increased subsequent donations not only in the short but
also in the long term (Kamdar, et al., 2015).
Anticipated positive emotional consequences due to not helping
Although not a widespread mechanism, it is possible to imagine people who are in a position to help,
but refrain from doing so because they anticipate pleasure from non-helping (c.f. schadenfreude;
Leach et al., 2003).
7. Our typology vs. Bekkers & Wiepking’s theoretical framework
The current typology is much inspired by the seminal article by Bekkers and Wiepking (2011a,
henceforth B&W). Their interdisciplinary review of the charitable giving literature (up until 2007) was
impressive and extremely comprehensive when it was published, and has been cited over 1400 times
to date.
Our article is in no way intended to challenge B&W in regards of systematically reviewing the
existing literature. Instead, our typology should be understood as an alternative way to categorize
psychological mechanisms, that — unlike B&W — clearly differentiates psychological mechanisms
(the why-question), from situational aspects (the when-question) and individual differences (the who-
question), that influence helping. To facilitate comparison, we next discuss each of B&W’s proposed
mechanisms and how they relate to the categories and subcategories in the typology we put forward
Costs/benefits, reputation, psychological costs & benefits, and efficacy
Four of the eight mechanisms in B&W’s framework are included in our typology as well. B&W’s
“costs/benefits” refers to basically the same concept as “anticipated material personal consequences”
in our typology. Likewise, their “reputation” corresponds to “anticipated social personal
consequences”, and their “psychological costs and benefits” is more or less identical to our
“anticipated emotional personal consequences”. Moreover, B&W’s “efficacy” seems to refer to the
same thing as “anticipated impact” (specifically response-efficacy) in our typology.
Awareness of need
We see awareness of need as a requirement for helping rather than a psychological mechanism that
influence helping. Without noticing a situation and interpreting it as a need for help, it is impossible to
experience the emotions, thoughts, or beliefs that are included in the typology.9
Still, one can argue that awareness can come in different degrees and that more awareness (elicited e.g.
by an increased media coverage) is linked to increased helping. B&W exemplify by suggesting that
the more people know about a specific cause, or about a specific type of plight, the more likely they
are to support the charitable cause that focuses on the underlying problem. For instance, people donate
more to cancer research if they know people who suffered from cancer (Bennett, 2003; Small &
Simonsohn, 2008; Zagefka et al., 2013). Although it remains to be tested empirically, we suggest that
both emotional reactions and moral principles might underlie this “personal-experience effect”.
Emotional reactions could explain this effect because being reminded of, and learning more about a
specific cause, or about the fate of a specified individual, elicit more emotions towards that cause, and
makes emotions more difficult to “shake off”. Likewise, studies show that emotional reactions toward
beneficiaries possible to help are weakened by unrelated pictures or by knowledge about beneficiaries
that cannot be helped, as these distractors divert attention away from the need situation and from the
beneficiaries one can help (Dickert & Slovic, 2009; Västfjäll et al., 2015).
Moral principles could also explain the personal-experience effect, because when someone you know
is suffering from a specific illness, fighting that illness becomes a mission that one must engage in
personally, whereas helping is optional for others (e.g. “It’s my obligation to donate to Alzheimer
research because my dad suffered from it, but if your brother died from cancer, you should focus on
that”).
Solicitation
B&W’s “solicitation” is, in our view, not a psychological mechanism but rather a situational aspect
that influences helping. Soliciting help through a direct face-to-face request rather than with a letter
typically increases helping, but this should be seen as a helping effect (the when-question), rather than
a psychological mechanism (the why-question).
With that said, several of the psychological mechanisms in our typology can be used to explain why
some types of solicitations elicit more helping than others. Anticipated social and emotional personal
consequences surely play a big role – it is more costly (both reputationally and emotionally) to decline
to help when solicited face-to-face as opposed to indirectly. Also, some charity-requests (e.g. those
presenting one identified victim; Kogut & Ritov, 2015; Lee & Feeley, 2016) attempt to increase
helping by eliciting compassionate emotions, whereas other requests attempt to elicit a high
anticipated impact and increase helping that way (e.g. those emphasizing low overhead costs, e.g.
Gneezy et al., 2014). Likewise, being solicited in aggressive or manipulative ways can reduce helping
through the entity-linked emotions mechanism.
9 Noticing the event and interpreting the event as requiring help are the first two steps in Latané and Darleys
(1970) classical decision model of bystander intervention.
Altruism
There exist many definitions of altruism, and B&W seem to use altruism primarily in its “economic
meaning”, not in its “utilitarian meaning”, nor in its “social psychological meaning”. Altruism in
economy is understood as something close to self-efficacy, meaning that people motivated by altruism
want to make a substantial difference, and that helping by others may “crowd out” personal helping
(because the personal impact of helping is then reduced, relatively speaking; Duncan, 2004).
An alternative way to understand altruism is to shift from self-efficacy (how much good can I do?), to
response-efficacy (how much good can be done in total; Genc et al., 2020; Singer, 2015). This latter
type of altruism is similar to the one proposed by the effective altruism movement that base their
altruism on what the anticipated consequences of decisions are, in terms of utilitarian cost-benefit
calculations. Despite their differences, both the economic (self-efficacy) and the utilitarian
understanding of altruism (response-efficacy) are related to the anticipated impact category in our
typology.
To complicate things further, altruism is used in a third way in social psychology. Specifically, Batson
(2011) argues that the only altruistic motive for helping is empathic concern which is one type of
emotional reaction that people can feel as a result of observing a need situation. Altruism, in this
sense, is then related to emotions rather than to anticipated impact. Because of the multiple ways that
the term “altruism” is used in the literature, we prefer not to include it at all in this typology.10
Values
Finally, B&W’s “values” is, in our view, not a psychological mechanism but rather an individual
difference. Values (as well as worldviews and moral intuitions) are relatively stable traits originating
from the helper, and B&W note that they “…are difficult, if not impossible to manipulate… (p. 941)”.
Still, to say that values illustrate individual differences does not prevent us from linking it to an
intermediating psychological mechanism. We suggest moral principles as the best candidate because
individual differences in stable values and worldviews are intimately linked to individual differences
in moral principles. Whereas some people see their obligation to help as limited to when their near
family and friends are in need, others have wider moral circles including unknown people far away
and even non-human animals and future generations (Reed & Aquino, 2003; Waytz et al., 2019). Still,
moral principles such as perceived personal responsibility can also be influenced by situational factors
(such as who caused the need-situation, societal roles, and the relation between helpers and
beneficiaries). In short, perceived moral principles can explain both why some groups of people help
more than others, and why some situations elicit more helping than others.
10 See e.g. Batson (2011), Dovidio et al. (2006), and van Vugt & van Lange (2006) for additional discussions
about definitions of altruism.
8. How to test underlying psychological mechanisms of helping
Throughout this article, we have treated psychological mechanisms as emotions, thoughts or beliefs
that are truthfully self-reported when asked about people’s motives for helping or not helping. To
illustrate, Konrath and Handy (2018) developed the “Motives to Donate Scale” including 18
statements such as “I donate because I feel compassion toward people in need” or “Donating money to
charities provides too much of a financial strain on me”.11
An inherent problem with all types of self-reported prosocial motives is that people may not honestly
report the motives for their helping decisions (Batson, 2011). Social desirability is especially a major
concern when asking people to self-report whether anticipated personal consequences motivate them
to help (e.g. “Giving to charities makes me feel powerful” in Konrath & Handy, 2018). This is not
only a problem when asking people to reveal their motives in public, but also in anonymous surveys
because the stated reasons for helping can influence one’s self-perception. Below, we suggest two
methodological approaches for handling this problem.
Manipulating the situation
One way to avoid the problems with social desirability in self-reporting is to experimentally
manipulate the anticipated costs and benefits of helping, and test if actual helping behavior change as a
function of varying the independent variable.
To illustrate, anticipated material costs and benefits can be manipulated by varying the asking amount
(e.g. $5 or $50), or by offering (or not offering) a compensation to those who help (e.g. Rubaltelli et
al., 2020). Anticipated social consequences can be experimentally manipulated by letting people make
their helping decisions, either in private (no observers) or in public (with observers), as well as
manipulating the injunctive norm among the observers (do observers approve of helping or not; e.g.
Andersson et al., 2020). Anticipated emotional costs due to not helping can be manipulated to some
extent, e.g. by varying how potential helpers think they will feel after their decision (e.g. the
misattribution paradigm; Gaertner & Dovidio, 1977; Schroeder et al., 1988), by varying exposure to
the person in need after the decision has been made (Batson et al., 1991; Toi & Batson, 1982), or by
varying the descriptive social norms (Batson et al., 1988; Andersson et al., 2021). Likewise,
anticipated emotional benefits due to helping can be manipulated, e.g. by varying whether a blood
donor anticipates receiving a heart-warming thank-you letter from the anonymous beneficiary or not.12
When experimentally manipulating the situation, it is vital to first conduct pilot studies or
manipulation-checks to establish that the manipulation influences the self-reported psychological
mechanism as intended. For example, participants’ self-reported anticipated material cost of helping
should be higher among those being asked to donate $50 than among those asked to donate $5.
Moreover, the manipulation checks should test for both presence and absence of effects on the
included mechanisms. To illustrate, a researcher who wants to experimentally manipulate anticipated
social consequences (using a private/public manipulation), should first ask participants questions not
11 Konrath and Handy suggested six subscales, and each can be linked to subcategories in out typology. Their
“tax” and “constraints” illustrates anticipated material benefits and costs due to helping. Their “egoism”
illustrates anticipated social and emotional benefits. Their “friends who donate” illustrates one type of
anticipated social benefits. Their “trust” illustrates response-efficacy. Finally, their “altruism” includes items
about emotional reactions, e.g. “because I feel compassion” but also about moral principles, e.g. “people should
be willing to help others who are less fortunate”.
12 The experimental approach can be used also for the three other psychological mechanisms. Instructions or
charity appeals can be manipulated in order to increase emotional reactions (e.g. by varying perspective-taking
instructions or by showing a very emotional picture), anticipated impact (e.g. by varying the size of the
problem), or moral principles (e.g. by varying who caused the need-situation).
only about the mechanism that the manipulation is intended to influence (anticipated social
costs/benefits due to helping or not helping), but also about other mechanisms that the manipulation is
not intended to influence. A good experimental manipulation will influence self-reports of the
intended psychological mechanism significantly more than it influences self-reports of the other
unintended mechanisms.
Meaningful mediation analysis
One popular way to test underlying psychological mechanisms is to test for mediation (Hayes, 2008;
Montoya & Hayes, 2017; Preacher & Hayes, 2008). Mediation analyses can be conducted in both
correlational and experimental designs by testing whether the independent variable (naturally
occurring or manipulated) influence the dependent variable (some manifestation of helping), as a
consequence of influencing a proposed intermediating variable (a measured psychological
mechanism). If performed correctly, mediation can help us understand which underlying
psychological mechanisms best explain why some people help more than others (who*why), and why
some situations elicit more helping than others (when*why).
In a demonstration of the latter, the first author randomly assigned participants to read one version of a
charitable advertisement, and to state their emotional reaction (e.g. “Do you feel strong empathic
feelings toward the victim”), perceived impact (e.g. “How much good do you think you can do by
donating money to this organization”), and perceived responsibly (e.g. “To what degree do you think
you have a personal responsibility to donate money to this organization”). Participants subsequently
expressed their helping intention, and all three mechanisms were then tested as possible mediators of
three well-known helping effects (Erlandsson et al., 2015).
The results showed that each mechanism was the primary mediator of a specific helping effect.
Specifically, the identified victim effect (helping more when the ad portrays a single identified child;
e.g. Kogut & Ritov, 2005a; 2005b; 2015; Slovic, 2007; Small & Loewenstein, 2003) was mediated by
emotional reactions but not by anticipated impact or moral principles. The proportion dominance
effect (helping more when one can help a large proportion of those in need; e.g. Bartels, 2006; Bartels
& Burnett, 2011; Fetherstonhaugh et al., 1997; Kleber et al., 2013) was mediated only by anticipated
impact. Finally, the ingroup effect (helping ingroup beneficiaries more than outgroup beneficiaries,
e.g. Baron, 2009; Fiedler et al., 2018; James & Zagefka, 2017; Levine et al., 2002; Levine &
Thompson, 2004) was significantly mediated by all three included mechanisms, but perceived
responsibility was the significantly better mediator.13
13 Arguably, mediation analyses are currently being used too routinely rendering some “meaningless
mediations”. A common practice is to propose and test a single underlying mechanism as a mediator, and draw
strong inferences about the underlying psychological mechanisms based on a significant result (e.g. Brunel &
Nelson, 2000; Pfattheicher et al., 2020; Sabato & Kogut, 2021; Syropoulos & Markowitz, 2021; Zagefka, 2018;).
This is especially problematic when the proposed mediator is either conceptually similar to the independent
variable (it then represents a manipulation check, e.g. Croson et al., 2009), or conceptually or empirically similar
to the dependent variable (e.g. Pavey et al., 2012; Kappes et al., 2013). A preferable approach is to test several
possible underlying mechanisms (each distinct from the independent variable and from the dependent variable)
and compare which of the mechanisms best explain the effect when controlling for shared variance (Erlandsson,
2014, see also Pieters, 2017 and Zhao et al., 2010 for additional advice about mediation analyses).
9. Conclusion
In the current paper, we propose a new comprehensive typology that we hope will help other
researchers synthesize and organize the various emotions, thoughts, and beliefs that have been shown
to increase or decrease different types of helping behavior. Our typology consists of four overarching
categories (emotions, moral principles, anticipated impact and anticipated personal consequences), and
has been inspired by several other influential models and frameworks (e.g. Batson, 2011; Bekkers &
Wiepking, 2011a; Ferguson et al., 2020; Konrath & Handy, 2018; van der Linden, 2011; Weber &
Lindemann, 2007).
We are aware that our typology might need refinement in the future, but we believe that the idea to
conceptually disentangle the “why-question” of helping from the “when-question” and from the “who-
question”, will make it easier to evaluate and understand existing and future studies related to human
prosociality. All of these questions are valuable in their own right (and even more valuable in
combination), but it is problematic to draw inferences about underlying psychological mechanisms
based only on observed individual differences or situational factors alone. We argue that it is fruitful
to acknowledge that these factors can influence helping behavior through several different types of
emotions, thoughts, and beliefs.