This is a preprint and may contain errors or omissions not in the published version.
Acquisition of the counting principles during the subset-knower stages: Insights from
children’s errors
a b b c
Pierina Cheung , Mary Toomey , Yahao Harry Jiang , Tawni B. Stoop ,
Anna Shusterman
National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University
Department of Psychology, Penn State University
Corresponding author: Pierina Cheung (cheung.pierina@gmail.com)
Funding: US National Science Foundation (CAREER DRL 0845899 and DRL 1420196 to AS)
Research Highlights
1. We test the assumption that subset-knowers lack cardinal principle knowledge in a
retrospective video analysis of children’s counting errors on the Give-N task.
2. We coded children’s adherence to or violation of each of the three counting principles:
word-object correspondence, stable order, and cardinal principle.
3. The stable-order and word-object correspondence principles emerge early, yet children
make errors of word-object correspondence throughout the learning process.
4. Children understand the cardinal principle before being classified as “cardinal-principle
knowers”, whose insight lies with coordinating all three counting principles
simultaneously.
Abstract
Studies on children’s understanding of counting examine when and how children acquire the
cardinal principle: the idea that the last word in a counted set reflects the cardinal value of the set.
Using Wynn’s (1990) Give-N Task, researchers classify children who can count to generate large
sets as having acquired the cardinal principle (cardinal-principle-knowers) and those who cannot
as lacking knowledge of it (subset-knowers). However, recent studies have provided a more
nuanced view of number word acquisition. Here, we explore this view by examining the
developmental progression of the counting principles with an aim to elucidate the gradual
elements that lead to children successfully generating sets and being classified as CP-knowers on
the Give-N Task. Specifically, we test the claim that subset-knowers lack cardinal principle
knowledge by separating children’s understanding of the cardinal principle from their ability to
apply and implement counting procedures. We also ask when knowledge of Gelman & Gallistel’s
(1978) other how-to-count principles emerge in development. We analyzed how often children
violated the three how-to-count principles in a secondary analysis of Give-N data (N = 86). We
found that children already have knowledge of the cardinal principle prior to becoming CP-
knowers, and that understanding of the stable-order and word-object correspondence principles
likely emerged earlier. These results suggest that gradual development may best characterize
children’s acquisition of the counting principles, and that learning to coordinate all three
principles represents an additional step beyond learning them individually.
Keywords: counting, cardinal principle, counting principles, Give-N, preschool children
Numerous studies have shown that children can recite the count sequence early in
development, but take 1 to 3 years to learn to use counting meaningfully to create sets of items
(see Cheung & Ansari, 2020; Sarnecka, 2015, for reviews). This ability is related to the cardinal
principle, or the knowledge that the last word of our count denotes the total quantity of the
counted set (Gelman & Gallistel, 1978; Fuson, 1988; Wynn 1990, 1992). The standard
assessment for testing cardinal principle understanding is the Give-N Task (Le Corre, Van de
Walle, Brannon, & Carey, 2006; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Schaeffer, Eggleston, & Scott, 1974;
Sella, Berteletti, Lucangeli, & Zorzi, 2017; Shusterman, Slusser, Halberda, & Odic, 2016;
Slusser, Ribner, & Shusterman, 2019; Wynn, 1990, 1992). Using this task, researchers classify
those who understand how to use counting to generate larger sets of objects (five or more) as
cardinal-principle-knowers (CP-knowers for short), and those who fail to do so as subset-
knowers, or more specifically as N-knowers (e.g., 1-knowers, 2-knowers, 3-knowers, 4-knowers).
Such findings have undergirded the influential ‘conceptual change’ account of number
acquisition (Carey, 2009), which posits that CP-knowers have learned the cardinal principle, and
subset-knowers lack such knowledge. However, an emerging body of literature has raised
questions about this assumption, indicating both more knowledge among subset-knowers (Barner
& Bachrach, 2009; Wagner, Chu, & Barner, 2018; Gunderson et al., 2015; O’Rear, McNeil, &
Kirkland, 2020) and less knowledge to cardinal-principle knowers (Davidson, Eng, & Barner,
2012; Le Corre & Carey, 2007; Le Corre, 2014; Sella & Lucaneli, 2020) than was previously
attributed to them in the canonical narrative. Here we explore this more nuanced view of
children’s number acquisition by carefully analyzing their spontaneous behaviors and errors,
rather than the traditional measure of accuracy, on the Give-N task. In doing so, we highlight an
element in analyzing children’s number acquisition that has been neglected in previous studies,
namely the coordination of the counting principles.
In their counting principles framework, Gelman and Gallistel (1978) proposed that
children have to acquire three principles to learn how to count: the cardinal principle, the stable-
order principle (using a count sequence consistently across all counting contexts), and the word-
object correspondence principle (applying one number word to one object). The cardinal
principle is considered the most important principle of the three because it provides meaning for
number words: to say there are “seven” items in a collection means that the collection of items
has a cardinal value of seven. By contrast, the stable-order and word-object correspondence
principles are often construed as foundational skills that are procedural in nature.
However, the implied hierarchy of the counting principles, with cardinality as the final
step in a progression, is in some ways misleading. All three principles have to be followed for the
counting algorithm to work correctly, and if the stable order or word-object correspondence
principle is violated, the last word of a count does not reflect the cardinal value of a set. That is,
the last word of a count denotes cardinality if and only if one follows the counting procedures
(Fuson, 1988). The ability to generate a correct set of objects is used to distinguish subset-
knowers from CP-knowers on the Give-N Task, with the tacit assumption that knowledge of the
cardinal principle characterizes the critical difference between them. However, this assumption
has not been well tested because previous studies that have adopted the knower-levels framework
have not examined the developmental progression of the counting principles individually.
A series of experiments by Wynn (1990, 1992) and Le Corre et al (2006) help to illustrate
characteristic differences between subset and CP-knowers. First, when asked to provide a puppet
1 We use the term word-object correspondence principle (Briars & Siegler, 1984; LeFevre et al.,
2006) rather than one-to-one correspondence principle (Gelman & Gallistel, 1978) to highlight
that we are referring to the counting procedure of tagging one object with one number word. We
do not make claims about whether children understand that two sets have the same numerosity if
they are in 1-1 correspondence with each other, also known as Hume’s principle.
with six objects on the Give-N task, CP-knowers can correctly count out six items, but subset-
knowers fail to give large sets of items such as “five” or “six” because they do not use counting
to give N items (Le Corre et al., 2006; Wynn, 1990, 1992). Many other studies have shown a
similar pattern, in which subset-knowers “grab” a number of items, rather than counting them, to
meet the experimenter’s request (Dowker, 2008; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008). Second, in the
“What’s on this Card” task (WOC), Le Corre and colleagues showed children a picture of
stickers, ranging in quantity from one to eight, and asked “What’s on this card?” (Gelman, 1993).
They tested whether children understand the cardinal principle by looking at trials in which
children counted a set correctly and asked how often they provided a cardinal response that
matched the last word of a count. For example, when shown five apples, they measured how
likely subset- and CP-knowers counted “one-two-three-four-five” followed by a cardinal
response, “five”. They found that CP-knowers are more likely to provide a correct cardinal
response that matched the last word of a count relative to subset-knowers. Subset-knowers, on the
other hand, either counted but did not provide a cardinal response, or provided a cardinal
response without counting. These studies suggest that subset-knowers do not understand the
significance of the last word of a count, but CP-knowers do, and that the acquisition of the
cardinal principle is a radical shift from the prior conceptual state (Carey, 2009).
One challenge with the framing of cardinality acquisition as a radical conceptual change
is that the focus on the discontinuity obscures more gradual elements of the learning process.
Indeed, recent studies that have administered both WOC and Give-N to preschoolers have shown
that approximately 20 to 30% of children can be classified as subset-knowers on one task but CP-
knowers on another (O’Rear & McNeil, 2020; Le Corre et al., 2006; Marchand and Barner,
2020). Consistent with this, Le Corre et al. (2006) found that together with CP-knowers, 3- and 4-
knowers as a group ended their count on the requested number word when generating a set on the
Give-N Task, but 1- and 2-knowers never did. They also found that among the 3- and 4-knowers
who counted correctly on WOC, a majority of them also produced a cardinal response when
asked “What’s on this card?” after counting the set. Similar findings have also been reported on
the How Many Task in which children become increasingly likely to provide last word responses
when asked how many as they approach the CP-knower stage (Sarnecka & Carey, 2008). These
findings are in line with a more nuanced view of number word acquisition and highlight a need to
examine the gradual elements that lead to children’s success in generating large sets on the Give-
N Task. Importantly, they suggest that children may have acquired the cardinal principle prior to
becoming “CP-knowers” as assessed by Give-N, and motivate the current study on the
developmental progression of the counting principles. By systematically examining the
acquisition of counting principles, our study provides insights into the gradual elements that may
reflect important learning mechanisms integral to large conceptual leaps.
The present study
In this study, we examine children’s knowledge of each of the three counting principles
by analyzing their counting behavior, and specifically their counting errors, when they have a
prompted opportunity to count.
We used a retrospective video analysis of previously collected Give-N data to examine
children’s behaviors related to counting and cardinality. We conducted secondary data analysis
and analyzed a part of the Give-N task where all children were asked to count. On the Give-N
task, there are two moments when children can count. First, when the experimenter asks children
to give N, some children count to give N, and some do not. Previous researchers have termed
those who count as “counters” and those who do not as “grabbers” (Le Corre et al., 2006; Wynn,
1990, 1992). Second, after giving some items, the experimenter can ask children to count to
check if they have provided N. Previous studies tend to focus on the first episode and ask
whether children spontaneously count to generate a correct set of items, or whether their final
responses are correct. Those analyses address whether children realize that they can use counting
to give N and whether they do so correctly. In the current study, we focus on the second episode
in the Give-N Task, in which we asked all children to count on every trial to ‘count and check’ if
they had given N . Each child thus had an equal opportunity to demonstrate their counting ability.
Importantly, in the dataset used for this analysis, the procedure asked children to count and check
their responses on every trial greater than one, whether or not their initial response was correct;
this helped to slow children down so that they could consider their responses and prevented them
from interpreting a request to check their response as feedback that they were wrong.
Furthermore, while children were asked to “count and check” whether the cardinality of their set
matched their response, they were never asked “how many” items were in the set; the request to
“check” arguably invited children to engage in meaningful rather than rote counting. We coded
children’s adherence to or violation of each of the three counting principles: word-object
correspondence, stable order, and cardinality. Thus, unlike previous studies, we did not focus on
spontaneous counts nor overall count accuracy, both of which require knowledge or behavior
beyond the three counting principles. This approach afforded a window onto children’s
knowledge of the counting principles separate from their ability to apply and implement counting
procedures.
2 Not all previous studies included this procedure in the Give-N task (Mussolin, Nys, Leybaert, &
Content, 2012; Sella, Bertellei, Lucangeli, & Zorzi, 2017; see Krajcsi, 2021, for discussion), and
some studies only asked children to count to check when they had provided an incorrect number
(Le Corre et al., 2006). Here, we used a version of the Give-N Task in which all children were
asked to count to check for N on all trials greater than “one” (Le Corre & Carey, 2007;
Shusterman, et al., 2016; Shusterman et al., 2017; Wagner, Chu, & Barner, 2018).
The goal of the current study was twofold. First, we examined whether acquisition of the
cardinal principle happens right around the moment when children become CP-knowers as
assessed by Give-N, or whether it emerges more gradually. If the analysis of errors suggests that
some subset-knowers obey the cardinal principle in their counting behavior, then this would
provide evidence for the more gradualist view of cardinal principle acquisition, and would invite
some theoretical revision about the nature of the conceptual change. Second, we examined the
relative timing of children’s knowledge of the word-object correspondence and stable-order
principles within the knower-level framework, testing whether children progress through a clear
order of acquiring stable order, then word-object correspondence, then cardinality. Specifically,
children can typically count up to 10 in a count elicitation task before they become CP-knowers,
and that most subset-knowers can count higher than the highest number requested on the Give-N
Task (e.g., Le Corre et al., 2006; Shusterman et al., 2016; Van Rinsveld, et al., 2020). Therefore,
the stable order of the count list is likely established prior to the other two principles. Less is
known about when children acquire the word-object correspondence principle under the knower-
level framework, and understanding the timing of word-object correspondence relative to
acquisition of cardinality should illuminate the nature of the conceptual change. Together, these
analyses help to triangulate the development of children’s counting knowledge using a new
source of data: children’s counting errors.
Methods
Participants.
We conducted secondary data analysis on a sample of 86 preschool-aged children (M = 3
years 4 months; Range = 2;10 to 4;2; 54 females). These children were part of a larger study that
examines number word learning (Slusser, Stoop, Lo, & Shusterman, 2017). They were recruited
in central Connecticut, and were fluent English speakers. No information about race or socio-
economic background was collected, but the sample was drawn from a database of families
representative of the surrounding area: White non-Hispanic (84%), Black and African American
(5%), Hispanic (6%), and Asian (3%), with a median per capita income of $42,647 and 7.3% of
households below the federal poverty line (US Census Bureau, 2019).
Tasks.
Count Elicitation. Children were asked to count a set of 20 fish that was lined up linearly,
and the highest correct count was assessed. This task assessed children’s count lists and knowledge
of stable order.
Give-N Initial Response. Children were presented with 15 toy fish and a large blue bowl,
which served as a pond. On each trial, children were asked to put N fish in the pond (e.g., “Can
you put one fish in the pond?”). The experimenter then asked, “Is that N?” to ensure that the child
was done putting fish into the bowl.
Give-N Count-and-check.The experimenter took the fish out of the bowl, lined them up in
front of the child, and asked him/her to count. After the child was done counting, the experimenter
asked, “Is that N?”, referring to the number initially asked for. If the child answered no, the
experimenter gave the child an opportunity to fix it to be N. The experimenter repeated this process
until the child answered yes.
3 All children first completed count elicitation and Give-N, and depending on their knower-level,
they also completed a novel word generalization task. Only data from the first two tasks were
reported here.
The first trial asked for one fish. If children successfully gave 1 when asked for one, the
next request was N + 1; if they incorrectly responded to the request for N, the next request was N
– 1. The highest numeral requested for all children was “six”.
Children were called ‘N-knowers’ (e.g., ‘1-knowers’) if they (1) correctly gave N fish two
out of three times when asked for N, (2) correctly avoided giving N fish for requests larger than N;
and (3) failed to give the correct number two out of three times for N + 1. Children who failed to
give one fish when asked for “one” were classified as ‘non-knowers’. Children who gave the
correct number of fish for all numerals asked for up to ‘six’ were called cardinal-principle (CP)-
knowers. Children were classified using the same criteria as the original study (Slusser et al., 2017).
Coding.
We initially approached the coding of children’s errors using a data-driven grounded
theory framework (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Birks & Mills, 2015), in which coding categories are
derived bottom-up from the data rather than top-down from a theoretical model. Two researchers
created an initial codebook characterizing children’s errors in each count-and-check trial. They
then used several subsequent coding passes to refine the initial codes into a smaller, more abstract
set of categories of errors. The final categories almost perfectly matched the theoretical
description of counting principles laid out by Gelman & Gallistel (1978), and we ultimately opted
to use those principles straightforwardly as the guiding theoretical framework for coding.
On each trial (i.e., each time a child was asked to count to check if they provided N), we
coded separately whether children made at least one violation of the cardinal principle and the
word-object correspondence principle. Importantly, the two principles were coded independently
from each other.
4 One child was asked to give “seven” rather than “six”, and correctly provided 7 objects.
For the cardinal principle, we coded whether children used the last word of a count to
denote the cardinality of a set regardless of whether the count was correct or not. We were not
able to code children’s violations of the stable-order principle because the count lists produced by
children on the Give-N Task were very short due to the nature of the task. Instead, we analyzed
examples that illustrate the three types of children’s counting errors on the Give-N Task and the
Count Elicitation Task.
Consider two illustrative scenarios; in the typical coding of Give-N, the first would be
marked simply as “incorrect” and the second would be marked “correct”. In our coding scheme,
children could be marked as correct or incorrect on the cardinal principle in either scenario,
depending on their attention to the last word.
1. A child was asked for “three” and gave 4 objects. When asked to check if she had
given three, the child placed 4 objects and correctly counted one-two-three-four
(thus following the stable-order and word-object correspondence principles). After
the child had counted, the experimenter asked “Is that three?” If the child agreed
that there were “three,” when her last word ended on “four”, this child would be
coded as violating the cardinal principle. However, if the child replied that no, she
had not given “three”, then this trial would not be coded as a cardinal principle
violation.
2. A child was asked for “two” and correctly gave 2 objects. When asked to check if
she had given two, the child incorrectly counted one-two-three for a set of 2
objects. The child was then asked “is that two?” If the child agreed that it was two,
when his last word was “three”, it would be coded as a cardinal principle
violation. However, if he said that it was not two, his response would not be coded
as cardinal principle violation, because his last word in the count was indeed not
“two”. Either way, the child failed to tag one object with one number word, and
thus violated the word-object correspondence principle.
In other cases, children might be marked as correct on following the cardinal principle, if the last
children’s behaviors that illustrate each of the three types of errors.
Type of Error Counting Behavior
Violation of word-object ● A child gave 5 objects when asked for ‘six’, double-
correspondence principle counting the last object.
● A child gave 4 objects when asked for ‘three’, counted
1-2-3 but did not touch each object as he counted.
Violation of cardinal ● A child gave 3 objects when asked for ‘two’, counted 1-
principle 2-3, and responded affirmatively when asked “Is that
two?”
Violation of stable-order ● A child who skipped or mixed the order of number
principle (from the Count words: 1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-10-13. The child followed a
Elicitation Task) stable order of the count list up to “ten”.
Results
Give-N. The number of children and the mean age in each knower-level group are
N Mean Age (SD in months) Age Range
1-knowers 12 3;1 (2.3) 2;10 – 3;7
2-knowers 33 3;3 (3.2) 2;10 – 3;11
3-knowers 14 3;5 (3.0) 2;11 – 3;11
4-/5-knowers5 7 3;5 (2.4) 3;2 – 3;9
CP-knowers 20 3;6 (4.0) 2;11 – 4;2
Acquisition of the Counting Principles
Count Elicitation.
On average, the length of children’s count list was 13 (Median = 12; Range = 3 to 23). A
total of 81 children provided an audible count sequence, and 75 of them counted up to 10. Data
were missing from five children because their count list was inaudible (N = 2) or they did not
respond (N = 3). Thus, most 3-year-olds (92.6%) in our sample had already acquired a stable
count sequence up to 10.
Counting Errors on Give-N Task.
We asked whether children followed the word-object correspondence principle and the
cardinal principle before becoming CP-knowers using the Give-N Task. For each child and for
each of the two counting principles, we computed the average proportion of trials in which they
made at least one error. Given that previous studies have identified 3- and 4-knowers as
5 We found two 5-knowers, and they were collapsed into the 4-knower group. Their patterns of
performance were very similar on all critical analyses.
potentially different from other subset-knowers on cardinal principle knowledge (e.g., Le Corre et
al., 2006), we formed three knower-level groups for the analyses: 1- and 2-knowers (n = 45), 3-
and 4-knowers (n = 21), and CP-knowers (n = 20).
Counting Errors on All Trials. First, we examined the overall developmental
trajectories of the counting principles by analyzing the frequency of counting errors across all
trials. We conducted a linear mixed effects model predicting the proportion of counting errors,
with Error Type (2 levels: Word-Object, Cardinal Principle) and Knower-Level Groups (3 levels:
1- and 2-knowers vs. 3- and 4-knowers vs. CP-knowers) as predictors, with random intercepts for
participants and error type. We compared this model against one with age in months that were
mean-centered as an additional predictor, and found that age did not significantly improve model
fit (ꭓ (1) = 1.23, p = .27). We thus reported results from the model without age below. Coefficient
There was a significant main effect of Knower-Level Groups and no effect of Error Type
on the frequency of children’s counting errors. Importantly, there was a significant interaction
between Knower-Level Groups and Error Type. Post-hoc comparisons with Holm-Bonferroni
corrections revealed that 1- and 2-knowers were significantly less likely to follow the two
counting principles than CP-knowers, t’s > -2.58, p’s < .013, d’s > -2.14. Three- and 4-knowers
differed from CP-knowers on how likely they were to follow the cardinal principle, t(31.04) = -
3.55, p = .0013, d = -1.10, but the two groups did not differ on the word-object correspondence
principle, t(39.0) = -1.91, p = .063, d = -.060. We also found that 3- and 4-knowers were more
6 We first fitted a model with error type as random slope, with random intercepts for participants,
followed by a model with random intercepts for error type and participants, but neither of them
converged due to insufficient data.
likely than 1- and 2-knowers to follow the cardinal principle, t(47.7) = -4.03, p < .001, d = -1.02,
but the two groups did not differ for word-object correspondence principle, t(60.0) < 1, p > .42, d
= -0.20. Word-object correspondence errors remained relatively stable across the knower-levels,
but children made noticeably fewer cardinal principle errors as they progressed through the
children following the two counting principles. CP-knowers were the reference category. Tests
reaching statistical significance at the .05 criterion are in bold.
Coefficient SE p(|z|)
1- and 2-knowers -0.33 0.063 < .001
3- and 4-knowers -0.16 0.073 .028
Error Type -0.086 0.054 .12
1-2-knowers: Error Type 0.33 0.065 < .001
3-4-knowers: Error Type 0.098 0.076 .20
and cardinal principles, by knower-level groups. Each small dot represents one child.
To assess whether some subset-knowers have knowledge of the cardinal principle, we
conducted 1-sample t-tests against chance. We used a data-driven approach to define chance.
Chance was determined using a group of children whom we hypothesized to lack cardinal
principle knowledge – i.e., non-knowers. We applied the same coding scheme as the other subset-
knowers and found that non-knowers (n = 20 trials) followed the cardinal principle (i.e., matched
the last word of their count to the requested set) 30% of the time. We took this to be our chance
level. We used Holm-Bonferroni corrections to adjust for multiple comparisons. Both knower-
level groups performed significantly above chance on the cardinal principle: 1- and 2-knowers, M
= .47, SD = .30, t(44) = 3.84, p < .001, d = 0.57; 3- and 4-knowers, M = .75, SD = .24, t(20) =
8.51, p < .001, d = 1.86.
We conducted a similar analysis comparing subset-knowers’ tendencies to follow the
word-object correspondence principle to non-knowers, who followed this principle 59% of the
time. Both knower-level groups were significantly more likely than non-knowers in following the
word-object correspondence principle: 1- and 2-knowers, M = .71, SD = .33, t(43) = 2.35, p
=.023, d = 0.35; 3- and 4-knowers, M = .76, SD = .19, t(20) = 4.01, p < .001, d = 0.87.
Counting Errors on Unknown Number Trials. Given that children at higher knower-
levels have acquired more number word meanings than those at the lower levels, an analysis of
all trials may overestimate performance for children at the higher levels and thus obscure the
developmental trajectories for the counting principles. For example, a 4-knower can correctly
generate sets of up to four objects, and thus has more trials with positive results than a 1-knower.
To address this, we focused on unknown number trials (e.g., N + 1, N + 2, N + 3, etc.), because
by definition, subset-knowers have not yet acquired meanings for numbers beyond their knower-
level. Given that the analysis focused on unknown number trials, we removed CP-knowers from
this analysis. For this analysis, a request for “six” was coded as the N + 1 trial for the two 5-
knowers, who were combined with the 4-knowers.
As in our previous analysis, the word-object correspondence principle remained stable
across both of the knower-level groups, but 3- and 4-knowers were much more likely to follow
borne out in post-hoc t-tests. Three- and 4-knowers were significantly more likely than 1- and 2-
knowers to follow the cardinal principle on unknown trials, t(29.3) = -3.49, p = .0015, d = 0.99,
but the two groups did not differ in following the word-object correspondence principle, t(35.6) <
1, p > .32, d = -0.27.
Next, we asked whether subset-knowers were above chance on following the two
principles, by conducting 1-sample t-tests using the same chance level and Holm-Bonferroni
corrections as the earlier analysis. We found that 3- and 4-knowers were more likely than chance
to follow the cardinal principle on unknown number trials, M = .62, SD = .40, t(19) = 3.60, p =
.0019, d = 0.80, but 1- and 2-knowers were at chance, M = .27, SD = .30, t(43) < 1, p > .53, d = -
0.10. Both knower-level groups did not significantly differ from non-knowers in following the
word-object correspondence principle for unknown numbers, M = .51, SD = .40; M = .61,
1k-2k 3k-4k
SD = .39, both t’s < 1, p’s > .38. These results suggest that children’s cardinal principle
understanding develops rapidly throughout the subset-knower stages even for unknown numbers.
They also highlight a lack of development in the procedural skill of tagging one object per word.
7 Children at the lower knower-levels might have had a higher likelihood to violate the counting
principles given that they were tested on more unknown number trials than children at higher
knower-levels. Thus, we also conducted this analysis on N + 1 trials only. Across knower-levels,
children received on average 2 to 3 N + 1 trials (M = 3.0 trials, M = 2.8 trials, M = 2.6 trials,
1k 2k 3k
M = 2.0 trials). The same pattern of findings emerged when we analyzed just N + 1 trials as
4k
when we analyzed all unknown number trials for both principles. For the cardinal principle, 1-
and 2-knowers were at chance, t < 1, p = .51 (M = .34, SD = .37), and 3- and 4-knowers were
significantly above chance, t = 3.65, p = .0017 (M = .63, SD = .40). For the word-object
correspondence principle, neither group of subset knowers performed significantly better than
non-knowers: M = .60, SD = .41, M = .58, SD = .42, both t’s < 1, p’s > .81.
1k-2k 3k-4k
unknown number trials. Each dot represents one child.
We grouped the main analyses above in order to have adequate statistical power, in line
with previous studies that have identified differences between 3- and 4-knowers and lower
knower-levels (Le Corre, et al., 2006). To take a closer look at developmental patterns, we also
that children have knowledge of the cardinal principle before becoming CP-knowers holds. The
six 4-knowers were statistically above chance on unknown number trials (M = .97, SD = .08, t(5)
= 20, p < .001, d = 8.88). Three-knowers, whose counting behavior was more variable, were not
above chance as a group (M = .47, SD = .39, t(13) = 1.66, p = .12, d = .44), likely due to a lack of
power. These results show that as children approach the CP-knower stage, they become
increasingly consistent at following the cardinal principle. Interestingly, at all knower-levels,
highly unlikely to make cardinal principle errors in counting, but they continued to make word-
object correspondence errors at rates similar to other subset-knowers.
followed the Word-Object Correspondence Principle and the Cardinal Principle. (CP-knowers are
not presented since there are no ‘unknown numbers’ for those children.)
Word-Object Correspondence Cardinal Principle
1-knowers 0.63 (0.42) 0.21 (0.27)
2-knowers 0.61 (0.38) 0.29 (0.31)
3-knowers 0.47 (0.39) 0.47 (0.39)
4-knowers 0.60 (0.43) 0.97 (0.08)
Individual Patterns of Acquiring Cardinal Principle Knowledge. The analyses on all
trials and on unknown number trials show that children at the advanced knower-level stages
begin to have knowledge of the cardinal principle. However, group analyses obscure whether
individual children tend to follow or violate the cardinal principle. We thus asked how many
individual subset-knowers followed the cardinal principle on unknown number trials 67% of the
time. We chose 67% as our criterion because (1) subset-knowers in this study had, on average,
3.5 unknown number trials (SD = 2.1 trials), and (2) children on the Give-N task are generally
classified as an N-knower if they succeed on 2 out of 3 trials on N, and fail on 2 out of 3 trials on
N + 1. We thus adopted a similar criterion to classify whether children consistently followed the
cardinal principle on the unknown number trials. Only 6.8% of 1- and 2-knowers passed the 67%
criterion, and approximately half (55%) of the 3- and 4-knowers did. Consistent with the group
analysis, these results suggest that 1- and 2-knowers likely lack cardinal principle knowledge.
Despite the fact that only half of the 3- and 4-knowers reliably demonstrated knowledge of the
cardinal principle, they were seven times more likely to follow the cardinal principle in counting
than the 1- and 2-knowers.
Discussion
Knowledge of the cardinal principle has been highlighted as the critical difference
between subset-knowers and CP-knowers in the knower-levels framework. However, this claim
has not been well tested because previous studies using this framework have not examined the
developmental progression of the counting principles individually. Our results challenge the view
that acquisition of the cardinal principle is the driving force that divides subset-knowers from CP-
knowers in four ways. First, we show that some subset-knowers follow the cardinal principle
prior to being classified as CP-knowers on the Give-N task: as a group, 3- and 4-knowers were
more likely than chance to follow the cardinal principle, both when we examined all trials and
when we restricted our analysis to unknown number trials. Second, in both individual and group
level analyses, 3- and 4-knowers were far more likely than 1- and 2-knowers to follow the
cardinal principle, suggesting that subset-knowers are not a homogeneous group, and that
children’s ability to follow the cardinal principle develops gradually rather than suddenly. Third,
we found that approximately half of the 3- and 4-knowers showed reliable cardinal principle
knowledge, even on unknown number trials. Although the proportion of children who showed
such knowledge is far from ceiling, this finding forces a reconsideration of the claim that subset-
knowers lack the cardinal principle. Fourth, in an exploratory descriptive analysis on individual
knower-levels, we found that 4-knowers almost always followed the cardinal principle, but were
far less likely to do so for the word-object correspondence principle (approximately 50 to 60% of
the time). Thus, at the higher knower-levels, children’s errors are often not ones of cardinality,
but rather ones of word-object correspondence. In short, these results show that cardinal principle
knowledge emerges in subset-knowers prior to them being classified as “CP-knowers” on the
Give-N task. Critically, these new data show that cardinal principle knowledge develops
gradually rather than suddenly, and that violations of various counting principles, not just
cardinality, characterize children’s errors in the late subset-knower stages. These findings provide
a more nuanced look at the gradual elements that lead to children’s success in generating large
sets on the Give-N Task, and lay the groundwork to update the conceptual change account.
The nature of cardinal principle knowledge
We turn our focus first to the cardinal principle and then to the other counting principles
and the issue of coordination. As laid out in the introduction, there are discrepant findings in the
literature regarding whether or not subset knowers have any knowledge of the cardinal principle.
Here, we used a novel methodological approach, retrospectively analyzing behavior and errors
from a particular segment of the Give-N Task in which all children were asked to count to check
whether they had given N. In doing so, all children were given an opportunity to demonstrate
knowledge of the counting principles in a relatively ecologically valid task, where they were
operating on sets that they had constructed. Traditionally, in the Give-N task, children are given
credit for correct responses if the set size they provide exactly matches the request. Thus, in
addition to assessing knowledge of number word meanings, the Give-N task requires children to
spontaneously use counting to give N and follow all of the principles simultaneously. In contrast,
our method allowed us to examine children’s knowledge of cardinality separately from their
spontaneous decisions to count, and separately from knowledge of the other counting principles.
It also contrasts with the What’s-on-this-card (WOC) task, which also tests whether children
spontaneously count and respond with the last word of a count (e.g., Sarnecka & Carey, 2008;
Sarnecka et al., 2007; Le Corre et al., 2006). These differences in methodology, separating
children’s decision to count (i.e., when creating a set) from their interpretation of the last word in
their own counts (i.e., when checking the set), may explain why we found evidence for cardinal
principle knowledge in subset-knowers where previous studies did not.
Overall, our results are consistent with recent studies that argue for a more nuanced and
gradual view of number word acquisition (O’Rear et al., 2020; Wagner et al., 2019). Although
CP-knowers are more likely than subset-knowers to spontaneously count to give N (Le Corre et
al., 2006; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008), Posid and Cordes (2018) found that subset-knowers can be
trained within 5 minutes of a simple counting game to use counting to generate sets on the Give-
N Task. Thus, subset-knowers may have implicit knowledge about the role of counting in
generating cardinalities, and spontaneous counts may not provide a complete picture of children’s
counting knowledge. Relatedly, recent studies indicate emerging knowledge in some subset-
knowers. Wagner and colleagues (2019) reanalyzed Give-N data using medians of performance,
rather than means, and found that subset-knowers (“N”-knowers) sometimes responded correctly
to requests for N + 1 and N + 2. In a secondary analysis of previous studies, O’Rear and
colleagues (2020) also found that approximately 20 to 30% of subset-knowers were accurate on
N + 1 (see also Barner & Bachrach, 2009).
Our findings contribute to this growing body of literature on partial number
understanding. The fact that children produce occasional instances of above-chance performance
in following each of the counting principles can help explain the isolated instances of subset-
knowers’ ability to give N + 1 on the Give-N Task in the previous studies. That is, subset-
knowers may be able to correctly generate numbers larger than their “known” number because
they can sometimes access each of the three counting principles. This may also explain why
subset-knowers on the Give-N Task are occasionally classified as CP-knowers on another task
(Marchand & Barner, 2020; Le Corre et al., 2006).
If some subset-knowers do understand the cardinal principle, why don’t they achieve the
level of CP-knowers on the Give-N Task? One possibility is that these children do not know how
to fix an incorrect set upon recognizing that they did not provide N. Indeed, in an exploratory
analysis, we examined children’s attempts to fix an incorrect set, and found that CP-knowers
were more likely to fix correctly, with 61.9% of incorrect sets being fixed correctly (out of 21
instances), compared to 44% for 1- and 2-knowers (out of 9 instances) and 37.5% for 3- and 4-
knowers (out of 8 instances). An anecdote from a recently tested child (not included in this study)
nicely illustrates children’s difficulty with fixing errors. The child was asked to give “eight”. On
previous trials, when he counted fish carefully into the bowl, he was successful (including on
some requests for “six” and “seven”). When asked for “eight”, however, he dumped 12 fish into
the bowl. The experimenter laid out the fish in a line to count and check. When the child got to
the eighth one and said “eight”, he looked puzzled, took the eighth object, and moved it to the
end of the row. He started counting again, got to the 8th object, again looked puzzled, and
repeated his correction. If anything, this child was doing his utmost to follow the cardinal
principle, making it so that the label of “eight” would appear at the end of the counted row. One
might say that he was committed to a kind of word-object correspondence, having glued the label
This child responded correctly to two requests for “six”, both after fixing incorrect responses, and to one
request for “seven” by counting carefully. He was unable to fix initially incorrect responses on one trial asking
for “seven” and two trials asking for “eight”. Thus, he is a highly unusual case and possibly right on the
transition to becoming a CP-knower.
“eight” to a specific object. Yet, despite following the counting principles, this type of fixing
would never get him to the right answer. Like this child, it seems that more advanced subset-
knowers may technically understand the cardinal principle, but have not yet integrated it into a
more sophisticated logic of counting, coordinating all three principles simultaneously within the
placeholder structure of the count list.
Relatedly, children have to grasp not only that the last word represents the cardinality of
the set, but also why the last word represents the cardinality of the set. To do so, they must also
grasp that the procedure only works when no other rules are violated. Violations of other
counting principles would unravel the causal structure that leads the last word to represent
cardinality. It is possible that before becoming CP-knowers, children might have some idea about
the cardinal principle, but not a complete causal theory. If we consider the child described above,
his error in moving the eighth object indicates an aspect of procedural knowledge about
cardinality: that the count should end on the target number word. His behavior was ambiguous
with respect to knowledge that the word “eight” captured the value of the whole set, not the
identity of a single item. It is ambiguous because it is not possible to tell why he wanted the
object labeled “eight” to be at the end of the row: because he knew, procedurally, that the item
tagged “eight” should be at the end (i.e., the “last word rule”), or because he knew, conceptually,
that ending on “eight” would mean that he had the correct number of items in the set (i.e., the
cardinal principle). But, either way, he clearly did not understand the causal structure that
connects counting to cardinal values; he didn’t understand that the last item had to be in the
eighth position for the count to produce a cardinality of eight. It might be that understanding this
causal structure is critical for children’s ability to establish sets on Give-N. Furthermore, our
preliminary results on children’s ability to fix their errors suggest that, when children become
CP-knowers, they have also acquired some knowledge of relations between numbers, which
allows them to employ appropriate addition or subtraction strategies to fix an incorrect set,
despite the fact that this relational knowledge may only apply to a small range of numbers
initially (Carey & Barner, 2019; Cheung et al., 2017). Future studies should examine children’s
attempts to fix incorrect sets to shed light into children’s understanding of counting and relations
between number words and quantities.
Our findings also raise the possibility that if advanced subset-knowers are provided with
feedback on the Give-N Task, they might then perform more like CP-knowers. For example, if
the child correctly rejects that they have given N if their count ends on a different number, the
experimenter could highlight that it is indeed not N, but M. Future studies can examine this by
modifying the Give-N task procedure by adding feedback.
Our findings corroborate those of Sarnecka and Carey (2008), who reported that even
subset-knowers frequently gave the last word in a count as the response to “how many?”, and that
their knowledge of a ‘last-word rule’ increased with age. Sarnecka & Carey distinguished
knowledge of the “last word rule” from knowledge of the cardinal principle. They identified a
difference between the Give-N task and the How-Many task as a potential source of the
difference in children’s apparent appreciation of the cardinal principle, namely that the How-
Many task explicitly asks “how many” whereas the Give-N task does not use those words. Here,
we did not ask children “how many”, yet some subset-knowers still attended to the last word in
the count. Thus, children’s understanding of the importance of the last word in a count is more
flexible than simply identifying the last word as the answer to a “how many?” question.
Children’s attention to the last word may in fact represent an emerging concept of the cardinal
principle, rather than a shallow or rote response.
Nevertheless, we do not claim that subset-knowers have full conceptual understanding of
the cardinal principle. We suggest that they procedurally match the last word of a count to a
target amount, and that they likely understand that the last number denotes the value of the set.
Recall that in our study, children could get credit for having cardinal principle knowledge even if
they made errors on their response to create a set of N. Children were credited as having
knowledge of the cardinal principle if they accepted that they had given N when their last word of
the count ended on N, or if they rejected that they had given N when their last word ended on not-
N, regardless of whether they correctly generate a set of N. Thus, we specifically tested whether
children apply the last word of a count to denote the cardinality of a set they have created, even in
the context of other errors. Critically, our analysis suggests that children sometimes uphold the
cardinal principle while abandoning the other counting principles, leading to an overall incorrect
response. Thus, an important aspect of counting that CP-knowers have, but subset-knowers may
not, is the ability to coordinate all three counting principles at once to correctly give sets of
items. After all, the cardinal principle--that the last word in a count denotes the cardinal value of
the set--only holds if and only if the other how-to-count principles are obeyed as well. Recent
research has highlighted a need to tease apart the procedural and conceptual understanding of the
cardinal principle (Carey & Barner, 2019; Cheung et al., 2017; Davidson et al., 2012). The
current study contributes to this literature by showing that, at the very least, the procedural
application of the cardinal principle develops gradually as children acquire number word
meanings, and that the application of this principle is well in place before the transition to the CP-
knower stage in the knower-levels framework.
Our claims are consistent with the conceptual change account theorized by Carey (2009),
but shift the proposed locus of the conceptual change. Specifically, we suggest that children
understand the cardinal principle prior to generalizing their understanding of higher numbers on
the Give-N task. The major conceptual shift is therefore not about acquisition of the cardinal
principle per se, but rather the coordination and integration of the cardinal principle with the
other counting principles, the ordinal structure of the count list, and the causal relations that link
counting to cardinality.
Developmental trajectory of the stable-order and word-object correspondence principles.
Finally, consistent with previous studies, we found that most children can recite the count
sequence up to “ten” at age 3, and thus stable order may be the first how-to-count principle to be
acquired by children. Our data also show that knowledge of the word-object correspondence
shows little developmental change during the subset-knower period, unlike cardinal principle
knowledge. Even at the earliest stages of number word learning, children can already apply the
word-object correspondence principles, suggesting that the two foundational skills for procedural
counting are in place before children acquire procedural knowledge of the cardinal principle.
Interestingly, though their performance is well above chance from early on, children continue to
make errors of word-object correspondence at every subset-knower level. Indeed, we observed
that 4-knowers almost always followed the cardinal principle, yet they made relatively more
word-object correspondence errors. Such a finding supports the argument that CP-knowers’
central insight lies with coordinating the three counting principles and perhaps not the cardinal
principle per se.
These results have implications for interventions that aim to train children’s
understanding of counting, and highlight the need to focus on teaching young children the
meaning of the last word of a count and the coordination of the three principles when creating
sets of items (Mix, Sandhofer, Moore, & Russell, 2012; Paliwal & Braoody, 2018; O’Rear &
McNeil, 2017). In particular, once children reach the higher knower-levels, allowing them to
engage in the act of counting so they can coordinate the three counting principles may constitute
more effective training than highlighting that the last word of a count tells how many.
Previous studies have suggested that even CP-knowers or older children struggle with the
word-object correspondence principle when counting larger sets of objects (Frye, Braisby, Lowe,
Maroudas, & Nicholls, 1989; Barclay, Cheung, & Shusterman, 2017), and our results echo those
findings. The current study suggests that prior to becoming CP-knowers, children recognize the
need to tag one object with one number word, but they may yet have trouble applying this
principle to larger sets. It is not clear whether these challenges are due to higher procedural
demands of coordinating a longer verbal count list with the pointing gesture when counting large
sets, or to a more profound failure to extend a conceptual understanding of the word-object
correspondence principle to larger sets. Further research would be useful to illuminate whether
procedural or working memory demands fully explain children’s difficulties with coordinating
counts in the context of larger sets.
Summary
The current study examined children’s knowledge of the counting principles prior to
becoming CP-knowers, using a retrospective video analysis of the Give-N Task. We assessed
knowledge of the cardinal principle independent of children’s ability to provide correct responses
on the Give-N Task, and found evidence that advanced subset-knowers understand that the last
word of a count reflects the cardinal value of a set. We also found that subset-knowers have
acquired the stable-order and word-object correspondence principles, though not always
perfectly. Our findings suggest that children have knowledge of all three counting principles
before learning how to coordinate them to generate sets of items, and that the coordination of all
three principles may itself represent an important conceptual step.