Running Head: TRUST IN SCIENCE 1
In Press, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
Science for Others or the Self? Presumed Motives for Science Shape Public Trust in Science
Tessa M. Benson-Greenwald1*, Alejandro Trujillo2, Andrew D. White1, and Amanda B. Diekman1
Affiliations:
1Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
2 Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA
*Corresponding Author: Tessa Benson-Greenwald, tmbenson@iu.edu, Psychology Building, 1101 E 10th
Street, Bloomington, IN 47405
Acknowledgements:
The authors wish to thank Mansi Joshi, Heidi Vuletich, Mary Murphy, Stephanie Reeves, Dorainne
Green, Jennifer LaCosse, Katelyn Kroeper, Elise Ozier, Heidi Williams, Caitlyn Jones, Carmen Stone, Tara
Verghis, Marie Yamada-Killilea for their feedback on this project and manuscript.
Authors’ Note: This research was supported in part by a National Science Foundation grant awarded to
Amanda Diekman (GSE/RES-1232364).
TRUST IN SCIENCE 2
Abstract
Science can improve life around the world, but public trust in science is at risk. Understanding presumed
motives of scientists and science can inform the social psychological underpinnings of public trust in
science. Across five independent datasets, perceiving the motives of science and scientists as prosocial
promoted public trust in science. In Studies 1 and 2, perceptions that science was more prosocially
oriented was associated with greater trust in science. Studies 3 and 4a-b employed experimental
methods to establish that perceiving other-oriented motives, versus self-oriented motives, enhanced
public trust in science. Respondents recommend greater funding allocations for science subdomains
described as prosocially-oriented vs. power-oriented. Emphasizing the prosocial aspects of science can
build stronger foundations of public trust in science.
Key Words: Trust in Science, Goal Affordances, Communion, Agency, Motivation/Goals
TRUST IN SCIENCE 3
Science for Others or the Self? Presumed Motives for Science Shape Public Trust in Science
Science can improve life around the world, but realizing this potential requires the trust of the
public – of citizens, lawmakers, teachers, business leaders, and others. This trust is threatened by the
spread of misinformation (Brossard & Scheufele, 2013), but crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic can
correspond to increases in public trust in science (3M, 2021). Such fluctuations of public trust in science
can be better understood through understanding their psychological foundations. We posit that
understanding presumed motives of scientists and science can inform the social psychological
underpinnings of public trust in science. Specifically, do perceivers see science as providing
opportunities to fulfill prosocial motives, and do these beliefs influence public trust?
Presumed motives matter because trust does not solely rely on the merits of science (Rutjens,
Heine, et al., 2018). More science knowledge does not lead inevitably to positivity toward science
(Allum et al., 2008); more knowledge can increase polarized attitudes if perceivers interpret that
knowledge through their own preconceptions (Kahan et al., 2012). The scientific process itself can set
the stage for distrust because of conflicting evidence and strong debates. Contemporary skepticism has
led scientific leadership to call for “a new American affinity for science” by highlighting how science
serves the public good (Korte, 2019, para. 4). Understanding the perceived motivational culture of
science – that is, what goals scientists value and the goals afforded by scientific careers– can illuminate
the psychological foundations of public trust.
Stereotypes of Scientists and Science Roles as Lacking Communality
In considering the foundations of trust in science, we focus on perceptions of agency and
communality attributed to scientists and seen as afforded by scientist roles. This perspective reflects the
social role principle that attributes of individuals or groups are inferred from the observation of people
within particular social roles (Eagly & Koenig, 2021). In particular, beliefs about science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) roles reflect expectations that STEM roles do not afford working
TRUST IN SCIENCE 4
collaboratively with others or for prosocial purpose: STEM careers are seen as affording fewer
communal opportunities than other fields (Diekman et al., 2020).
The perception of science as lacking this communal orientation is important because
communion, along with agency, comprise two core dimensions of perceptions of social judgment (Abele
& Wojciszke, 2014): Communion reflects an orientation toward others, whereas agency reflects an
orientation toward the self (Bakan, 1966). The communal and agentic value dimensions, sometimes
referred to as meta-motives, reflect abstract purposes guiding goal pursuit (Schwartz & Bilsky, 1987;
Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012). These two dimensions of agency and communion emerge repeatedly as
foundations of understanding the self and others (Fiske et al., 2007; Folberg et al., 2019; Judd et al.,
2005; Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012).
Inferences about communal motives in science may be particularly important in understanding
trust in science because stereotypes of science and scientists reflect low levels of communality. STEM
careers are perceived as affording fewer opportunities to work with and help others, even among STEM
majors (Diekman et al., 2011) or pre-service K12 science teachers (Fuesting et al., 2021). Scientists are
stereotyped as competent but not warm (Fiske & Dupree, 2014) and are viewed as less communal and
more agentic than the average woman or man (Carli et al., 2016). In all, the perceived motivational
culture of science is characterized by low communality compared to agency.
Yet these beliefs are not monolithic or immalleable. For example, when individuals personally
experience science or math as including collaboration or altruism, they perceive that STEM fields afford
more communal opportunities (Brown et al., 2018). Contextual cues can heighten communal beliefs
about science – whether through direct information about the collaborative or altruistic work of
scientists (Brown, Smith, et al., 2015; Diekman et al., 2011) or through considering the purpose rather
than the process of science (Steinberg & Diekman, 2018). Here, we seek to understand whether
TRUST IN SCIENCE 5
perceptions of communal culture in STEM can elucidate the psychological foundations of public trust in
science.
Dimensions of Interpersonal Perception as Foundations for Trust in Science
Institutional Trust and Interpersonal Trust
The literature on the foundations of interpersonal trust offers insight into public trust in science.
Interpersonal trust means holding positive expectations of outcomes with another person (Holmes &
Rempel, 1989). Quickly determining whether to trust another person in ambiguous conditions benefits
human evolution because trust is fundamental to cooperation and social connections (Oosterhof &
Todorov, 2008). In close relationships, trust develops through using past behaviors to predict future
behaviors (predictability), inferring a partner’s qualities (dependability), and setting aside doubts despite
emotional risks (i.e., faith; Rempel et al., 1985).
Similar to interpersonal trust, institutional trust means holding positive expectations of
outcomes related to belonging to or interacting with an institution, and thus there is some overlap in
the psychological foundations of interpersonal trust and institutional trust (Kramer & Tyler, 1996;
Shockley-Zalabak et al., 2000; Zaheer et al., 1998). Some differences are clear: Institutions are comprised
of many members rather than a single partner, and individuals may not directly interact with
organization members. Whereas interpersonal trust derives from an interaction partner, institutional
trust may derive both from interactions and observing other institutional actions, such as its policies and
structures (Murphy & Reeves, 2019). These observations can provide information along the same
dimensions that define interpersonal trust (Rempel et al., 1985): Predictability might take the shape of
positive expectations for interactions and organizational actions (e.g., will a fair process be followed?).
Dependability might focus on inferring the motives of the institution and its members (what are the
traits or motives of institutional actors?). Faith may be expressed in willingness to follow an institution’s
policies or recommendations, despite doubts.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 6
Prior research about public trust in science aligns most closely with the faith or predictability
components: Trust in science is frequently conceptualized as positive expectations about the actions of
scientists (predictability), even in the presence of uncertainty (faith) (e.g., Luhmann, 1979; Nisbet et al.,
2015; Rutjens, Heine, et al., 2018). Less research has examined trust in science as related to the
dependability dimension: What character inferences might shape trust in science? In this research, we
examine whether inferences about motivations perceived in science affect public trust.
Inferences of Communal and Agentic Motives Underlie Trust
In interpersonal judgments, communal inferences are central. Judgments of others weigh
communion more than agency (Abele & Wojciszke, 2014) and communal information is processed
preferentially (Abele & Bruckmüller, 2011). Indeed, confiding in others particularly relates to perceiving
potential confidantes as highly communal (Wojciszke et al., 2009). Further, interpersonal distrust relates
to perceiving both low levels of communion and high levels of agency (Radkiewicz et al., 2013).
Extrapolating from this research, public trust in science may be enhanced when the public views
communality as a central motivation for science – that is, perceiving scientists and scientific institutions
as acting for the prosocial good. Conversely, public trust in science may be diminished when the public
views agency as a central motivation for science – that is, perceiving scientists and scientific institutions
as acting for their own gain.
In examining the impact of communal and agentic inferences for institutional trust, a key
consideration is the varying expressions of communion and agency that can be folded into the “Big Two”
umbrella constructs. Depending on the relevant context, specific aspects of the meta-motives may be
especially impactful. Components of agency include power/dominance (Folberg et al., 2019; Trapnell &
Paulhus, 2012), independence/autonomy (Eagly et al., 2019; Folberg et al., 2019), and competence
(Eagly et al., 2019; Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012). Components of communion include altruism (Brown,
TRUST IN SCIENCE 7
Smith, et al., 2015; Brown, Thoman, et al., 2015), collaboration (Fuesting et al., 2017), harmony, and
equality (Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012).
Further, agency and communion are often observed as orthogonal constructs, but at times high
levels of one dimension accompany low levels of another. Within the domain of interpersonal
interaction, the interpersonal circumplex (Wiggins, 1979) examines behaviors that might arise given
varying levels of agency and communion. High agency has different consequences in interpersonal
interaction when paired with high versus low communion (Locke, 2000). Although research from a Big
Two perspective often finds positive or no correlation between agency and communion, focusing on
subcomponents of agency can yield a different pattern: Agency as dominance can be associated with
low communion (particularly when dominance is high; Diekman, 2007; Imhoff & Koch, 2017). In the
current research, we posit that communal motives particularly matter for trust in science. In turn,
agentic motives may affect trust in science more when inferences of agency also implicate inferences of
communion (for example, seeking power over others rather than seeking competence or
independence). Moreover, trust in science may be especially low when science is perceived as pursuing
power at the expense of others, consistent with the Agency/Separation blend of the interpersonal
circumplex (Locke, 2000).
In all, we expect that perceptions of communal and agentic motives will influence trust in
science, but research has yet to identify communal motivational culture of science as associated with
trust in science. Prior evidence provides some support along these lines: Perceiving scientists as valuing
knowledge advancement over morality contributes to viewing scientists as potentially dangerous
(Rutjens, Heine, et al., 2018). In medicine, nutrition, and the environment, the public trusts scientific
researchers less than they trust practitioners whose work more closely affects the public (Pew Research
Center, 2019). Similarly, scientists who conduct research in the public sector, compared to the private
sector, are perceived as being motivated by benevolent values and having research that is accessible by
TRUST IN SCIENCE 8
the public; these perceptions in turn predict trust in science (Critchley, 2008). This evidence lays the
groundwork for the current research: Understanding the impact of perceived motives in science can
provide insight into enhancing trust.
Current Research
We tested the hypothesis that perceiving a more communal motivational culture in science
would promote public trust in science. We employed correlational and experimental methods across
five independent datasets: Studies 1 and 2 examined correlations between perceived motives in science
and trust in science. Studies 3 and 4a-b employed experimental methods to establish that communal
motives enhance public trust in science compared to agentic motives.
Additional analyses tested for moderation by political ideology and participant gender because
prior research shows lower trust in science among conservatives and women (Gauchat, 2012; Rutjens,
Sutton, et al., 2018). These analyses appear in supplemental materials because of inconsistent power to
detect higher-order interactions. All data are available at
Study 1
Study 1 examined the relationship between prosocial perceptions of science and trust in
science in the General Social Survey (GSS), a nationally representative dataset drawn from interview
surveys conducted by the National Opinion Research Center (Smith et al., 2016). The GSS provides a
unique opportunity to investigate these associations in a large, nationally representative sample with a
range of demographic predictors.
Method
Participants. The sample for analyses included 478 participants (227 female; 251 male) who
answered items of interest1 in the 2012 GSS (see Measures below). The GSS is a nationally-
1 Results were similar when N varied across analyses.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 9
representative survey that tracks sociological and attitudinal patterns in the U.S. Data are collected
biennially via face-to-face interviews and telephone from approximately 1,700 respondents. Each
independent sample draws from noninstitutionalized English-speaking persons at least 18 years old
(Smith et al., 2016). The 2012 GSS utilized multiple ballots with certain sections only appearing on some
versions (Smith et al., 2019). A subsample of 485 participants responded to the science-related
questions of interest.
The sample (Age: M = 48.48, SD = 17.02) included 359 participants identifying as White, 64 as
Black, and 55 as other. The median reported income was $25,000 or over. The sample was distributed
across party affiliations (110 Republican, 182 Independent, 172 Democrat, 11 other). Most participants
reported completing at least high school (75 did not complete high school, 225 high school diploma, 38
junior college, 92 bachelor’s degree, and 48 graduate degree).
Measures.
Developing measures of perceived prosociality of science and trust in science progressed in two
steps. In step one, we selected all items from all available years in the GSS that asked about science or
scientists, removing items that assessed science knowledge, exposure, or education. To obtain a
sufficiently large pool of items, we excluded items only appearing in years with fewer than 5 total
science opinion items. This process resulted in a pool of 9 items2 collected in the 2012 survey.
In step two, these items were entered into a Maximum Likelihood factor analysis with an
oblique rotation (Promax) to allow for correlation between the factors (John & Benet-Martínez, 2000).
This analysis revealed two factors with eigenvalues greater than 1 that accounted for 43.99% of the total
variance.3 We retained items if they loaded .30 or higher and only onto one factor. The first factor
2 The GSS items were SCIENTGO, SCIENTHE, SCIENTBE, SCIENTMO, SCIENTAL, NEXTGEN, ADVFRONT, NATSCI,
SCIBNFTS.
3 Because use of eigenvalues for factor extraction has been criticized (e.g., Turner, 1998), we also examined other
indices to determine the factor structure of these items (see Supplement).
TRUST IN SCIENCE 10
focused on perceived qualities of scientists (prosociality of scientists), and the second factor focused on
perceptions of science as a field worthy of trust. The measures were moderately positively correlated
with each other, r(475) = .35, p < .001.
Perceived Prosociality of Scientists. Participants rated their agreement with three items on
scales from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 4 (Strongly agree). Additional responses coded as missing values
included don’t know and no answer. Items were Scientists work for the good of humanity, Scientists help
solve problems, and Scientists want to make life better for the average person.4 Items were averaged
(α=0.71).
Trust in science. Participants rated agreement with two items on scales from 1 (Strongly
disagree) to 4 (Strongly agree). Additional responses coded as missing values included don’t know and
no answer. Items were Because of science there will be more opportunities for the next generation and
Even if it brings no immediate benefits, scientific research that advances the frontiers of knowledge is
necessary and should be supported by the federal government.5 Items were averaged, r (462) = 0.32, p <
.001.6
Results
Does perceived prosociality of scientists predict trust in science? We conducted a stepwise
regression in which we regressed trust in science on perceived prosociality of scientists and
prosociality was entered in Model 2. As hypothesized, prosocial perceptions of scientists uniquely and
4 GSS items were SCIENTGO, SCIENTHE, and SCIENTBE.
5 GSS items were ADVFRONT and NEXTGEN.
6 With two-item scales, Cronbach’s alpha can underestimate reliability (Eisinga et al., 2013) and the Spearman-
Brown coefficient is recommended.
7 Without demographic controls, perceived prosociality of science positively predicts trust in, b = 0.47, SE = 0.06, p
< .001.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 11
positively predicted trust in science, above and beyond the demographic predictors. When people see
scientists as serving prosocial goals, they tend to trust science more.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 12
Trust in Science
Model 1 Model 2
Perceived Prosociality of Scientists
0.36 (0.26)***
Gender 0.11 (0.10)† 0.11 (0.11) †
Political Ideology 0.08 (0.23)*** 0.06 (0.18)**
Education 0.01 (0.03) 0.02 (0.05)
Income -0.01 (-0.05) -0.01 (-0.04)
R2 .06 .12
Model df 4,273 5,272
Model F 4.34** 7.58***
R2Δ .06
df Δ 1,272
F Δ 19.37***
coefficients are inside the parentheses. Gender was effect coded (women = -1, men = +1). Political
ideology ranged from 1 (Extremely conservative) to 7 (Extremely liberal). Education ranged from 0 (Less
than high school) to 4 (Graduate). Income ranged from 0 (Less than $1000) to 12 (25000 or more). ** p <
.01, * p < .05, † p < .10.
Discussion
In a nationally representative sample, perceived prosociality of scientists predicted greater trust
in science. Indeed, prosocial perceptions of scientists accounted for variance above and beyond
demographic predictors, including political ideology. This initial study demonstrates a robust association
between perceived prosociality of scientists and trust in science in a large, nationally representative
TRUST IN SCIENCE 13
sample. However, an inherent limitation to the GSS is that analyses are constrained to items included in
the survey. In Study 2, we turn to primary research that employs conceptually and empirically distinct
measures of the motivational culture of science and trust.
Study 2
This study examined how perceived opportunities for communal or agentic goal pursuit in
scientific careers relate to trust in science. Study 1 examined the perceived motivational culture of
science through examining beliefs about scientists’ prosocial motives; Study 2 shifts from focusing on
the inferred motives of scientists to focusing on motivational opportunities within the scientist role (i.e.,
communal or agentic affordances; Steinberg & Diekman, 2018).
Method
Participants. We recruited 367 US citizens using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) online
marketplace; respondents were compensated $0.50. Potential participants were recruited at two time
points8 and excluded from participating twice. Fifty-three respondents were removed for failing
attention checks.9 The remaining 314 participants (148 women; 166 men) comprised the sample for
analyses (Age: M = 33.34, SD = 18.71). The sample included 190 participants identifying as
White/European American, 23 as Black/African American, 22 as Asian/Asian American, 13 as
Hispanic/Latinx, 8 as multiracial, 58 as other/did not report. Political identification included 123
Democrats, 72 Independents, 59 Republicans, 60 other/no affiliation.
Sensitivity analyses10 showed sufficient power (0.80; alpha = .05) to detect small-to-medium
sized regression coefficients in all analyses (f2 = 0.05 for models with one to four predictors; Faul et al.,
2007, 2009).
8 Recruitment time point produced no main effects or interactions. All analyses are available from the authors.
9 Results are the same when those excluded for inattention are included in analyses. Attention checks used in
Studies 2-4a-b are reported in Supplement.
10 All sensitivity analyses were conducted using G*Power 3.1.9.7.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 14
Procedure. Participants completed all measures in the order described below as part of a larger
battery of surveys. Finally, they answered demographic questions.
Measures.
Science affordances. Participants rated how much science careers offer communal and agentic
adapting base measures of communion and agency (e.g., Folberg et al., 2019; Diekman et al., 2010),
which contain similar content to other measures (see Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012). 11 The base measures of
communion and agency have demonstrated structural validity (Folberg et al., 2019) and convergent
validity with the Bem Sex Role Inventory (Bem, 1974) and the Interpersonal Adjective Scale (Wiggins,
1979), a circumplex measure of interpersonal behavior (Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012).
The base communion or agency items were adapted in these affordances items to ask about
perceived opportunities to pursue agentic or communal goals within a scientific career. Participants
rated the presence of each opportunity on a scale from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very much). Items were
averaged to form indices of communal affordances and agentic affordances.
Science Affordances
How much do you think a career as a scientist includes…
Communal (α=0.84) Agentic (α=0.73)
Providing direct help to others Demonstrating skill or competence
Helping society Enacting power over other people
Improving the lives of others through Gaining power in society
direct contact
Generally improving the lives of others Attaining power within their field
through scientific innovation
11 Mixed support for a two-factor solution for agentic affordances emerged in an exploratory factor analysis
(stronger in Study 2 than in Study 3). The content of these factors aligned with prior literature, with one factor
focusing on dominance affordances and the other on competence affordances. However, the reliabilities for these
subdimensions are too low to interpret with confidence, and thus we report the overall agentic affordance scale.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 15
Working face-to-face with others Working alone
Participating in a broader scientific Striving for success
community
Directly mentoring others Competing with others
Serving as a role model in the Financial rewards
community
Note. Measure from Steinberg & Diekman (2018)
Trust in science. Participants rated their agreement with 15 items on scale from 1 (Strongly
Disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree). Items were drawn from the GSS and supplemented with face-valid items
an oblique rotation (Promax) to allow for correlation between the factors (John & Benet-Martínez,
2000). All items loaded onto 1 factor with an eigenvalue of 6.67 that accounted for 44.42% of total
variance. Items were averaged (α=0.90).12
Trust in Science
Because of science and technology, there will be more opportunities for the next generation.*
Government funding for basic science pays off.*
Science and technology are making our lives healthier, easier, and more comfortable.**
Overall, modern science does more harm than good.**
Modern science will solve our environmental problems with little change to our way of life.
Climate scientists can be trusted to give full and accurate information on causes of climate change.
Scientists should have a major role in policy decisions.
Climate scientists should have a major role in policy decisions.
Because scientific findings change from day to day, science can never truly be trusted.
Scientists have a political agenda which skews their results.
12 Similar results emerge with omission of climate science items.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 16
Climate scientists are unsure whether global warming is actually happening.
Scientific findings seem to be made up.
Government funding should be spent on things other than science.
Scientists should have no role in politics.
Disputes among scientists make me question scientific findings.
Note: All items were used in Studies 2 and 3. *Items from 2012 GSS items used in Study 1; ** GSS items
drawn from other years.
Results
Perceived communal and agentic affordances in science. Consistent with broader STEM
stereotypes, a one-way repeated measures ANOVA revealed perceptions that science provided fewer
communal opportunities (M = 4.85, SD = 0.96) than agentic opportunities (M = 5.00, SD = 0.82), F(1,304)
= 6.05, p = .01, η2 = 0.02.
Do communal and agentic affordances predict trust in science? We regressed trust in science
on communal and agentic affordances, controlling for participant gender and political orientation.13
Communal opportunities positively predicted trust in science, b = 0.32, SE = 0.05. β = 0.32, p < .001,
1).14,15 Thus, whether the public construes science as motivated by communal or agentic goals
distinguished trust from mistrust.
13 Income and education were not collected from the full sample and thus not available as controls.
14 Without controls, trust in science is positively predicted by communal affordances (b = 0.39, SE = 0.06, β = 0.39,
p < .001) and negatively predicted by agentic affordances (b = -0.31, SE = 0.07, β = -0.31, p < .001).
15 Exploratory analyses with subcomponents of agentic affordances align with prior theory: Trust in science is
negatively predicted by perceived power opportunities (b = -0.27, SE = 0.04, β = -0.32, p < .001) and positively
predicted by perceived competence opportunities (b =0.24, SE = 0.06, β = 0.21, p < .001). Crucially, perceived
communal affordances strongly predict trust (b = 0.31, SE = 0.05, β =0.31, p < .001) uniquely from these distinct
forms of agentic affordances.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 17
n 5
Communal Affordances
s Agentic Affordances
Not at All Moderate Very Much
Science Affords Communal/Agentic Goals
Note: Communal affordances (solid) positively relate to trust in science. Agentic affordances (dashed)
negatively relate to trust in science. Not at All, Moderate, and Very Much correspond to raw scale scores
of 1, 4, and 7. Graph presents predicted values, however, participants reported perceiving communal
and agentic affordances throughout the entire range of the scale.
Discussion
Beliefs about science as affording communal or agentic goals aligned differently with trust in
science. Communal perceptions uniquely positively predicted trust, whereas agentic perceptions
uniquely negatively predicted trust. Given the robust alignment of prosocial perceptions with trust in
science, we next turned to experimental methods to test the hypothesis that scientists’ communally-
oriented behavior can heighten trust in science.
Study 3
Study 3 employed experimental methods that framed science as communal (vs. agentic) to
influence communal perceptions of science and explore consequences for trust in science. To do this,
we manipulated motivational culture by describing the activities and motives of a particular scientist.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 18
Notably, this operationalization of communal motivational culture primarily emphasizes performing
science with other people (collaborative subcomponent of communion) along with prosocial purpose.
The operationalization of agentic motivational culture primarily emphasizes working alone (independent
subcomponent of agency) along with power or status seeking. These manipulations seek to differentiate
between communal and agentic motivational frames by integrating different subcomponents within
each of the meta-motives. For simplicity, we refer to these as collaborative or independent but we
acknowledge the presence of other aspects.
Additionally, we tested whether the effect of perceived motivational culture of science is an
artifact of evaluative differences: Is it simply the case that perceivers positively evaluate communally-
oriented roles and this positivity predicts trust? Such heightened positivity toward communality parallels
the “women are wonderful” effect in gender stereotypes (Eagly & Mladinic, 1989). To test whether trust
effects emerge beyond positivity toward the role, we directly measured positivity about the scientist’s
role description. In sum, Study 3 examines whether perceived goal opportunities uniquely underlie trust
in science.
Method
Participants. We recruited 193 US citizens from MTurk who were compensated with $0.50.
Thirteen respondents were removed for failing attention checks.16 The remaining 180 participants (89
men, 89 women, 2 did not report) comprised the sample for analyses (Age: M = 37.57, SD = 12.67). The
sample included 131 participants identifying as White/European American, 22 as Black/African
American, 13 as Asian/Asian-American, 6 as Hispanic/Latinx, 2 as multi-racial, and 6 not specified.
Sensitivity analyses showed sufficient power (0.80; alpha =.05) to detect small effects. A 2×2
mixed model ANOVA could detect within-between interactions with an effect size of f2 = 0.09 or larger.
16 Results are the same when those excluded for inattention are included in analyses. Exclusion did not vary
systematically across conditions, Χ2(1, N=193) = 1.90, p = .17.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 19
Regression coefficients for models with one to four predictors could detect an effect size of f2 = 0.04 or
larger.
Procedure. Participants read about the typical day of a scientist whose daily activities and
motives were framed as either collaborative or independent (adapted from Diekman et al., 2011). The
essential tasks (e.g., data analysis, presentations) were constant across condition but varied in involving
work with others versus alone. For example, the collaborative framing included the task “I go to the lab
after about an hour to work with others on checking samples left overnight,” whereas the independent
framing included the task “I go to the lab after about an hour to check on samples left overnight.” See
supplement for full text. Participants then completed measures described below and answered
demographic questions.
Measures.
Science affordances. Measures of communal opportunities (α=0.89) and agentic opportunities
(α=0.77) were identical to Study 2.
Trust in science. Participants completed the Study 2 trust in science measure (α=0.88), as well as
an existing measure of trust in the scientific community (Nisbet et al., 2015). These 5 items included I am
suspicious of the scientific community, I have very little confidence in the scientific community,
Information from the scientific community is trustworthy, I trust the scientific community to do what is
right, and The scientific community often does not tell the public the truth. Participants rated items on
scales from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree). Items were averaged together (α=0.87).
Reflecting convergent validity, this measure correlated highly with the trust in science measure; r(177) =
0.86, p <.001.
Positivity. Participants evaluated the scientist’s day by responding to the item, “On average, it
sounds like this scientist has a good day,” on a scale from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree).
TRUST IN SCIENCE 20
Results
Neither participant gender nor political ideology moderated effects, all ps>.19 (see supplement).
Does framing of the scientist role affect affordance beliefs? Affordance ratings were submitted
to a 2 (scientist role: collaborative, independent) × 2 (perceived affordances: communal, agentic) mixed
model ANOVA, with perceived affordances as a within-subjects factor. As designed, affordances varied
affordances, F(1,178) = 36.00, p < .001, η2 = 0.17, f2 = 0.45, appeared only in the collaborative role, as
reflected in the predicted Scientist Role × Affordances interaction, F(1,178) = 61.99, p < .001, η2 = 0.26,
f2 = 0.59. In the collaborative scientist role, people perceived more communal than agentic affordances,
t(90) = 9.25, p < .001. In the independent scientist role, people perceived similar levels of communal and
agentic affordances, t(88) = -1.42, p = .16.
d = 1.11*** d = -0.04
f 4
v 3
Collaborative Independent
Scientist Role
Communal Agentic
Note. Error bars represent +/- 1 SE. *** p < .001
Does framing of the scientist role affect trust in science? Independent samples t-tests
examined whether the scientist role framing affected trust in science and trust in the scientific
TRUST IN SCIENCE 21
community. The direct effect of the scientist role framing was nonsignificant for both trust in science
[t(177) = -1.48, p = .14, d = 0.22, f2 = 0.11] and trust in the scientific community [t(178) = -1.67, p = .10, d
= 0.25, f2 = 0.13]. The collaborative role produced descriptively greater trust than the independent role
on both measures (trust in science: M = 5.12, SD = 0.95 vs. M = 4.90, SD = 1.06; trust in the
collab ind
scientific community: M = 5.34, SD = 1.21; M = 5.01, SD = 1.40).
collab ind
What role perceptions predict trust? Given that role framing influenced perceived affordances,
we examined what specific affordances were associated with trust, and whether these were distinct
from overall positivity. In a parallel path model, we compared the indirect effects of perceived
communal affordances, agentic affordances, and positivity. Even though the direct effect of role framing
on trust was not significant, indirect effect analyses are informative: In some cases, an independent
variable exerts a stronger influence on a mediator than the dependent variable, leading to significant
indirect effects in the absence of significant direct effects (Rucker et al., 2011).
predictor variable, (2) communal affordances, agentic affordances, and positivity as mediators, and (3)
trust in science as the outcome variable. The model used Hayes PROCESS macro model 4 and 10,000
bootstrapped samples. The collaborative science role predicted greater trust through higher communal
affordances and lower agentic affordances. As predicted, the indirect effect of positivity was not
significant (Indirect Effect: 0.03, 95% CI = [-0.02, 0.14]). This pattern replicated in the model examining
a) Trust in Science
TRUST IN SCIENCE 22
b) Trust in Scientific Community
** p < .01, *** p < .001, † p < .10.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 23
Discussion
The content of science roles relates to greater trust in science through perceived communal and
agentic affordances, and these pathways cannot be reduced to positivity. Collaborative (versus
independent) science was perceived as offering more communal opportunities and fewer agentic
opportunities which, in turn, predicted greater trust in science across two different measures.
The lack of a direct effect of role activities on trust in science is puzzling; however, this null
effect may reflect that an individual scientist’s activities do not generalize to the overall culture of
science. The observed indirect pattern suggests that to the extent that individual scientists’ activities
and motives shape broader perceptions of communal and agentic goals opportunities in science, these
broader motivational perceptions are associated with trust in science. Moreover, these indirect effects
of perceived opportunities on trust in science remained robust when controlling for global impressions
of positivity toward the role. In Studies 4a-b, we shift to an experimental manipulation that focuses on
science at a broader level rather than an individual lab.
Studies 4a and 4b
Studies 4a-b replicated and extended the findings thus far in key ways. As noted above, we
adopted an experimental manipulation of scientific culture that portrayed entire subdisciplines of
science, rather than individual labs. The new manipulation also provided a conceptual replication by
changing the operationalization of the specific motivational dimensions. In Studies 4a-b, we
operationalized communion as focusing on benefitting others and the world, and we operationalized
agency as focusing on attaining power and status. This design allows us to investigate the effects of
more polarized views of communion and agency, consistent with the Agency/Separation blend in the
interpersonal circumplex (Locke, 2000).
We further investigated the consequences of the motives-to-trust effect by examining the
impact of perceiving different motivational cultures of science on funding recommendations for that
TRUST IN SCIENCE 24
science. These preferences for monetary resource allocation serve as a proxy for support and
prioritization of scientific domains. We hypothesized that participants would recommend spending
taxpayer dollars on sciences perceived as benefiting society. Further, the manipulation of subdisciplines
of science, and public funding measure, focus participants on publicly-funded scientists, who tend to be
trusted more than privately-funded scientists (Critchley, 2008).
Method
Participants. All participants were US citizens recruited using Amazon’s MTURK online
marketplace and compensated with $0.50. In Study 4a, 15 out of 138 initial respondents were removed
for failing attention checks and/or a culture check (TurkPrime, 2018).17 The remaining 123 participants
(64 men, 59 women) comprised the sample for analyses (Age: M = 38.63, SD = 12.84). The sample
included 90 participants identifying as White/European American, 16 as Black/African American, 7 as
Asian/Asian-American, 6 as Hispanic/Latinx, and 4 as multiracial. The sample was distributed across
party affiliations (47 Democrat, 33 Independent, 37 Republican, 6 other/no affiliation).
In Study 4b, 23 out of 287 initial respondents were removed for failing data quality checks
(TurkPrime, 2018).18 The remaining 264 participants (113 men, 147 women, 4 did not report) comprised
the sample for analyses (Age: M = 38.72, SD = 12.16). The sample included 195 participants identifying
as White/European American, 22 as Black/African American, 13 Asian/Asian American, 17
Hispanic/Latinx, 11 as multi-racial, 6 as Other/did not report. The sample was distributed across party
affiliations (117 Democrats, 74 Independents, 53 Republicans, 20 other/no affiliation). Most of the
sample reported at least some college education (20 high school diploma, 77 some college, 121 college
degree, 42 graduate/professional degree, 4 other/missing).
Because both studies used the same manipulations and measures, we combined the data from
both samples for these analyses to improve power (n=387). Sensitivity analyses showed sufficient power
17 Results are the same when those excluded for inattention and/or failed culture checks are included in analyses.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 25
(0.80; alpha = .05) to detect small effects in the combined sample. Repeated measures 2×2 ANOVAs
could detect an effect size of at least f2 = 0.06. Regression coefficients for models with up to four
predictors could detect an effect size of f2 = 0.03.
Procedure. Participants read an ostensible news report describing two groups of scientists
(chemical engineers and physicists). The prosocially-focused group was described as valuing working
toward a better society and serving as a role model in the community, whereas the power-focused
group was described as valuing attaining power and status within their field and in society.
For example, participants who read about prosocial physicists read the following:
The results conclusively show that the majority of physicists indicate that their number one goal
is to work toward a better society and serve as a role model in the community, whereas
chemical engineers indicate that their number one goal is attain power and status within their
field and in society. This research proves it. The domain of science determines their aims:
physicists want to help the world, chemical engineers want to rise to the top of it.
Other versions varied nuisance variables on between-subjects bases, including which science branch was
described as prosocial vs. power seeking, and which science branch was presented first. All stimuli are
Participants then provided ratings of each subdomain and answered demographic questions.
Measures. Respondents completed measures in the order described below.
Affordances. Participants rated how much careers in chemical engineering and physics afford
communal and agentic goals (adapted from Diekman et al., 2010). Participants responded to several
items beginning with the statement, “How much do you think a career as a chemical engineer (physicist)
involves…” Participants considered 3 communal affordances (serving the community, helping society,
TRUST IN SCIENCE 26
generally improving the lives of others; αs0.92) intermixed with 3 agentic affordances (gaining power in
society, gaining status within their field, demonstrating competence; αs0.61-0.7018).
Trust in science. Participants rated support for using each scientific subdomain’s research in
engineering included: Overall, chemical engineers do more harm than good; Chemical engineers should
have a major role in policy decisions; Government funding for research in chemical engineering pays off;
Chemical engineers have a political agenda that skews their results; Chemical engineers should have no
role in politics (αs≥0.77). Identical items for physics replaced “chemical engineers” with “physicists”
(αs≥0.74). Respondents rated agreement from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree).
Positivity. Participants rated their positivity toward chemical engineers and physicists by
responding to the item “What is your general opinion of chemical engineers (physicists)?” Participants
provided ratings on scales from 1 (Extremely negative) to 7 (Extremely positive).
Funding recommendation. Study 4b included a funding allocation measure (adapted from
Rutjens, Sutton, et al., 2018). Participants were presented with a pie chart with the accompanying
directions: “Below you can view the “Spending Allocation Pie” for the NSF (National Science Foundation)
in 2017…. It is up to you to indicate changes to the spending pie, by rearranging the order of the areas.
Which spending areas should be prioritized in 2019?” Participants rank ordered the six spending areas,
including the target disciplines. The measure of funding priority converted rankings of the prosocially-
focused science and the power-focused science to an ordinal scale ranging from 1 to 6, with a ranking of
1 reflecting highest priority.
18 Although some alphas for agentic affordances are low, similar patterns emerged when items were examined
separately. We retained the index for simplicity of reporting.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 27
Results
The design included nuisance variables of order and the scientist group described as prosocial;
both were manipulated on a between-subjects basis. These variables did not moderate any analyses,
and were omitted from analyses presented here. Neither participant gender nor political ideology
moderated effects, all ps > .16 (see supplement for analyses).
Does motivation focus affect perceived opportunities? A 2 (scientist motivation: prosocial,
power) × 2 (goal affordance: communal, agentic) repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to establish
Motivation × Goal Affordance interaction emerged [F(1,386) = 248.95, p < .001, η2 = 0.39, f2 = 0.80].
When scientists’ motivation was prosocial, participants perceived more communal affordances than
agentic affordances. When scientists’ motivation was power-seeking, participants perceived more
agentic affordances than communal affordances. These interactions subsumed main effects of
motivation framing [F(1,386) = 37.03, p < .001, η2 = 0.09, f2 = 0.31] and affordance type [F(1,386) =
35.60, p < .001, η2 = 0.08, f2 = 0.29].
d = 0.86*** d = -0.78***
a 5
f 4
d Communal
i Agentic
P 2
Prosocial Motivation Power Motivation
Scientist Motivation
Note. Error bars represent +/- 1 SE. *** p < .001
TRUST IN SCIENCE 28
Does motivational focus affect trust in science? A paired-samples t-test examined whether
reported more trust in science when the scientists were described as prosocially-motivated than power-
motivated, t(386) = 9.43, p < .001, d = 0.48, 95% CI = [0.37, 0.58], f2 = 0.96.
6 d = 0.44*** d = 0.65***
e 5
r 3
Study 4a Study 4b
Prosocial Motivation Power Motivation
Note. Prosocially-motivated scientists elicited greater trust than power-motivated scientists. Error bars
represent +/- 1 SE. *** p < .001
Do perceived affordances mediate the motivation-to-trust effect? The previous analyses
established that experimentally manipulating scientist motivation affected both perceived goal
affordances and trust in science. Yet, the question remains as to whether trust in science is predicted by
higher communal affordances, lower agentic affordances, or both, as well as whether these effects are
reducible to positivity. We tested a parallel mediation model with communal affordances, agentic
affordances, and positivity as mediators of the motive-to-trust effect, using Montoya’s (2017) MEMORE
TRUST IN SCIENCE 29
significantly mediated the relationship between motivation and trust above and beyond the indirect
effect of positivity.
combined.
Note. The figures present unstandardized beta coefficients. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001, † p < .10.
Does motivation affect funding priorities? We analyzed rankings of funding priority using a non-
parametric Friedman test of differences among repeated measures (Howell, 2009). The prosocially-
rank 1.27 vs. 1.73; Χ2 (1,N=251) = 52.69, p <.001]. Participants ranked the prosocially-oriented science
highest for funding twice as frequently as the power-oriented science (28.3% vs 11.2%).
TRUST IN SCIENCE 30
power
100%
90%
g 80%
a 70%
e 6th
P 60%
l 5th
50%
4th
o 40%
3rd
t 30% 2nd
o 1st
r 20%
10%
0%
Prosocial Power
Motive
Discussion
Portrayals of the motivational culture of science affected trust in science. Specifically, science
subdomains described as prosocially motivated (vs. power-seeking) were perceived as providing greater
communal opportunities and, in turn, trusted more. Similar to Study 3, the beneficial effect of
communal affordances for trust remained above and beyond positivity – suggesting that these effects
cannot merely be reduced to valence.
Consistent with prior research, effects on trust were larger in this study that pitted a pitted a
power-seeking motive against a prosocial motive (compared to independence vs. collaboration). The
power-seeking motive can elicit stronger distrust because it implicates perceptions of communal as well
agentic opportunities. Indeed, the science subdomain described as power-seeking was rated as
providing both more agentic opportunities and fewer communal opportunities than the prosocially
TRUST IN SCIENCE 31
motivated subdomain. This polarization of perceived communion and agency is consistent with the
Agency/Separation blend that has particular impact for interpersonal behavior (Locke, 2000). Further,
this finding aligns with previous research showing that the perceived immorality of scientists can
threaten trust (Rutjens & Heine, 2016).
Finally, Study 4b demonstrates a potential downstream consequence of greater public trust in
science. In short, the perceived motives of science mattered for perceptions of funding priority. The
same scientific domain, when framed as prosocially-oriented, deserves more dollars in the public’s eye.
Internal Meta-Analysis
Perceiving science as prosocially motivated relates to public trust, as demonstrated here in five
datasets ranging in methods, measures, and samples. An internal meta-analysis aggregating across
science related positively to perceived communal beliefs about science (N = 1359, r = .36, 95% CI = [0.31,
0.41], Z = 13.79, p < .001) but negatively to agentic beliefs (N = 881, r = -.28, 95% CI = [-0.34, -0.22], Z = -
8.52, p < .001). These meta-analytic correlations differed significantly, Z = 15.34, p < .001.
N Communal Agentic
Study 1 478 .35
Study 2 314 .29 -.14
Study 3 180 .23 -.26
Study 4a 123 .40 -.37
Study 4b 264 .51 -.41
Overall .36 -.28
Note: All effect sizes are provided in r.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 32
To summarize the experimental effect of role framing manipulations used in Study 3 and Studies
in Study 3, the hypothesized effect emerges when aggregated across studies (N = 567, r = .23, 95% CI =
[0.15, 0.30], Z = 5.45, p < .001). Framing the scientist role as communally- vs. agentically-motivated
fostered greater trust in science.
N Trust in Science
Study 3 180 .11
Study 4a 123 .21
Study 4b 264 .31
Overall 567 .23
Note: All effect sizes are provided in r.
General Discussion
Inferences about the motives pursued in science can inform the understanding of when and why
the public trusts science: People trusted science more when the scientific culture emphasized
communality than agency. Further, perceptions of motivational culture mattered above and beyond
positivity: Even though communally-oriented science elicits positive impressions, these positive
impressions cannot account for effects on trust.
The current findings indicate that insights about the interpersonal foundations of trust in
perceived communality (e.g., Radkiewicz et al., 2013; Wojciszke et al., 2009) can be leveraged to
understand trust accorded to societal institutions. Cues to prosociality in science may be particularly
important because of the potential for conspiracy theories to heighten contemporary distrust in
scientists (Rutjens, Heine, et al., 2018). Yet, we anticipate that foundations of public trust in a variety of
societal institutions, not just science, are similarly rooted in the perceived motivational culture of those
institutions.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 33
Across studies, results more consistently demonstrate that perceived communal motivational
culture heightens trust in science than that perceived agentic motivational culture depresses trust in
science. To some extent, we can trace this variation to the different forms of agentic motivational
culture that were emphasized across studies. Effects on trust appear to be stronger when scientists are
described as seeking power, perhaps because this power seeking can implicate inferences about
communal motives (consistent with the Agency/Separation blend in interpersonal values, Locke, 2000).
Relations of trust with perceived agentic affordances were also less consistent than relations of trust
with communal affordances, again consistent with research in the interpersonal domain that places
inferences of communality at the center of interpersonal trust.
Practically, these data suggest that emphasizing scientists’ prosocial motives and collaborative
activities can enhance public trust. Consistent with this idea is the finding that public approval of
Congress aligns with the amount of prosocial language in legislative addresses (Frimer et al., 2015).
Prosocial communication especially matters because scientific progress involves uncertainty that can be
exploited for political gain (Bolsen & Druckman, 2015) and polarize attitudes toward science (Druckman,
2017). Emphasizing science as a public good might enhance trust where it is most depleted, such as
among those higher in religious orthodoxy and conservatism (Clobert & Saroglou, 2015; Gauchat, 2012;
Rutjens, Sutton, et al., 2018). Though political ideology did not moderate experimental effects of
motives on trust (Studies 3, 4a-b ps > .16; see supplement), highlighting prosocial and humanitarian aims
of science holds potential to heighten trust where it is low. We note that the motives-to-trust
relationship emerges across the political spectrum, and that a worthwhile endeavor would be to
understand whether conservatives and liberals differentially weigh specific aspects of prosociality in
alignment with varying moral foundations (Graham et al., 2009).
Limitations and Future Directions
TRUST IN SCIENCE 34
The convergence and divergence between interpersonal trust and institutional trust is worthy of
future study. The approach in this paper was to build predictions about institutional trust on the more
established literature on interpersonal trust. Yet, trust in individuals and trust in an organization are
conceptually and empirically distinct (Zaheer et al., 1998). To date, little research directly compares how
institutional and interpersonal trust operate similarly or distinctly. For example, the dispersal of
cooperative behavior across an institution might be particularly important in shaping institutional trust.
If institutional trust is more affected by information dispersed among an institution, this process could
account for the larger effect size observed in Study 4 (where motives of scientist groups were portrayed)
than Study 3 (where motives of an individual scientist were portrayed). Although investigating the
quantitative and qualitative differences in interpersonal and institutional trust is beyond the scope of
this work, it provides ample opportunity for future research.
Another question is how this knowledge can be leveraged to so that scientific insights and
processes can more effectively solve societal problems. Over the time of the COVID-19 pandemic, public
trust in science has increased (3M, 2020); the motivational cultures perspective would hypothesize that
this increased trust relates to the greater visibility of the prosocial impact of science due to the rapid
development of vaccines and treatments. On the other end of the spectrum, perceptions of scientists as
lacking prosociality may contribute to resistance to vaccination or other public health measures. To
amplify the potential benefits of prosocial aspects of science, future research might investigate the
impact of science communicators and the contexts in which they are most needed and most effective.
Because many people lack firsthand knowledge of scientific culture, exemplars (e.g., Dr. Fauci) play an
important role in shaping perceptions of the motives of science and scientists which, in turn, shapes
trust in science.
Particularly important is to understand how highlighting the communal motives of science and
scientists can garner the trust of communities where distrust is especially heightened. Distrust can be
TRUST IN SCIENCE 35
well-deserved; what can institutions do to earn public trust? A case in point was the disparate impact of
COVID-19 on Black communities (Khatana & Groeneveld, 2020). Given the disproportionate impact of
the virus, Black communities stood to especially benefit from vaccination. However, reluctance toward
vaccination was higher among Black Americans than other racial groups (Hamel et al., 2020), which is
not surprising given the history of anti-Black racism in science (e.g., Tuskegee, Henrietta Lacks;
Rajagopalan et al., 2017; Skloot, 2010).19 Given this history, it is not adequate to signal that science
benefits society at large because those benefits may be only available for some (i.e., White Americans).
Providing direct information about the benefits of science for specific communities may be more
effective in fostering trust in science.
Finally, the relationship between perceived motivational culture and trust in science is likely
bidirectional. As demonstrated here, perceiving prosocial motives can elicit trust. Yet trusting science
might lead people to interact more with scientists, to learn scientific information, and to enter scientific
settings. This approach motivation may yield opportunities to see scientists more prosocially. Although
these studies focused on effects of perceived motives on institutional trust, this research can provide a
foundation for other work to understand how institutional trust in turn contributes to exposure to
communal aspects of science.
Conclusion
Because science operates at the edge of the known, the scientific enterprise will always be
challenging. Yet contemporary scientists face the additional challenge of greater skepticism toward
science itself, exacerbated by the spread of (mis)information (Brossard & Scheufele, 2013). Crises like
the COVID-19 outbreak show the danger societies face without trust in scientific knowledge.
19 The Tuskegee Syphilis Study was conducted by the United States Public Health Service between 1932 and 1972
in the Tuskegee area of Alabama (Rajagopalan et al., 2017). Black men who had contracted syphilis were tracked
for cardiovascular and mental health changes over time without their knowledge or consent. In the Henrietta Lacks
case, cancer cells were taken from Henrietta Lacks without her knowledge or consent. These cells, known as HeLa
cells, have become widely used in studying the effects of treatments on cancer cell growth (Skloot, 2010).
TRUST IN SCIENCE 36
Understanding how the public views the motives underlying science offers a lens for delineating the
psychological underpinnings of public distrust, and a specific strategy for building trust. Excellent science
relies on collaborative processes for purposes that serve the greater good; clarifying these communal
practices and purpose to the public can build stronger foundations of public trust in science.
TRUST IN SCIENCE 37