Crocheted Indonesian Language Learning with the Environment
Lisna Oktari/19016099
lisna18oktari@gmail.com
The environment is an important part in human life because, in his life of man occupies the
environment as a place to survive and do various activities. The environment is also a place of
development of human life. Lingkunganlah that affect good or bad human behavior. This is due to
the influence of the environment on life. However, in the environment we often encounter a
variety of problems. When learners experience this, educators can engage students in utilizing the
surrounding environment as a medium of learning fun. The base of this learning also can raise the
correlation of social learners include value as well as the procedures. It can also help students
rethink the relationship of human use of the environment and are aware of and consider the matter
in the surrounding environment.
According to Tung and Wihardjo (in Ramadan et al, 2019), the problems that occur in the
environment caused by human activities that careless and intensive in the area where he lived,
this was done to improve the quality of life respectively. A lot of people do not think of the
environment when doing things that can damage the environment. Most of them only think of
yourself and not think about any impact that would occur from these actions. The impact of his
actions as, littering will result in a contaminated environment and the occurrence of floods. This
is because a selfish attitude that exists in human beings.
Environment is a place to interact a lot of people. The environment is the beginning of human life,
how the development of the language a person starting from the environment. Good poor man can
be judged from the environment. In everyday life situations, attitudes manners will give a positive
impact on social relations with the environment (Gani, 2019). In learning, especially languages of
indonesia's environment can affect the quality of the human. Naturally children will recognize the
language as a way of communicating with people around Suardi et al (2019). This means that the
communication of the child starting from its environment, the better the child's environment that
the better the communication the language gets.
According to Nkwetisma (in Ramadan et al, 2019), environmental education is a business that is
done consciously to teach and attract the attention of human beings about how the function of the
natural environment and how human beings can manage and protect it. Ramadan et al (2019) said
that environmental education is important to improve the attitude and awareness of students
towards the environment. Environmental education can make students think critically and
contextually. How to think critically and contextually this effect later on Indonesian language
learning, so between environmental education and language learning are interrelated.
According to Lai and Buldur (in Ramadan et al, 2019), environmental education can be applied in
the learning process directly in the classroom. In Indonesian language learning can connect the
material about the environment with the materials taught. Ramadan et al (2018) stated
environmental education is able to help the student rethink the relationship or correlation between
humans and their environment. The correlation starts from understanding the environment, aware
of environmental problems, and consider the environmental issues related to human life.
In addition, the presence-based learning environment, students will be more sensitive to
environmental conditions. Thus, teachers utilize the environment to train, familiarize, and
motivate learners to think critically and creatively. Zulhafizh et al (2013) stated that attitudes and
learning motivation of students contribute to the learning outcomes, that is the language of
Indonesia. Not only the students, teachers also need to think creatively utilize the environment to
be used as learning media. Therefore, the teacher is a facilitator for the students. This is in line
with the statement of Sukma (2012) and Ramadan et al (2019) the teacher serves as a facilitator
and manager of the learning in the learning process
Based on the student respondents to the questionnaires that have been created by the author of
“Regard Indonesian Language Learning with the Environment” to 15 students of Universitas
Negeri Padang, 3 students from Universitas Bunghatta, 8 students from the University of Andalas,
2 students from the Open University, and 7 students from the State University of Jakarta. Of the
overall student above is only 35 people who participate in filling out the questionnaire, the more
dominant women 23 respondents and male 12 respondents with a percentage of 65.7% female,
34,3% of men. The results of the data of the percentage of the questionnaire that has been done
through the google form can be seen as follows.
The first statement, “the Material environment is closely associated with kehidupn day-to-day” of
44.1% stated strongly agree, 55,9% agree, 0% expressed less agreed, and 0% disagree. The second
statement, “the Material environment in the Indonesian language brings positive value for
students” 34,3% stated strongly agree, 62,9% agree, 2.8 percent expressed less agreed, and 0%
disagree. The third statement, “Learning about the material environment, directly or indirectly,
can develop a mindset of students” 20% stated strongly agree, 77,1% agree, a 2.9% said less
agreed, and 0% disagree. Statement of the fourth, “a Learning-based environment aimed at
making students participate in the keep, preserve, and protect about” 34,3% stated strongly agree,
60% agree, a 5.7% stated less agreed, and 0% disagree. Statement of the fifth, “the Efforts in the
preservation of the environment can be incorporated kealam reading texts the language of
Indonesia” 31,4% stated samgat agree, 68,6% agree, 0% expressed less agreed, and 0% disagree.
Statement sixth, “the Use of media literacy in Indonesian language learning can increase the
awareness of students on the importance of the environment” 37,1% stated strongly agree, 62,9%
agree, 0% expressed less agreed, and 0% disagree. Statement of the seventh, “a Learning-based
environment can increase creativity in learners” 31,4% stated strongly agree, 68,6% agree, 0%
expressed less agreed, and 0% disagree. Statement of the eighth, “the Material environment can
be used as the theme in to create a masterpiece of literature” of 25.7% stated strongly agree, 71,4%
agree, 0% expressed less agreed, and 2.9% disagree. Statement of the ninth, “the Material
environment needs to be one of the indicators in the Indonesian language learning” 31,4% stated
strongly agree, 62,9% agree, a 5.7% stated less agreed, and 0% disagree. Statement of the tenth,
“the Utilization of the environment is one of the learning media that is better to be applied in the
process of learning the language of Indonesia” 31,4% stated strongly agree, 62,9% agree, a 2.85%
stated less agreed, and a 2.85% disagree.
Based on the results of the answers of the questionnaire conducted, the authors conclude that
regard, Indonesian language learning with the environment is very influential. It is proved that in
the questionnaire higher number percentage strongly agree and agree rather than disagree and
agree. Environmental education can be put into direct learning Indonesian language. Students can
diintruksikan to make the text being studied with the theme of the environment. According to the
author crocheted Indonesian language learning environment can facilitate teachers and students in
teaching and understanding the material bahasa Indonesia motivating, creative, fun, and
rewarding. The author hopes that menerapan environmental education that exist in Indonesian
language learning can make the environment better for the future.