Covid-19 as natural intervention: Guilt and perceived historical privilege contributes to
structural reform under conditions of crisis
1* 1
Melike M. Fourie & Wilhelm J. Verwoerd
Studies in Historical Trauma and Transformation, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch,
South Africa
*Corresponding author
Studies in Historical Trauma and Transformation
Stellenbosch University
Stellenbosch, 7600
South Africa
E-mail: marethem@gmail.com OR melikef@sun.ac.za
IN PRESS IN AFFECTIVE SCIENCE
Abstract
The Covid-19 pandemic has been described as an unmasking of persistent racialized
inequalities linked to South Africa’s oppressive past. However, such observations lack
empirical support. Here we examined whether Covid-19 lockdown conditions encouraged
greater perceptions of continuing structural racism together with motivational and behavioral
support for social justice, and whether guilt or empathic concern undergirded such responses.
A national sample of White South Africans’ data suggest that the pandemic served as a
natural intervention, fostering greater acknowledgment of structural racism and support for
redress through increased awareness of historical privilege and guilt in response to Black
hardship. Guilt furthermore predicted a social justice motivation in relief efforts, whereas
empathic concern predicted only charity motivation. These results suggest that ‘White guilt’
is more consequential than empathic concern in contributing to structural reform, but would
require longer-term processes to support the translation of its motivational push into
sustainable contributions to social justice.
Keywords: guilt, empathic concern, structural racism, inequality, social justice, charity
Over the past 25 years, South Africa has increasingly featured White denial of the roots
of present-day racialized inequalities (Lefko-Everett et al., 2017). Although Whiteness
continues to yield significant (economic) power and privilege (Chatterjee, 2019; Ratele &
Laubscher, 2010), right-wing politics enforce the notion that the White minority is
systematically oppressed and marginalized by the post-apartheid government (Van Zyl-
Hermann, 2018). Such perceptions of victimhood often manifest in reduced acknowledgment
and lack of empathic concern for continuing structural racism (Fourie & Moore-Berg, 2021),
which serves the added benefit of maintaining the status quo and access to tangible material
advantages (Milazzo, 2016; Unzueta & Lowery, 2008).
The unequal health and economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the
racialized nature of divisions between rich and poor worldwide (Bottan et al., 2020; Turok &
Visagie, 2021). In South Africa, it has been described as an unmasking of the extent to which
White South Africans and their descendants continue to benefit from centuries of systemic
racialized privileging, so that the materiality of racism can no longer be ignored (Chatterjee et
al., 2020; Haffajee, 2020). For example, the structural barriers (including infrastructure,
water, food, sanitation, and digital access) to adhere to and survive Covid-19 lockdown
restrictions faced by Black communities in township settings have been forced into view
unequivocally (Coetzee & Kagee, 2020; De Groot & Lemanski, 2021).
While there has been greater articulation of White privilege in the media, it remains to
be explored whether the Covid-19 disruption in public life has shifted White South Africans’
acknowledgment of structural racism (Salter et al., 2017), their motivational, and behavioral
support for social justice (Durrheim & Dixon, 2018); or whether the pandemic strengthened a
culture of paternalistic charity (Jackman, 1994). The distinction between a charity versus
social justice motivation for helping is critical in terms of their impact on both human dignity
and social inequality: whereas charity is associated with little appreciation for the root cause
of a situation and reinforces the dependency of marginalized communities, a justice
motivation is borne out of a longer-term desire to empower marginalized communities
because of the recognition of historical injustice and resulting personal gain (Halabi et al.,
2008; Swartz, 2016). Finally, we were uniquely interested in which group-based emotions,
particularly self-focused guilt and/or other-focused empathic concern, in this context would
be associated most strongly with structural reform (Iyer & Leach, 2008; Vollhardt &
Sinayobye Twali, 2016).
Much has been theorized about White guilt and shame, and whether these self-directed
emotions are appropriate responses to legacies of violent racial subjugation and persistent
White privilege in post-colonial and post-slavery contexts (Milazzo, 2016; Phyfer et al.,
2020; Sullivan, 2014; Vice, 2010). Yet a large body of empirical research in intergroup
settings point to collective guilt’s association with support for affirmative action policies and
efforts at restitution when experienced by members of historically advantaged groups (Doosje
et al., 1998; Imhoff et al., 2012; Iyer et al., 2003; Leach et al., 2006; Swim & Miller, 1999).
Shame’s scrutiny of the entire self typically renders individuals less able to connect with
others’ suffering (Eisenberg, 2000; Fourie, Stein, et al., 2017; see also Gausel & Leach,
2011), whereas guilt’s association with a sense of responsibility for harmful acts typically
motivates repair (Iyer et al., 2004). Because group-based emotions parallel individual-level
emotions (Salice & Montes Sánchez, 2016), collective guilt has also been associated more
strongly with tendencies to apologize and with outgroup reparation support over time than
collective shame (Brown & Cehajic-Clancy, 2008; Brown et al., 2008).
Empathy reflects the natural capacity to (i) understand and (ii) resonate with another’s
emotional state, coupled with the (iii) desire to contribute to their well-being (Decety et al.,
2016). Because these empathy phenomena are dissociable in terms of subjective experience,
neural substrates, and behavioral outcomes, they should be distinguished (Decety & Yoder,
2016). The present research involved the latter aspect, empathic concern, which includes
other-oriented feelings of compassion or sympathy for someone suffering (Batson et al.,
2015). Unlike personal distress, which is an egoistic motivation to reduce personal aversive
feelings, empathic concern is associated with altruistic motivation and resource-sharing to
reduce others’ suffering (Batson et al., 1987).
While empathic concern thus motivates prosocial behavior, various social and
psychological factors along with situational motivations influence the extent to which, and
towards whom, empathic concern is deployed (Bruneau et al., 2017; Cameron et al., 2016;
Fourie, Subramoney, et al., 2017; Zaki, 2014). Moreover, in contexts of asymmetric power
dynamics, where advantaged group members benefit from current status arrangements,
empathic concern might be insufficient to produce prosocial change (Dixon, Tropp, et al.,
2010; Saguy & Kteily, 2014). In the absence of equitable goals and norms, empathic concern
in such contexts might serve to mask structural inequality and maintain the status quo (Zaki
& Cikara, 2015). Indeed, the stereotype content model predicts that people respond to social
outgroups high in warmth but low in perceived competence or status with paternalistic
positivity/pity that legitimizes inequality (Fiske et al., 2007; Fiske et al., 2016).
Taken together, here we examined whether the unprecedented Covid-19 hard lockdown
conditions fostered greater acknowledgment of continuing structural racism while raising
White South Africans’ recognition of our implication and shared ethical responsibility for
redress as beneficiaries of apartheid injustices (Leach et al., 2013; Rothberg, 2019). We
tested the following specific hypotheses.
First, we hypothesized that a nationally representative sample of White South Africans
would express greater empathic concern than self-incriminating guilt/shame in response to
Black hardship during the 2020 Covid-19 hard lockdown. We had no specific predictions for
personal distress, anger, and fear, which we included for comparison purposes.
Second, we predicted that greater acknowledgment of socioeconomic inequality as
ingroup privilege during the pandemic would be associated with greater guilt and awareness
of historical White privilege (Leach et al., 2002; Powell et al., 2005). Third, we predicted that
heightened guilt (vs. empathic concern) and greater perceived historical privilege would
predict progressive perceptual (perceived anti-Black structural racism), behavioral (support
for redress), and motivational (social justice) intergroup outcomes, but would be unassociated
with right-wing populist attitudes and unsustainable charity. While existing work
investigating both guilt and empathic concern’s reparative tendencies are inconclusive (Harth
et al., 2008; Iyer et al., 2003), we argued that guilt’s association with ingroup responsibility
for illegitimate advantage would be more consequential in generating motivational and actual
support for restitution than empathic concern (Cehajic-Clancy et al., 2016). Moreover,
empathic concern in response to low-status outgroups might be confounded by pity (Fiske et
al., 2007). We explored age as another predictor of interest, given that our sample spanned
more than one generation.
Finally, in line with the hypothesis that the pandemic served as a natural intervention,
we predicted that support for redress and perceptions of anti-Black structural racism would be
greater in the direct aftermath of the 2020 Covid-19 hard lockdown compared to similar data
collected in 2018. Because of a growing sense of victimhood amongst the South African
White minority (Van Zyl-Hermann, 2018), we also examined participants’ beliefs about
racism directed towards the ingroup (‘anti-White racism’) (Saguy et al., 2013). Utilizing
measures of both perceived anti-Black and anti-White racism provides a more accurate
reflection of perceived racialized realities and differs from most WEIRD research (Rad et al.,
2018) examining only anti-Black racism.
Methods
Participants
2020 Covid-19 Pandemic. An a priori power analysis using G*Power 3.1 (Faul et al.,
2007) indicated that 395 participants would be sufficient to detect a small effect (f = .02) at
an alpha of .05 with 80% power. We collected data from a national sample of 461 White
South Africans between 12 June and 12 July 2020, the direct aftermath of the South African
Covid-19 hard lockdown (level 5). Of these participants, we excluded 61 who failed to
respond correctly to an attention check question, leaving 400 participants (age range: 18 to 71
years, M = 34.90, SD = 11.57; 40% male). The median income bracket of this sample was
age
ZAR11,000-ZAR17,999 per month, 86% identified as Christian, and 62% obtained some
tertiary education.
2018 Pre-pandemic. To determine whether (i) perceptions of racism and (ii) support
for redress were greater during the pandemic than before, we compared these variables to
similar data collected from a national sample of 195 White South Africans during August
2018 (age range: 20 to 74 years, M = 39.62, SD = 12.12, 23% male). The median income
age
bracket of this sample was ZAR11,000-ZAR17,999 per month, and 54% obtained some
tertiary education. Data was collected as part of a larger study that included additional
measures less relevant to the present research question. Part of this study is reported in Fourie
and Moore-Berg (2021).
The same panel service was employed to collect both data sets and 84 respondents
(21%) completed both surveys. Additional details on sampling can be found in the online
Supplementary Material. All participants provided informed consent prior to participation.
Procedure and Stimuli
Participants completed online surveys specific to the South African context. Each
survey stipulated that we do not endorse the legitimacy of artificial, historically imposed,
racial categories, but that we accept the resultant realities of racialized identities, which
continue to provide a context for people’s lived experiences. We furthermore indicated that,
unless specified otherwise, the word ‘Black’ was used inclusively, referring to all persons of
color who were disempowered during apartheid.
2020 Covid-19 Pandemic Measures
Affective Responses to the Pandemic. These items captured affective responses to the
plight of Black individuals during the Covid-19 pandemic. Participants were asked “When
considering the hardships of Black South Africans, what kinds of feelings did the current
pandemic evoke for you?” for each of 6 different emotions on slider scales from 1 (not at all)
to 9 (very much). Emotion items included compassion (empathic concern), guilt, shame,
anger, fear, and personal distress. Empathic concern was operationalized as compassion to
ensure that participants understood its meaning (Fourie et al., 2019; Zaki & Cikara, 2015).
Covid-19 Observations of Inequality. Seven questions probed participants’
observations regarding socioeconomic inequality and the experiences of a relatively
privileged White minority compared to a largely disadvantaged Black majority during the
Covid-19 pandemic (see Supplementary Material). For example, participants were asked
whether they agree with statements such as “During the current COVID-19 hard lockdown,
White people had better access to medical facilities and essential services than Black people”
and “Black people were more dependent on the distribution of food parcels than White
people” on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 9 (very much) (α = .93). Higher scores
indicated greater acknowledgement of socioeconomic inequality.
Perceptions of Historical Privilege. Five questions assessed participants’ current
awareness of being White and privileged, thus having benefited historically from apartheid
injustices (see Supplementary Material). In this way we assessed perceptions of implication
arising from gross human rights abuses, specifically that of being a beneficiary (Rothberg,
2019). For example, participants were asked to indicate whether they agreed with statements
such as “I have benefitted economically from apartheid: The inheritance I receive (will
receive) from my parents is based on pre-1994 benefits” and “My children will continue to
benefit economically from the injustices of apartheid” on a scale ranging from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) (α = .76).
Perceptions of Racism. To assess perceptions of interpersonal and structural racism,
we asked participants “How much did/does each form of racism affect Black African people
in South Africa” (anti-Black racism) at two time points: during apartheid and today, and
“How much does each form of racism affect White people today” (anti-White racism), on
continuous sliders ranging from 1 (not at all) to 100 (very much) (adapted from Rucker et al.,
2019). To ensure that participants understood the distinction between these terms,
interpersonal racism was defined as “negative attitudes and discriminatory behaviors by
individuals towards members of specific racial groups,” whereas structural racism was
defined as “institutional practices and structural factors (e.g., laws, policies) that routinely
disadvantage specific racial groups.”
While we acknowledge that the term racism should be reserved for race-based
oppression along historically institutionalized power dimensions, we examined perceptions of
anti-White racism to gain a better understanding of White participants’ perceptions of feeling
oppressed (i.e., victimhood).
Support for Redress (behavior). To assess support towards real-world outcomes that
will have a positive impact on historically marginalized individuals and communities in
South Africa, participants were given the opportunity to sign five purportedly real petitions
urging government to implement progressive policies. These included support towards a
wealth tax for the 10% wealthiest citizens, Black Economic Empowerment legislation,
Affirmative Action legislation, free tertiary education for previously disadvantaged students,
and land expropriation policies (Dixon, Durrheim, et al., 2010) (see Supplementary Material).
For each petition, participants indicated whether they wanted to add their signature to the
petition (coded as 1), to a counter-petition (coded as -1), or to neither (coded as 0) (α = .84).
Using these codes, we created an average index of support for redress for each participant.
Prosocial Motivation. Participants were asked to indicate whether they have contributed
personally towards relief measures for Black South Africans during the Covid-19 lockdown in
terms of time or money (yes or no). Those who responded affirmatively were then asked to
indicate what motivated their prosocial behavior on continuous sliders ranging from 1 (not at
all) to 100 (very much) (see Supplementary Material). Three items assessed charity motivation,
for example, “It is my calling as a good person to assist the most vulnerable in society” (α =
.58), and three items assessed social justice motivation, or a sense of moral responsibility for
redress, for example, “I have helped because the unequal impact of the pandemic is largely
shaped by our apartheid history” (α = .84).
Right-wing Attitudes. To assess right-wing attitudes, participants were asked to indicate
their agreement with six questions tapping into populist narratives presented in the media
during the 2020 pandemic (see Supplementary Material). For example, participants were asked
to indicate their agreement with statements such as “The government has abused Covid-19 to
boost their own racist agenda and control White people”, and “During the pandemic, it has once
again been up to predominantly White institutions (e.g., White churches, AfriForum) to
alleviate the distress of the poor”, on slider scales ranging from 1 (not at all) to 9 (very much) (α
= .85).
2018 Pre-pandemic Measures
Perceptions of Racism. The 2018 instrument used to assess participants’ perceptions
about the impact of interpersonal and structural forms of racism against Black people (during
apartheid and today) and against White people (today) was the same as that used during the
2020 Covid-19 pandemic. These data are reported in Fourie and Moore-Berg (2021).
Support for Redress (behavior). The 2018 petition instrument assessed
support/opposition towards the same five measures of redress used in the 2020 Covid-19
pandemic survey. Because the petitions were framed inversely, i.e., whether participants
supported policies that will have a negative impact on Black people, data from these petitions
were first reverse scored, and then averaged to create an index of support for redress (see
Supplementary Material).
Results
2020 Covid-19 Pandemic Data
To test our first hypothesis, we conducted a repeated-measures ANOVA on the emotion
items, which indicated that there were significant differences in the strength of reported
ε 3
emotions, F(4.09, 1633.68) = 70.42, p < .001, = .15, = .82. Confirming our hypothesis,
𝑝𝑝
planned contrasts indicated that empathic concern (M = 6.34, SD = 2.33) was rated as
significantly higher than all other emotions (ps < .001, rs > .37). Guilt (M = 4.35, SD = 2.54)
was rated as significantly lower than all emotions (ps < .01, rs > .15), except shame (M =
4.08, SD = 2.52), which was rated the lowest (p = .001, r = .16). Interestingly, empathic
concern was positively associated with age (r = .14, p = .004), whereas guilt was negatively
associated with age (r = -.16, p = .001). No other emotions were significantly associated with
age.
Next, we examined the hypothesis that observations of socioeconomic inequality, as it
unfolded during the Covid-19 lockdown, would be associated with a heightened awareness of
correlations and descriptive statistics). As expected, greater acknowledgment of
socioeconomic inequality during the pandemic was strongly associated with an awareness of
historical privilege, as well as with guilt and shame (rs > .45, ps < .001). Covid-19
observations of inequality was also positively, but modestly, associated with empathic
concern and anger (rs > .17, ps < .01), and marginally with fear and personal distress (ps >
.02). The difference in strength of correlations between Covid-19 observations of inequality
and guilt, and between Covid-19 observations of inequality and empathic concern, was
significant, Steiger’s z = 4.99, p < .001.
To gain insight into how well perceived historical privilege and affective responses
(particularly guilt and empathic concern) during the pandemic predicted outcome measures,
we performed regression analyses. Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations of these
Results of these analyses consistently showed the impact of greater perceived historical
privilege and greater guilt, which were also positively associated (r = .28, p < .001), in
predicting higher responses on progressive outcome measures: perceptions of anti-Black
structural (and interpersonal) racism today (βs > .28, ps < .001), support for redress (βs > .25,
ps < .001), and social justice motivation (βs > .32, ps < .001). Perceived historical privilege
and guilt furthermore predicted reduced right-wing attitudes (βs > -.16, ps < .002) and
reduced perceptions of anti-White structural (and interpersonal) racism (βs > -.18, ps < .01).
These results could not be explained by shame, as guilt contributed unique variance even
Anger was related most significantly to greater right-wing attitudes and increased
perceptions of anti-White structural (and interpersonal) racism (βs > .24, ps < .001), which
suggests that it stemmed from a reactionary focus on perceived ingroup disadvantage, rather
than on systemic outgroup injustices during the pandemic (Leach et al., 2006). Adding age as
an additional predictor of interest did not change existing results, but showed that younger
age was associated significantly with more progressive outcomes: greater perceptions of anti-
Black structural racism and greater support for redress (βs > -.12, ps < .01), as well as reduced
right-wing attitudes and reduced perceptions of anti-White structural racism (βs > .12, ps =
Of significance, is that empathic concern was neither associated with perceived
historical privilege (r = .04, p = .46), nor predicted any progressive outcome measures
significantly (ps > .10). Instead, empathic concern significantly predicted only charity
motivation ( = .16, p = .02). It should be noted that a charity motivation was dominant in the
199 participants who indicated that they have contributed towards emergency relief: only
33% agreed strongly with a social justice motivation for giving, while 63% agreed strongly
Although guilt was thus not experienced most prominently (cf. Swim & Miller, 1999),
together with historical privilege, it was most strongly associated with observations of
socioeconomic inequality during the pandemic, and the only affective response significantly
predicting progressive perceptual, behavioral, and motivational outcome measures.
Comparison with 2018 Pre-pandemic Data
To test our final hypothesis, we compared (i) perceptions of racism today and (ii)
support for redress following the 2020 Covid-19 lockdown to similar data collected during
2018. While these samples were only partially matched, observing significant progressive
changes would provide at least partial support for our hypothesis that the pandemic served as
a natural intervention.
As in 2018, participants perceived interpersonal racism today (M = 56.49, SD = 30.29)
to have a greater impact than structural racism today (M = 53.48, SD = 31.59) on Black
people during the 2020 Covid-19 pandemic, t(397) = 2.84, p = .005, d = .10. In stark contrast
to the 2018 sample, however, where perceptions of anti-White racism today were exceedingly
high, participants did not perceive significant differences in either structural or interpersonal
racism experienced by Black and White people today during the pandemic, ts < 1.8, ps > .15,
by Black people today were significantly higher during the pandemic than in 2018 (anti-
Black structural racism M = 15.80, anti-Black interpersonal racism M = 9.75, ts > 3.67,
diff diff
ps < .001, ds > .30), whereas perceptions of anti-White structural and interpersonal racism
during the pandemic were significantly lower than in 2018 (anti-White structural racism M
diff
= -18.02, anti-White interpersonal racism M = -17.37, ts > 6.60, ps < .001, ds > .54). White
diff
participants following the 2020 Covid-19 lockdown thus showed greater acknowledgment of
structural and interpersonal racism experienced by Black people today, coupled with reduced
perceptions of anti-White structural and interpersonal racism today, than those in 2018. These
changes suggest that notions of White people as a racially oppressed minority (i.e., White
victimhood) in South Africa were less salient immediately following the 2020 Covid-19
lockdown.
Regarding support for redress, we also compared petition data for the 2020 sample to
that obtained in 2018. Chi-square analysis indicated that support for redress for each of the
five petitions was much more robust following the 2020 Covid-19 lockdown than during
significantly greater during the pandemic than in 2018 (Mann-Whitney U = 57665.50, p <
support economic policies of redress in the immediate aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic
than towards the end of 2018.
Discussion
The present research examined whether White South Africans’ perceptions of
continuing structural injustice and support for redress were encouraged through greater
awareness of historical privilege and guilt experienced during the Covid-19 pandemic. Our
data suggest that the pandemic and its societal impact served as a natural intervention: not
only were observations of socioeconomic inequality during the pandemic associated strongly
with perceived historical privilege and with guilt, but White acknowledgment of structural
racism and support for economic redress were also greater in the immediate aftermath of hard
lockdown compared to 2018. Although empathic concern for Black hardship was evoked
most saliently, guilt together with perceived historical privilege consistently predicted greater
progressive outcomes (perceived anti-Black structural racism, support for policies of redress,
and social justice motivation), and reduced ultra-conservative perspectives (right-wing
attitudes and perceptions of anti-White racism). By contrast, empathic concern predicted only
charity motivation. These findings raise several questions for discussion and future research.
First, what was it about the pandemic that potentially raised awareness of racialized
privilege and support for redress? We believe the unprecedented conditions of lockdown,
which highlighted stark material discrepancies, provided a visceral confrontation with
continuing structural racism and a unique opportunity to reflect on unearned privileges based
on generations of racial discrimination. The pandemic thus served to bring the past into the
present, which likely contributed significantly towards eliciting collective self-critical feelings
of guilt (Leach et al., 2013). The fact that the pandemic was a ‘natural’ intervention is also
significant. In contrast to political intergroup interventions, where a focus on gross human
rights violations is explicit (Fourie et al., 2013), the pandemic’s exposure of unjust racialized
inequalities was more indirect, less threatening, allowing more room for self-critical group-
based emotions to surface. The South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission process,
for example, tended to conflate guilt with a legalistic, individualistic understanding of
‘criminal guilt’, which arguably undermined more collective feelings of wrongdoing (Swart,
2017; Verwoerd, 1999).
Second, how can we understand younger age’s association with heightened guilt, more
progressive outcomes, reduced right-wing attitudes, and reduced perceptions of anti-White
racism? These results follow an international trend, where the self-critical engagement with
nd rd
past immoral actions emerge more strongly amongst 2 and 3 post-war generations
(Branscombe & Doosje, 2004). Because younger White South Africans have no causal
responsibility for apartheid atrocities and its legacies as members of ‘perpetrator’ or
‘participant’ generations (Govier & Verwoerd, 2011), the acceptance of being implicated
beneficiaries is less threatening legally, morally, and emotionally (Rothberg, 2019). Hence,
they are potentially more likely to admit feelings of guilt and provide restitution than older
generations. Their group-identification might also be less cemented than pre-1994
generations, who were conditioned by a militarised, sanctified ‘anti-Communist’ Whiteness
(Verwoerd & Edlmann, 2021). Some evidence suggests that a weaker group-identification
enables stronger guilt and motivation for repair (Doosje et al., 2006; Powell et al., 2005).
Third, why was empathic concern and charity motivation evoked most saliently and
why is this so problematic in the South African context? Faced with vivid, distressing, media
images of Black people queuing for food, it is much easier to interpret large-scale hunger as a
humanitarian crisis and respond with compassion and potentially short-lived (remote) help
(Hunt et al., 2006; Västfjäll et al., 2014), which do not imply responsibility (Meerholz et al.,
2019), than to face the dysphoria of guilt and moral implication in apartheid as crime against
humanity (Xu et al., 2011). Indeed, empathic concern in response to Black hardship was
entirely unrelated to perceived historical privilege in our sample. Moreover, charity
strengthens a positive self-image as a ‘good person’ and, especially, a ‘good White’ (Jones,
2004). While we accept that in a crisis charity is better than indifference, the racialized nature
of this charity, especially as Christian missionary outreaches, encourages a paternalistic
‘saviour mentality’ protecting Whiteness (Bowers du Toit & Nkomo, 2014).
The above interpretation helps to explain empathic concern’s weak association with
outcome measures that will contribute to structural reform. In addition, we are drawn to the
possibility that participants’ empathic concern responses more accurately reflected pity
towards impoverished Black South Africans, a related but conceptually distinct construct
(Boleyn-Fitzgerald, 2003). People typically feel worse when misfortunes befall pitied targets
(social outgroups high in social warmth but low in status) than ingroup targets (Cikara &
Fiske, 2011). Moreover, pitied targets are often the recipients of active helping (e.g., charity),
but also passive harm (e.g., neglect) (Fiske et al., 2007). To the extent that charity-as-White-
pity contributes to the perpetuation of systemic racism, more than passive harm is at stake,
however.
Fourth, we need to examine critically the data’s suggestion that White guilt holds
promise in contributing to structural reform. Criticisms against the expression of White guilt
include its association with ‘virtue signalling’ (Phyfer et al., 2020) and selfish relief from
incriminatory feelings (Batson, 1998; Iyer et al., 2003), rather than with genuine other-
directed behaviors to transform social injustices. While public displays of guilt may certainly
be unproductive, we believe the present anonymous, private conditions of data collection
mitigated against the pitfalls of White guilt becoming a public performance, placing undue
pressure on Black people to respond (typically through forgiveness). We also agree that an
exclusive focus on White guilt as an individual emotional state is insufficient to disrupt the
structural systems that sustain and perpetuate racial inequality (Milazzo, 2016; Moore, 2019).
Nevertheless, we are encouraged that our data is supported by substantial previous
research observing that advantaged groups’ collective experiences of guilt provide the
impetus for social redress, as it “marks what concerns us, still, in spite of all rationalization or
denial” (Cehajic-Clancy et al., 2016; Prade-Weiss, 2020, p. 8; Vollhardt & Sinayobye Twali,
2016). Indeed, for those participants who contributed towards relief measures during the
pandemic, feelings of guilt strongly predicted a social justice, rather than a charity motivation
for helping. Guilt in this context might therefore be understood as emanating not only from
the collective misdeeds of group members in the past, but also from the acceptance of and
continuous enjoyment of unearned material benefits in the present, especially during
lockdown.
Finally, we concur that by itself, guilt is either too fleeting and infrequent (Iyer et al.,
2004; Leach et al., 2013), or too ruminative and maladaptive when chronic self-blame focuses
attention inward (Harder, 1995), to bring about lasting change. With the easing of lockdown
conditions, evidence emerged that neither increased empathic concern and charity, nor
changes in political awareness and historical responsibility associated with guilt, are likely to
be sustained (Hamann, 2020). We contend that for genuine empathic concern and guilt to
become ‘unsettling’ beyond the immediate crisis (Krondorfer, 2015), these other-oriented and
self-critical feelings need to be combined with the deliberate cultivation of capacities through
intrapersonal/intergroup relational processes within contexts supporting equitable goals. Only
then will their motivational push translate into sustainable commitments to promote social
justice.
Declarations
Funding. This work was supported by a grant MF received for Covid-19 related research
from the Vice-Rector (RIPS) fund, Stellenbosch University.
Conflicts of interest. On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no
conflict of interest.
Ethics approval. This research has been approved by the University of Stellenbosch’s
Humanities Research Ethics Committee and the research was performed to ethical standards
as laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki.
Consent to participate. All participants provided informed consent to take part in this
research.
Consent for publication. All participants provided consent to publish the findings of this
research.
Availability of data and material. The data that support the findings of this study are openly
Code availability. Not applicable.
Author’s contributions. M.M.F. and W.J.V. conceptualized the research. M.M.F.
collected and analyzed all data and wrote and prepared the main manuscript text (including
figures). W.J.V. assisted with data interpretation and co-wrote the Discussion. Both
authors approved the submitted version of the manuscript.