Related To Indonesian Learning With The Environment
Aulia Putri Nabila/ 19016077
auliaputrinabila194@gmail.com
Environmentally based learning is learning that emphasizes the environment as a medium
or learning resource. This environmental-based learning is an implementation of environmental
education that is done formally. According to Nkwetisma (in Ramadhan et al, 2019)
environmental education is an effort made consciously to teach and attract human attention about
how the natural environment functions and how humans can manage and protect it. The use of
the environment as a source of learning is one of the ways teachers to provide understanding to
students about events that occur in the field Thus, it can be conveyed that between humans and
the environment there is basically a reciprocal relationship. Humans affect their environment,
and instead humans are influenced by their environment and are inseparable from each other.
(Guci et al, 2018).
According to Alagoz and Akman (in Sukma et al, 2020) teachers are an important factor
in realizing or integrating effective environmental education. That is, a teacher must have the
necessary knowledge and readiness about the environment with the aim of developing the
attitude and ability of students to understand, criticize, and participate rationally in the teaching-
learning process in the classroom. Zulhafizh and Ramadhan (2013) said students' learning
attitudes will affect each learning process towards a subject, especially Indonesian.
In Indonesian learning activities, it can be done by inviting students to be literate about
environmental issues that are developing today. Agree with that, according to Mutisya and
Barker (in Sukma et al, 2020) before designing an effective environmental learning program, it is
necessary to investigate variables that are important in the development of environmental
literacy. Literacy is the basis in the formation of multi-educated personalities (Indriyani et al,
2019). Sukma et al (2017) assert that literacy is very important for students because skills in
literacy have a significant influence for students in obtaining the desired learning success.
Furthermore, Harras (in Sukma et al, 2020) stated that literacy awareness is important to develop
because it can make students become intelligent in looking at their life problems. In today's
modern era media literacy is one of the basic skills that has become a central and inseparable part
of life (Ramadhan et al, 2019). Media literacy is the ability to assess meaning in each type of
message, organize meaning and communicate that information into various forms of media.
In connection with the above discussion, Kharade and Peese (in Ramadan et al, 2018)
revealed that language learning is a complex process by connecting the intellectual, social and
emotional dimensions. Dania and Sukma (2020) explained that the learning process is a process
of interaction between learners and learning resources in a learning environment. In the learning
process teachers and learners strive to share and process information so that the knowledge
provided is useful in students characterized by changes in individual behavior that are better.
Therefore, teachers must be able to create an effective and efficient learning process to achieve
all the desired efforts of the learning process. Sofiyani et al (2019) said fun learning is a learning
atmosphere that can focus students' attention fully while studying so that the (time on task) is
high. Furthermore, Akçali and Demircioğlu (in Sukma et al, 2020) assert that teachers are the
most influential in educating learners to become future leaders in environmental advocacy.
According to Ramadhan et al (2019) individuals should be encouraged not to see the
environment as something to be exploited, but rather as a valuable asset worthy of protection for
human survival. This is because the important role of environmental education is to develop
individuals to have scientific knowledge about environmental issues and high environmental
concerns (Sukma et al, 2020). Thus, environmental education is expected to help students rethink
the correlation between humans and the environment, ranging from understanding their
environment, being aware of environmental issues and considering environmental issues related
to their lives (Ramadhan et al, 2019).
Based on the problems that have been spelled out, the author has conducted research on
"The Link of learning Indonesian with the environment". In this case the author distributes
questionnaires to students from various majors, semesters, and universities. A total of 30
respondents participated in the filling of the questionnaire, such as from Padang State University,
Jakarta State University, Andalas University, Riau University, Trisakti University, Open
University, Walisongo State Islamic University, STIMLOG, Batam State Polytechnic, and Riau
Islands University. This research was conducted by providing 10 statements through google form
that must be filled out by respondents.
The results that the authors got from this study are as follows. The first statement,
"Environmental material fosters a caring soul for students in school". 60% of respondents agreed
and 40% of respondents strongly agreed. The second statement, "learning Indonesian is the most
influential learning with the environment". Based on the statement, 50% of respondents agreed,
30% of respondents strongly agreed, and 20% of respondents disagreed. The third statement,
"Teachers use the environment around the school as a support for Indonesian learning". 60% of
respondents agreed and 40% of respondents strongly agreed. The fourth statement, "Learning
Indonesian as an effort to build student intelligence". From the statement submitted, it turned out
that 50% of respondents agreed, 43.3% of respondents expressed great agreement, and 6.7% of
respondents expressed disapproval. Fifth statement, "A good environment is a good supporting
aspect in Indonesian learning". 40% of respondents agreed and 60% of respondents strongly
agreed. The sixth statement, "Learning about environmental material in a langusng or not
langusng can develop the mindset of learners". A total of 66.7% of respondents said they agreed,
30% of respondents strongly agreed, and 3.3% of respondents disagreed. The seventh statement,
"Learning Indonesian can improve the communication skills of learners, both in the school and
community environment". A total of 46.7% of respondents agreed and 53.3% of respondents
strongly agreed. The eighth statement, "The teacher can associate the texts in the learning
Indonesian with the example of the environment". 60% of respondents agreed and 40% of
respondents strongly agreed. The ninth statement, "Learning Indonesian based on the
environment can increase the creativity of learners". A total of 56.7% of respondents said they
agreed, 40% of respondents strongly agreed, and 3.3% of respondents disagreed. The tenth
statement, "Learning is more interesting when it comes to the environment". Fifty percent of
respondents agreed, 43.3 percent of respondents strongly agreed, and 6.7 percent of respondents
disagreed.
From the results of filling the questionnaire that has been done, the author can conclude
environmental-based learning, especially Indonesian is an important aspect that must be taught
to learners in the learning-teaching process in the classroom. This is because with learning like
this it is expected that learners are able to grow awareness of the need to maintain the
environment. Not only that, with the utilization of material about the environment in learning
Indonesian it is expected that learners can create a sense of care and develop their mindset in a
better direction. Because, a good environment is a good supporting aspect in learning.
DAFTAR PUSTAKA
Dania, R., & Sukma, E. (2020). Peningkatan Proses Pembelajaran Tematik Terpadu
Menggunakan Model Cooperative Learning Tipe Think Pair Share di Sekolah
Dasar. Jurnal Pendidikan Tambusai, 4(3), 2624-2636.
Guci, I., Syahrul, R., & Nursaid, N. (2018). Korelasi Penguasaan Kosakata Bidang Lingkungan
Hidup Dengan Menulis Karangan Argumentasi Tentang Lingkungan Hidup. Jurnal
Pendidikan Bahasa dan Sastra Indonesia, 5(2), 169-174.
Indriyani, V., Zaim, M., Atmazaki, A., & Ramadhan, S. (2019). Literasi baca tulis dan inovasi
kurikulum bahasa. KEMBARA: Jurnal Keilmuan Bahasa, Sastra, dan Pengajarannya (e-
Journal), 5(1), 108-118.
Ramadhan, S., Elfia Sukma, dan Vivi Indriyani. (2019). Environmental Education and Disaster
Mitigation Through Language Learning. IOP Conference Series: Earth and
Environmental Science, 314, p. 1-9.
Ramadhan, S., Sukma, E., & Indriyani, V. (2019). Teacher competence in utilizing digital media
literacy in education. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1339, No. 1, p.
012111). IOP Publishing.
Ramadhan, S., Asri, Y., & Indriyani, V. (2018). Learning module design writing argumentative
text based problem-based learning.
Sukma, E., Ramadhan, S., & Indriyani, V. (2020). Integration of environmental education in
elementary schools. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1481, No. 1, p.
012136). IOP Publishing.
Sukma, E., Mahjuddin, R., & Amelia, R. (2017). Literacy Media Development in Improving
Reading and Writing Skill of Early Class Students in Elementary School Padang Utara
Padang. In 9th International Conference for Science Educators and Teachers (ICSET
2017) (pp. 145-150). Atlantis Press.
Sukma, E., Indrawati, T., & Suriani, A. (2020). Penggunaan Media Literasi Kelas Awal di
Sekolah Dasar. Jurnal Inovasi Pendidikan dan Pembelajaran Sekolah Dasar, 3(2), 103-
111.
Syofiani, M., Zaim, S., Ramadhan, A., Agustina. (2019). Peningkatan Keterampilan Berbahasa
Siswa Melalui Pemanfaatan Media Teka-teki Silang: Menciptakan Kelas yang
Menyenangkan. Ta'dib, 21 (2); 87-89.
Zulhafizh, A., & Syahrul, R. (2013). Kontribusi sikap dan motivasi belajar siswa terhadap hasil
belajar bahasa indonesia. Jurnal Bahasa, Sastra dan Pembelajaran, 1(2), 13-28.