Vicarious Ratings of Self vs. Other-directed Social Touch in Women with and
Recovered from Anorexia Nervosa
Ashleigh Bellard
1*
, Paula Trotter
, Francis McGlone
& Valentina Cazzato
School of Psychology, Faculty of Health, Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, UK
Correspondence to: Miss Ashleigh Bellard, School of Psychology, Faculty of Health,
Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, e: A.M.Bellard@2020.ljmu.ac.uk
Abstract
Anorexia Nervosa (AN) is an eating pathology characterized by restricted eating,
body image distortions and impaired socio-cognitive abilities. Altered responses to affective
touch − a pleasant interoceptive stimulus hypothesised to involve activation of the C-Tactile
(CT) system, may contribute to the aetiology and maintenance of this disorder. Here, we
investigated whether third-party social touch vicarious ratings of different body sites at CT-
optimal vs. non-CT optimal velocities differed in women with and recovered from AN
(RAN) and healthy controls (HCs). Thirty-five HCs, 27 AN and 29 RAN provided
pleasantness ratings for two different tasks designed to probe expectations of how touch is
perceived by self (self-directed touch) vs. others (other-directed touch). Findings revealed
that both clinical groups, compared to HCs, did not differ in their pleasantness ratings to
touch for another but when evaluating touch for self, both clinical groups rated CT-optimal
touch as less pleasant than HCs. These findings suggest that AN and RAN women
demonstrate an atypical vicarious pleasantness response to affective touch involving self, but
not others. Therefore, as atypical responses persist even after recovery, treatment
interventions should focus on overcoming an impairment in differentiating between self and
other affective touch experience, which could help prevent post-recovery relapsing.
Introduction
Anorexia Nervosa (AN) is an eating disorder typically characterised by body image
disturbances, including overestimations in body shape and size [1, 2, 3], atypical eating and
dieting behaviours, including maintaining an extremely low and unhealthy Body Mass Index
(BMI) [4]. Individuals with AN also show disturbances in interoceptive processing, which is
defined as the understanding of internal bodily states such as taste, hunger, stomach
distention, pain, heartbeat, and gut attention [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. They also abnormally interpret the
internal physiological condition of their body such as sensations of hunger and pain [10]. A
mismatch when combining information from internal and external bodily sensations may
contribute towards the aetiology of AN [9, 10, 11].
Prior investigations examining the link between interoceptive deficits and AN have
mainly concentrated on unrewarding interoceptive signalling, including pain (thermal),
neutral interoceptive signalling (heart rate), and interoceptive signals specific to the
symptoms of AN (hunger and taste), with only few studies focussing instead on rewarding
interoceptive stimuli, such as a gentle, caress-like affective touch [12, 13, 14, 15]. Affective
touch processing is hypothesised to be facilitated by activation of low-threshold
mechanoreceptive C-fibres, known as C-Tactile afferents (CTs) [16, 17, 18, 19]. CTs
optimally respond to gentle stroking in velocities ranging from 1-10cm/s [20], which is
generally perceived as pleasant and rewarding in neurotypical populations, with ~3cm/s being
perceived as most pleasant [16, 18, 20]. A plethora of investigations have highlighted that the
Insula Cortex, specifically the posterior and anterior and posterior regions, is activated when
an individual is experiencing affective touch to the hairy skin of the arm [21, 22, 23]. The
posterior Insula is also thought to be the centre for processing and evaluating the hedonic
properties of interoceptive cues, and receives information regarding internal bodily states,
thus contributing to interoceptive processing [24, 25]. Henceforth, affective touch might be
considered a sub-modality of interoception, supported by the Insula Cortex, which conveys
affective and affiliative aspects of social touch in agreement with the ‘Social Touch
Hypothesis’ [26, 27].
To the best of our knowledge, only four independent studies have provided so far
evidence for an impairment in the affective touch system in individuals with AN [12, 13, 14,
15, but also see Carey et al [28, 29] and Cazzato et al [30] for evidence on subthreshold EDs].
A seminal study by Crucianelli et al [14], reported that AN patients (restrictive-type)
perceived gentle skin stroking touch at CT-optimal velocities as less pleasant relative to
healthy controls, while there was no such difference for CT-suboptimal velocities, thus
suggesting that individuals with AN have abnormalities in the perception of the pleasantness
of CT-mediated, affective touch. These results were corroborated by a (brain imaging) study
by Davidovic et al. [13] which showed that at behavioural level, AN rated CT-optimal touch
as less pleasant than a group of matched HCs. On the other hand, neuroimaging results were
controversial. No differences in the activation of the Insula were observed when comparing
conditions of gentle touch and no tactile stimulation amongst the two groups of AN and HCs.
A further brain imaging study by Bischoff-Grethe and colleagues [12] assessed brain
correlates of anticipation and perception of gentle touch on the forearm and the palm and
specifically in individuals who have recovered from AN. The findings of this study show that
RAN did not rate the pleasantness of CT-touch as less pleasant than controls and that there
were not any CT-specific neuroimaging findings at the group level, thus not confirming the
findings of the previous two studies. Finally, a recent study by Crucianelli et al. [15] showed
that clinical groups of AN and RAN anticipated and rated delivered tactile stimuli as less
pleasant than HCs. However, the latter difference was not related to the CT optimality of the
stimulation. On the contrary, differences in the perception of CT-optimal touch were best
explained by individual differences in alexithymia and interoceptive sensibility. All these
studies offer an important theoretical advancement in the understanding of affective touch
experiences in disordered eating. Yet, the results are inconclusive and leave this research
question still unanswered. Furthermore, the studies above have only focused on directly
experienced touch (with touch delivered to the self mainly on the forearm and palm) thus,
neglecting the importance of investigating vicariously experienced touch.
In the general population, it has been reported that viewing others being touched
induces vicarious touch experiences, which is based on the recruitment of brain regions,
which originally were responsive to first-hand somatosensation, including the somatosensory
cortex, the parietal operculum and the insular cortex [31, 32, 33, 34]. Furthermore, we have
recently demonstrated that ratings of vicarious touch have the same relationship between
velocity and anticipated pleasantness as directly felt touch [35]. However, there are several
reasons to expect differences in ratings of vicariously experienced touch in the case of AN
and particularly when this is self- compared to when this is other-directed. Indeed,
interpreting the affective state of two persons exchanging interpersonal touch requires social
cognition, such as Theory of Mind (ToM). One important aspect of ToM is cognitive
st
perspective taking which is one’s capacity to compare state of self (1 person perspective)
rd
with another individual (3 person perspective), with both perspectives involving different
neural and cognitive processes [36, 37]. It is well known that anorexics have difficulties in
attributing mental states (intentions, feelings, beliefs) to others and in explaining and
predicting others' behaviour, which involves the decoding of affective stimuli [38, 39, 40, 41,
42, 43, 44]. Further, fMRI studies have revealed that even after recovery, anorexics have
reduced functioning in social and cognitive networks, compared to healthy controls, which
again can account for their difficulty in ToM perspective taking [38, 45]. Given that previous
studies have found reduced pleasantness in individuals with AN during real experience of
touch [13, 14, 15], and that observing touch activates touch experiences and corresponding
brain regions [46, 47], it is reasonable to expect that when anorexics are asked to rate the
perceived pleasantness of others receiving affective touch, they will use their own
experiences to interpret the feelings generated in another. In doing so, one might expect that
reduced pleasantness observed during real tactile experience should also extend to vicarious
responses to social touch, a hypothesis which has not been investigated yet, therefore leaving
an important gap in the literature of vicarious touch experience in AN.
The current study
With the present study we aimed to fill this gap by investigating whether third-party
vicarious ratings of social touch delivered at CT-optimal vs. CT non-optimal velocities differ
in women reporting current diagnoses of AN. Participants were shown a series of videos with
affective touch being delivered to various body sites of actors, after which participants
answered two questions: “How much would you like to be touched like that?” (self-directed
touch) and “How pleasant do you think that action was for the person being touched?” (other-
directed touch). We expected patients with AN to perceive vicarious self-directed tactile
stimuli as less pleasant than other-directed touch and compared to healthy controls.
Furthermore, we explored whether specific dimensions of body awareness and of social touch
experiences, may predict patients’ third-party vicarious pleasantness ratings of touch when
delivered to self, compared to when delivered to others [48]. Accordingly, we focused on the
‘Trusting’ subscale of the Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA)
[49] given that a previous work by Brown et al. [50] reported that lower trust in one’s body
signals was most robustly associated with ED psychopathology including higher restraint,
eating concern, weight and shape concern, and binge eating and purging symptoms.
Furthermore, a recent study confirmed that items from the MAIA Trusting subscale were the
most central in bridging interoceptive awareness and ED symptoms [51].
On the other hand, we focused on ‘Attitude to intimate touch’ of The Touch
Experiences and Attitudes Questionnaire (TEAQ) [52] because previous research reported
that AN patients experience intimate stimuli with lower valence and dominance than healthy
controls [53]. Furthermore, women suffering from disordered eating report difficulties
experiencing closeness with a partner and low levels of satisfaction in relationships [54], they
also express a fear of intimacy [55] and report avoidance of interpersonal relationships with
men [56]. Importantly, we also recruited recovered AN (RAN) individuals to examine
whether the differences in self- vs. other-directed third-party ratings hypothesized in AN as
explained above may also apply to recovered patients, in comparison to HCs. Indeed, by
testing women who have recovered from AN, it is possible to draw more solid conclusions
about whether any potential abnormality observed in processing tactile pleasure are a cause
or a consequence of starvation, thus ruling out the impact of malnutrition in the acute stages
of illness which can cause cognitive and emotional deficits per se.
In line with previous evidence of difficulties in attributing mental states (intentions,
feelings, beliefs) to others in both AN and RAN, it was hypothesized that both clinical groups
will provide lower pleasantness ratings for self- compared to other-directed touch. However,
given that results of a reduction in the perceived tactile pleasantness in terms of specificity to
CT-optimal stroking velocities are to date controversial, we did not make any specific
prediction with these regards. Finally, we hypothesized that scores obtained to the MAIA
Trusting and to the TEAQ Attitude to intimate touch scales would predict pleasantness
ratings for self-directed social touch, for both AN and RAN, but not for HCs.
Materials and Methods
Participants
A total sample of 91 female participants, assigned to three groups (Current Anorexics
vs. Remitted Anorexics vs. Healthy controls) based on self-reported Anorexia Nervosa
Diagnosis (Current AN diagnosis, previous AN diagnosis and no AN diagnosis) were
recruited for this online study. The total sample size was calculated based on the results of a
power analysis using G*Power 3.0.10 [57], which indicated that a minimum sample of 81
participants was needed to detect a medium effect (f = .25) with 95% power, using a Mixed
ANOVA with alpha at .05 (two tailed).
Only females were used in the current investigation, as females are typically more
sensitive to touch discrimination and respond more positively to touch than males [58], and
because the incidence of eating disorders is greater in women than men [59]. Twenty-seven
were current anorexics aged 18-47 (M= 25.56, SD= 6.95) and with a mean BMI of 17.58
female control participants (M = 27.20, SD = 8.81; M = 24.77, SD= 4.47), were recruited
age BMI
Participants for the healthy control group were recruited through external contacts, via
social media, the University SONA participant recruitment scheme and through those known
to the researchers. Healthy controls were eligible to take part if they self-reported no history
or current diagnosis of any psychiatric or neurological disorders (including eating disorders
and body dysmorphic disorder) when questioned. No other psychometric constraints were
applied because we wanted to recruit women who are representative of the non-eating
disordered female population, many of whom have concerns about body image [60].
Current and remitted AN were recruited by contacting eating disorder charities such
as the Beating Eating Disorders Organisation (BEAT) and MQ Mental Health Research, in
addition to contacting clinicians known to the researchers, who work directly with these
patient groups. Gatekeeper permission was granted to assist with the recruitment of
individuals with and recovered from AN. As well as this, patient groups were also recruited
through Anorexia support groups on social media. All patients were eligible if they had a
primary diagnosis of AN according to the DSM-5 [4]. Furthermore, we used scores obtained
from the Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q) which is a self-report version
of the Eating Disorder Examination (EDE) structured interview [61], as a screening
questionnaire for eating disordered behaviour.
All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision (individuals with contact
lenses or glasses were able to take part), were not pregnant, did not suffer from any skin
conditions such as eczema or any chronic pain conditions such as fibromyalgia. Eligibility for
all participants was checked through an online participant screening questionnaire. All
participants gave their implied informed consent to take part in the study and were debriefed
through the debrief sheet presented at the end of the study. Participants were offered
compensation for their time taking part. They were offered the chance to voluntarily enter
themselves into a prize draw, with two chances of winning a £25 Amazon voucher and level
4 BSc Psychology students were awarded with course credits. The study was carried out in
accordance with the Helsinki declaration of ethical standards. The study protocol was
approved by Liverpool John Moores University (LJMU)’s University Research Ethics
Committee (UREC, protocol: 20/NSP/025).
Measures
Self-report Questionnaires
Participant Screening
An initial set of seven screening questions were used to determine participants’
eligibility. The questionnaire asked participants to answer “true” or “false” to a series of
statements. These statements included: “I am 18 years old or over.”, “I am female.”, “I do not
suffer from any form of skin condition.”, “I do not suffer from any chronic pain condition.”,
“I am not pregnant.”, “I have normal or corrected to normal vision”. A final question asked
participants to confirm they had read the participant information sheet and they agreed to take
part in the study by clicking an “I agree” option. For the healthy control group only, an
additional question ascertained that they did not have a current or previous diagnosis of AN.
If a participant answered “false” to any of the statements, or did not agree to take part, an “if
then” function was applied, so that ineligible participants were directed to the end of the
survey, thanking them for their time in taking part.
To classify clinical populations into AN and RAN groups, patients were required to
answer to the following statements: ‘Please specify your current diagnosis of Anorexia
Nervosa’ with the options of identifying either: ‘Current diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa’,
‘Previous diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa’ or ‘No diagnosis/history of Anorexia Nervosa’.
For AN, this group was asked to specify how many years they have had a formal diagnosis,
and to declare any treatment they are currently undergoing, through answering the following
questions: ‘If you have a current diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa, for how many years have
you had this?’ and ‘Are you currently undergoing any treatment for Anorexia Nervosa (e.g.,
psychiatric treatments, SSRIs, tranquilizers, and or CBT)?’. The RAN group were asked to
identify the number of years they have been recovered from AN: ‘If you have a previous
diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa, for how many years have you been recovered?’. Questions
specific to both AN populations were not displayed to individuals with no AN diagnosis.
Demographics Questionnaire
The demographic information taken from participants included their age, gender,
biological sex, ethnicity, relationship status and education level. Participants were also asked
to state their height (cm/ft) and weight (Kg/lbs) which was used to calculate their BMI.
Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q)
The Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q) [61] consists of 28 items,
which asked participants to self-report any eating disorder symptoms they may have
experienced over the last 4 weeks. This questionnaire comprised of four subscales: Restraint,
Eating Concern, Weight Concern and Shape Concern. Participants responded to items using a
7-point Likert scale, for the first 12 questions using a scale of 0= No Days, 6= Every day.
Items for these questions included: “Have you had a definite desire to have a totally flat
stomach?” and “Have you had a definite fear that you might gain weight?”. For the next 6
questions participants had to state the number of days (up to 28 days) that each statement
corresponded to, statements included: “Over the past 28 days, how many times have you
eaten what other people would regard as an usually large amount of food (given the
circumstances)?” and Over the past 28 days, how many times have you made yourself sick
(vomit) as a means of controlling your shape or weight?”. For the next 6 questions, the scale
used ranged from 0= Not at all to 6= Markedly, items for these questions included “Has your
weight influenced how you think about (judge) yourself as a person?” and “How dissatisfied
have you been with your shape?”. The final 4 questions asked participants to self-report their
current weight, height, if they have missed any menstrual periods and how many and if they
are taking the pill. A sum of scores from all four subscales gave an indication of the severity
of eating disorder symptoms. This questionnaire has good internal consistency in clinical
populations, with Cronbach α= 0.70-0.83 and in healthy populations. with Cronbach α=0.78-
0.93 [62, 63]. Individual subscales have also shown to have good internal consistency:
Restraint (Cronbach α=0.70–0.85), Eating Concern (Cronbach α=0.73–0.86), Shape Concern
(Cronbach α=0.83–0.93), and Weight Concern (Cronbach α=0.72–0.89) [64] This
questionnaire was administered to assess eating disorder diagnosis and symptom severity.
Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness Questionnaire
The Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA) [49] is a 32‐
item questionnaire which was administered to investigate eight dimensions of interoceptive
bodily awareness: Noticing (4 items), Not Distracting (3 items), Not Worrying (3 items),
Attention Regulation (7 items), Emotional Awareness (5 items), Self-regulation (4 items),
Body Listening (3 items) and Trusting (3 items). Items were answered using a 6-point Likert
scale ranging from 0 = Never to 5 = Always. Questions included: “When I am tense I notice
where the tension is located in my body.” and “I notice when I am uncomfortable in my
body”. Each individual dimension is scored by the average of scores from questions
corresponding to that subscale, with some questions being reversed scored. This
questionnaire is a reliable measure, as it has been previously used in research measuring
interoceptive awareness in both healthy [49] and with an eating disorder population [50]. The
MAIA questionnaire was found to have good internal consistency, with Cronbach α = .90
[65]. For this investigation, we were particularly interested on the MAIA Trusting subscale
because previous studies by Brown and colleagues [50, 51] reported that this subscale is the
most central in bridging interoceptive awareness and ED symptoms.
Touch Experiences and Attitudes Questionnaire
The Touch Experiences and Attitudes Questionnaire (TEAQ) [52] is a 57-item
questionnaire which was administered to examine current experiences of positive touch and
positive experience of touch during childhood, as well as an individual’s attitude towards
positive touch. Questions were answered using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from
1 = “Disagree strongly”, 2 = “Disagree a little”, 3 = “Neither agree nor disagree”, 4 = “Agree a
little”, 5 = “Agree strongly”. Questions included: “I dislike people being very physically
affectionate towards me.” and “There was a lot of physical affection during my childhood.” A
mean score was calculated for each of the six subscales; friends and family touch (FFT) (11
items), current intimate touch (CIT) (14 items), childhood touch (ChT) (9 items), attitude to
self-care (ASC) (5 items), attitude to intimate touch (AIT) (13 items) and attitude to
unfamiliar touch (AUT) (5 items), with negatively worded questions reversed scored. The
TEAQ questionnaire was found to have a good internal consistency with Cronbach α= 0.78–
0.92 [52, 66]. For this investigation, we were particularly interested on the TEAQ Attitude to
intimate touch (AIT) subscale because previous investigations suggest that AN patients
experience intimate stimuli with lower valence and dominance than healthy controls [53].
They also report difficulties experiencing closeness with a partner and low levels of
satisfaction in relationships [54], they show a fear of intimacy [55] and report avoidance of
interpersonal relationships with men [56].
Self- and Other-directed affective touch video clips
Affective touch task consisted of 15, 6 s long video clips depicting actors being
touched by another person, at different body sites. The videos displayed a female actor
receiving touch by a male actor. This choice was made because only females were recruited
in the current investigation and we wanted to avoid any confound due to using different
genders receiving touch, to those observing this touch. Moreover, we chose to display videos
showing only males delivering touch and females receiving touch as generally males appear
to initiate touch more than females do [67, 68]. All videos were taken from a database of
previously standardised video clips [66]. Touch was delivered across five different body
regions: non-CT-innervated body site i.e., palm vs. CT-innervated body sites i.e., back,
ventral forearm, cheek and upper arm) with 3 different stroking velocities: static (0 cm/s),
slow (5cm/s) and fast (30 cm/s). The order in which the videos were presented was
counterbalanced amongst participants. To avoid any confound linked to emotional expression
of the agent delivering the touch [69], all videos were displayed zoomed up to the body part
of the receiver and the hand of the deliverer of touch, which ensured that the actors faces
Immediately after viewing each video, participants were probed to respond to two
questions, one asking: “How much would you like to be touched like that?” (self-directed
touch) using a VAS scale ranging from 0 = not at all to 100 = extremely. This question was
related to the participant themselves in their level of wanting the touch they are viewing.
Participants also responded to a second question asking: “How pleasant do you think that
rd
action was for the person being touched?” (3 person perspective) using a 100-point VAS
scale ranging from 0 = very unpleasant to 100 = extremely pleasant [66]. This question
concerns the ability of participants to determine mental states of another and evaluate how
pleasant the touch received was for the actor in the video (other-directed touch). Overall,
there was a total of 15 videos randomly presented, with each video being presented once to
participants, each displayed in 240 p YouTube quality in full HD (1920×1080 pixels) at 25
fps rate [66].
General procedure
The study was conducted online using Qualtrics software, Version 60,939 of the
Qualtrics Research Suite (Copyright © 2015 Qualtrics., Provo, UT, USA.
brief description of the study and the hyperlink to the online study if participants were happy
to take part. Once clicked, participants were provided with the participant information sheet,
screening questionnaire and gave their implied consent to take part. Once consent was
obtained, participants engaged with the affective touch videos task, during which they were
asked to rate using a 100-point VAS scale: “How pleasant do you think that action was for
the person being touched?” and “How much would you like to be touched like that?” using a
VAS scale ranging from 0 = not at all to 100 = extremely. The order participants viewed the
videos was counterbalanced, as well as the order they were shown the two questions. After
completion of the videos, participants filled out questionnaires which assessed body image
and eating concerns, body awareness, experiences and attitudes to touch, as well as social
isolation and longing for touch since the COVID-19 pandemic respectively, by means of the
EDE-Q [61], MAIA [49], TEAQ [52] and the COVID-19 touch experiences and eating
behaviour Questionnaire (see supplementary information). The order participants filled out
these questionnaires was counterbalanced. Those participants who were not eligible were
taken to the end of the survey, in which they were thanked for their time. Overall, the online
th
study lasted approximately 35 minutes. Data collection began on 10 July 2020 and ended on
th
27 June 2021.
Data Handling and Statistical Analysis
Data were analysed using STATISTICA 8.0 (StatSoftInc, Tulsa, Oklahoma).
Inspection of model residuals indicated data were normally distributed. Assumptions of
sphericity were not violated. Third-party pleasantness ratings of social touch were analysed
by conducting a 4-way Mixed ANOVA with a between-subjects factor of Group (3 levels:
AN, RAN and HCs) and within-subjects factors of velocity (3 levels: 0cm/s, 5cm/s and
30cm/s), body sites (5 levels: Upper arm, ventral forearm, back, cheek and palm) and Task (2
levels: Other-directed touch and self-directed touch). All demographic information and scores
for the self-reports are reported as Mean (M) and Standard Deviation of the mean (SD). A
significance threshold of p<.05 was used as the significance threshold for each of the effects.
All pairwise comparisons were assessed using the Duncan's post-hoc test correction for
multiple comparisons, which reduces the size of the critical difference depending on the
number of steps separating the ordered means. This procedure is optimal for testing in the
same design effects that may have different sizes [70, 71, 72], as it is expected in our case for
differences between patients AN, RAN and HCs participants and, within the patient group,
between AN and RAN patients, as well as for the size of the effects of the different within-
subject variables (i.e., Self- vs. Other-directed touch effects).
Independent samples t-tests, with Bonferroni Correction were conducted to assess
group differences for subscales of the EDE-Q, MAIA and TEAQ questionnaires, by examining
significant differences in mean scores across each group. A significance threshold of p<.05
was used as the significance threshold for each of the effects.
In keeping with previous studies [73-74], a Pleasant Touch Awareness (PTA) index
was calculated as the difference in pleasantness ratings between CT-optimal (5 cm/s) and CT
non-optimal stroking (30 cm/s), weighted by the average scores calculated separately for each
participant and location (PTA= (pleasantness ratings at 5cm/s−pleasantness ratings at 30
cm/s)/overall touch pleasantness). PTA measures the degree to which an individual prefers
CT-optimal as opposed to CT non-optimal velocities [75], and it was used in the current
study to compare preference for CT-optimal touch across the three groups (AN, RAN and
HCs) and the two tasks. Furthermore, an Overall Touch Pleasantness (OTP index was
calculated as the average across CT-optimal velocity (5cm/s) and CT-non optimal velocities
(0cm/s and 30cm/s). This index was calculated separately for each group and task [73, 74].
OTP refers to the extent to which an individual finds touch pleasant, which is not CT-
specific. Thus, in the current study we wanted to examine overall touch pleasantness amongst
the three groups (AN, RAN and HCs) and self- vs. other-directed social touch.
For exploratory purposes, we performed a series of exploratory Multiple Linear
Regression analyses to investigate the predictive role of TEAQ AIT and MAIA Trusting
subscales on both PTA and OTA, across the three groups and tasks.
Results
Univariate Statistics
questionnaire subscales, which has been calculated separately for AN, RAN and HCs. The
far-right column shows the output of pairwise comparisons between the three groups, which
have been adjusted for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni-corrected). The three groups were
matched for age. However, as expected, all groups differed regarding their self-reported BMI,
with AN having a significantly lower BMI than HCs and RAN, and RAN had significantly
lower (but still in the normal-weight range) BMI than HCs. Furthermore, as expected, AN
had significantly higher EDE-Q global scores than RAN and HCs, whilst no difference was
observed between RAN and HCs.
Between AN and HCs, there was a significant difference observed for the subscale
MAIA Self-regulation, with HCs demonstrating higher ability to self-regulate distress when
paying attention to inner body sensations, compared to AN. HCs had also significantly higher
MAIA Trusting scores and thus reported greater experiences of their body as safe and
trustworthy compared to both AN and RAN. No other group differences were observed for
any other interoceptive facet, as measured by the MAIA.
For touch experiences and attitudes, HCs currently experience more Family and
Friends touch and current intimate touch compared to AN. During childhood, HCs reported
experiencing significantly more childhood touch compared to both AN and RAN. HCs also
reported more positive attitudes towards self-care, and intimate touch compared to both AN
and RAN and reported higher attitudes to unfamiliar touch compared to AN. Both AN and
RAN did not differ in their current and previous touch experiences, and both demonstrated
similar attitudes towards touch and self-care.
Additional demographics such as ethnicity, relationship status and education level
all 3 groups to investigate whether there were any differences in these demographics between
groups. Importantly, there was no significant differences in ethnicity (χ = 3.28; p = .773),
2 2
relationship status (χ = 13.18; p = .659) and education level (χ = 5.33; p = .868) between
16 10
groups.
Self-directed vs Other-directed affective touch ratings
The repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of Body sites
[F(4,352) = 19.10, p < .001, ηp = .18], with the back being rated as most pleasant overall (all
ps < .001). The upper arm, ventral forearm and palm were all rated as more pleasant than the
cheek (all ps < .001). No other significant differences in pleasant ratings for the other body
sites were observed (all ps > .351). There was also a significant main effect of velocity
[F(2,176) = 11.99, p < .001, ηp = .12], with CT-optimal touch (5cm/s) rated as significantly
more pleasant than touch applied at CT non-optimal velocities (0cms/s and 30cm/s) (all ps <
.001). No significant differences were observed between the two CT non-optimal velocities
(p= .682). There was a significant main effect of Task [F(1,88) = 67.57, p < .001, ηp = .43],
with overall touch being rated as more pleasant for other-directed touch compared to self-
directed touch (p < .001). A significant main effect of Group was also observed [F(2, 88)=6.43,
p=.002, ηp = .13]. Overall, there were significant differences in pleasantness ratings between
both HCs and AN (p= .022) and HCs and RAN (p= .002), with HCs providing higher overall
pleasantness ratings compared to AN and RAN. No significant differences were observed in
pleasantness ratings provided by AN and RAN (p= .301).
A significant 2-way interaction of body sites × velocity was revealed [F (8, 704) = 8.64,
p<. 001, ηp = .09] with a velocity of 5cm/s to the ventral forearm being rated as significantly
more pleasant than 30cm/s to the ventral forearm (p< .001) and 0cm/s to the ventral forearm
(p< .001). Touch delivered at 5cm/s to the cheek was rated as significantly more pleasant than
touch delivered at both 30cm/s (p< .001) and 0cm/s (p< .001). Also, touch delivered at 5cm/s
to the palm was rated as significantly more pleasant than that delivered at 30cm/s (p= .007) and
0cm/s (p= .005). All other body sites and velocities were not significant (p>. 224).
Crucially, a 3-way interaction of velocity × task × group was also observed [F(4, 176)=
three groups of AN, RAN and HCs at each level of velocity revealed that AN and RAN rated
touch delivered at 5cm/s significantly lower than HCs (all p<.05). No difference in pleasantness
ratings was observed between AN and RAN for touch delivered at CT-optimal velocity (p=
.946). A significant difference was also observed between pleasantness ratings provided by
HCs and RAN for 30cm/s (p= .007), with HCs providing higher preference ratings for 30cm/s
compared to RAN. There were no significant differences amongst the three groups in their
ratings of 0cm/s touch (all ps > .429). For the other-directed task, there was no significant
differences between groups for any of the velocities (all ps> .05).
In summary, regardless of whether touch involved the self or another person, all groups
demonstrated a preference for CT-optimal touch (5cm/s) compared to CT-non optimal touch
(0cm/s and 30cm/s). For all groups, touch evaluated for another person (other-directed touch)
was perceived as more pleasant compared to when participants were asked to judge receiving
the same touch to themselves (self-directed touch). Crucially, both AN and RAN demonstrated
lower preference for both self- and other-directed touch when delivered at CT-optimal velocity
(5cm/s) than HCs.
Pleasant touch awareness and overall touch perception related to attitudes in intimate
touch and the trusting of one’s own body
We performed a series of exploratory (given the relatively small sample size for such
analyses) Multiple Linear Regression analyses to explore whether individual differences in
experiences to intimate touch and of one's body as safe and trustworthy could predict AN,
RAN and HCs’ preference for CT-optimal touch (PTA) or for overall touch (regardless of
CT-Optimal specificity, OTP). Accordingly, we included TEAQ AIT and MAIA Trusting as
predictors of PTA and OTP respectively for self- and other-directed touch. We repeated these
regressions for each group separately.
For self-directed touch, we found a significant regression equation for the overall
touch pleasantness for HCs [F(2,34) = 4.359, p= .021] and for AN [F(2,26) = 6.365, p=
.006]. For RAN, the regression equation was only marginally significant [F(2,28) = 3.219, p=
.056]. Specifically, the TEAQ AIT was a significant predictor for overall touch preference for
both HCs and AN, suggesting higher positive attitude towards intimate touch to predict
higher pleasantness ratings to social touch (regardless of CT optimality of the stimulation) in
significant regression equations for the overall touch pleasantness for HCs [F(2,34) = .839,
We then conducted a separate Multiple Linear Regression analysis for each group to
investigate whether TEAQ AIT and MAIA Trusting would predict women’ PTA for self-
directed touch. Again, we did not find significant regression equations for neither of the three
groups (HCs [F(2,34) = .110, p= .896], AN [F(2,26) = .262, p= .772], RAN [F(2,28) =
.715, p= .499]). Similarly, we did not find significant regression equations for PTA for other-
directed touch in any of the three groups (HCs [F(2,34) = .432, p= .653], AN [F(2,26) =
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first investigation to assess whether third-party
vicarious ratings of self- vs. other-directed social touch, delivered at CT-optimal vs. CT non-
optimal velocities differ in women with a current or previous diagnosis of AN, compared to
healthy individuals with no AN diagnosis. Our analysis also included covariates such as
interoceptive awareness and attitudes to touch with the aim to explore whether potential factors
which are known to largely contribute towards the aetiology and development of EDs [1, 9, 10,
11] might also explain subjective ratings of pleasantness for social touch.
When taking into consideration both self- and other-directed touch tasks, both groups
of patients and healthy comparison subjects showed the expected velocity dependent
pleasantness curve for brush stroking, indicating that C-tactile targeted stroking velocities
were preferred over slower and faster velocities [20, 76]. Although the case, both AN and
RAN demonstrated significantly lower pleasantness ratings for CT-optimal touch compared
to HCs. This finding is in line with those of real experiences to touch by Crucianelli et al.
[14] as they found that anorexics rated CT-optimal touch (delivered to the self) as less
pleasant than healthy controls, which was not evident for CT-non optimal velocities.
Additionally, this finding supports research by Davidovic et al. [13], whereby current
anorexics rated touch as less pleasant than matched HCs. Yet, this finding contradicts the
results obtained by Crucianelli et al. [15] as they found that a reduction in tactile pleasantness
was not CT-specific. A possible explanation for this finding is that atypical responses to
affective touch is due to an error in bottom-up processing, i.e., an error in the sensation and
perception of touch, which could, as suggested by Crucianelli et al. [14], be due to a
dysfunctional CT afferent system, particularly as this finding is more evident in the self-
directed task.
Both current and remitted anorexics demonstrated atypical and clear differences in
vicarious affective touch ratings specifically for self-directed touch, compared to healthy
controls, with both clinical groups demonstrating reduced pleasantness ratings compared to
healthy controls. This is in line with Crucianelli et al. [15] who found that both women with,
and recovered from, AN rated affective touch as less pleasant compared to healthy controls.
A possible mutual but not exclusive explanation concerning atypical responses to affective
touch to the self could be due to anorexics’ anxiety and discomfort towards touch in general
[77]. Accordingly, we observed significant differences in the ratings to experience and
attitude to social touch across all domains of touch experience and amongst the three groups.
Indeed, AN reported significantly less positive experience to familiar and unfamiliar touch, as
well as to intimate touch compared to HCs. Interestingly, a significant regression equation for
self-reports of touch experiences and overall touch pleasantness for AN, particularly for
vicarious self-directed touch lend support to this idea. With these regards, it was found that
positive attitude to intimate touch was positively associated with overall touch pleasantness
for current anorexics (but also for HCs), when concerning touch to the self. This is in line
with previous findings from Zucker et al. [44], who investigated sensitivity and avoidance of
touch in women with current and a previous diagnosis of AN, in comparison to HCs. Both
clinical groups demonstrated higher sensitivity and avoidance of touch compared to HCs,
with AN demonstrating higher touch sensitivity. Furthermore, another possible explanation
for the association between attitude to intimate touch and overall touch perception to the self-
directed touch is that typically anorexics tend to struggle and find closeness discomforting
and have difficulty in maintaining close intimate relationships with a romantic partner,
family, and friends [54, 77]. The more severe the body image disturbances in these
populations, the less likely they are to engage and feel comfortable in physical intimacy i.e.,
touch from a romantic partner or feel comfortable with touch from a loved one [78]. This
could explain the reduction in pleasantness of touch to the self for both current anorexics, as
low exposure to touch was found to result in lower pleasantness of touch [79]. Yet, our
findings are not conclusive and should be interpreted with caution given they are exploratory
in their nature. As such, further studies with larger clinical samples should be conducted to
better investigate the contribution of social touch experiences and attitudes in predicting
anorexics’ sensitivity to CT-optimal affective touch.
Contrary to our prediction, we did not find evidence that experience of one's body as
safe and trustworthy (MAIA Trusting) might predict women’ preference for CT-Optimal
touch nor for the overall touch perception, in the three groups. Previous works by Brown et
al. [51] reported that items from the MAIA Trusting subscale were the most central in
bridging interoceptive awareness and ED symptoms [51]. However, the study by Crucianelli
et al. [15] reported that individual differences in the perceived pleasantness of CT-optimal in
the AN group were predicted by interoceptive sensibility scores (as measured by the Body
Awareness Questionnaire [80], thus suggesting that other facets of interoception awareness
might play a role in the perception of social touch in AN. Thus, future studies in AN are
needed to disentangle the exact contribution of multidimensions of interoceptive awareness to
preference to social touch to draw firm conclusions about the mechanisms that cause blunted
responses to vicarious experience of social touch in this population.
Overall, as expected, we observed group differences for third party ratings of
pleasantness of touch for self but not for another. We capitalized on prior research which has
reported that individuals with AN have impaired ToM which involves the decoding of
affective stimuli [38] both at self and other perspectives [36, 37] and it was found to manifest
even after recovery [39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 81]. In this study, it was expected that anorexics
would use their own experiences to interpret the feelings generated in another, which would
be less pleasant compared to neurotypical populations. However, both current and remitted
anorexics did not perceive CT-targeted touch as less pleasant than healthy controls for other-
directed touch. Instead, as found previously, no differences were observed between anorexics
and control participants regarding perspective taking when engaging in ratings for other-
directed touch [38, 82, 83, 84]. A possible explanation for this finding could be related to
‘learned experiences’ of touch as pleasant when delivered to another, which conversely does
not apply to the self. With these regards, it might be the case that anorexics may observe how
others respond to the receiving of touch and use this learned experience when making
judgments about touch for others, regardless of the fact that they perceive touch to
themselves as less pleasant [85]. In doing so, they may have boosted their ToM abilities,
which is a process which enhances based on an individual’s experience of that specific
interaction. Another possible but not mutually exclusive explanation is that, like found
previously, anorexics have an intact theory of mind functioning, comparable to healthy
controls [38, 82, 83, 84, 86]. Thus, as suggested by Sedgewick et al. [86], the social-
emotional difficulties anorexics face may not be specific to inferring and recognising
emotions and mental states but rather this would reflect a bias in the interpretation of their
social situations that they are more likely to avoid. Furthermore, it also could be that AN
struggle with more complex social situations involving a dynamic of various interactions, as
opposed to less complex social situations such as receiving pleasant touch from another
individual [86].
Although this study was the first to assess third-party ratings of social touch in current
and remitted anorexics, limitations have been identified. First, self-report diagnosis may have
posed an issue with the variability of individuals in both clinical samples and also there is a
risk of some undiagnosed in the healthy control group. However, these concerns are mitigated
by several factors. First, the online survey was anonymous, which should encourage honest
responding. Furthermore, participants’ ability to continue to take part to the study depended on
their responses, which encouraged the provision of high-quality data. Most importantly, the
manipulation check indicated that individuals reporting AN endorsed significantly greater
eating pathology on the EDE-Q which is a gold standard measure for the assessment of
symptom severity and AN diagnosis in replacement of structured interviews (i.e., Eating
disorder examination interview [87, 88]. Future studies should however attempt to replicate
these findings by recruiting AN inpatients whose diagnosis has been established by a qualified
clinician.
Although the study controlled for various variables that may affect touch pleasantness,
other factors such as touch avoidance, sexuality, mood and emphatic traits may have an impact
as well. For example, a recent study by Sailer and Ackerley [79] found participants with low
touch exposure scores, which on the Social Touch Questionnaire (STQ) [89] is indicative of
unpleasantness of social touch and avoidance, rated touch differently, as they could not
differentiate various stroking velocities. Furthermore, mood may have influenced social touch
perception. Although participants were asked to state if they had any neurological or
psychiatric conditions, a form of anhedonia measurement such as the Fawcett-Clark Pleasure
Scale (FCPS) [90] or the Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS) [91] should have been
administered to account for participants mood on their testing day and those above the cut-off
point excluded. This is because anhedonia, a characteristic for depression associated with the
reduced ability to experience pleasure, can negatively affect attitudes to social touch [92].
Furthermore, in Crucianelli et al. [15] study, tactile anhedonia was found to be present in RAN
as well as AN, suggesting that this could be a trait which manifests even post-recovery which
could account for their lack of pleasure towards touch.
Another factor which may have impacted the third-party vicarious ratings of social
touch is individual differences in empathic abilities. This factor influences participants’ ability
during embodiment tasks and vicarious experiences [93, 94, 95]. For example, Peled-Avron et
al. [96] found levels of empathy modified ratings and EEG responses to photos of social touch.
Participants classified as highly empathetic, had higher mu suppression and rated social touch
as more pleasant, as opposed to participants reporting lower empathy levels. Therefore, it
would be prudent in future studies that involve third-party ratings of touch, rather than actual
touch, to consider empathy measures, as responses to observed touch are modulated by
empathy levels and previous research has found that current anorexics have lower levels of
empathy compared to RAN and HCs [41, 97].
Conclusions
To conclude, our findings add to previous results of Crucianelli et al. [14] and
Davidovic and colleagues [13] in that they show that despite atypical, blunted responses to
affective touch, women with AN and RAN still demonstrate preference for CT-optimal touch.
Most importantly, we provide initial evidence that third-party ratings of touch pleasantness for
another individual do not differ regardless of eating disorder diagnosis. On the contrary, both
RAN and AN groups rated affective touch as less pleasant compared to healthy controls when
touch involved the self. Thus, altered responses to vicarious experience of affective touch in
AN and RAN might be self-specific and intact when making judgements of touch for someone
else. This could be due to a learning mechanism according to which AN have learned that the
touch they are viewing would be pleasant for another individual, with multiple facets of
interoceptive awareness and social touch experiences possibly mediating this effect. Given that
atypical responses persist even after recovery, treatment interventions should focus on
overcoming an impairment in differentiating between self and other affective touch experience,
which could help prevent post-recovery relapsing.
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding
author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.