DMT micro-phenomenology
James W. Sanders1*, Raphael Milliere2, Zachary G. Daily1,4, Robin
Carhart-Harris1,3, Christopher Timmermann1
1 DMT Research Group, Centre for Psychedelic Research, Department of Brain Science, Imperial
College London, UK
2 Department of Philosophy, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
3 Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
4Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, USA
*Corresponding author: James W. Sanders james.sanders@imperial.ac.uk
December 29, 2024
Abstract
DMT reliably induces profound experiences of immersion in other worlds and encounters with
seemingly autonomous presences, yet the lived qualities and unfolding of these experiences remain poorly
understood. Using micro-phenomenological interviews with twenty-three healthy participants who
received DMT during fMRI scanning, this study explores how these experiences arise and develop in
awareness. Micro-phenomenological analysis reveals rich dimensions of immersive experience - from
multisensory engagement to radical reconfigurations of self and world - and illuminates the varied ways
presences can be seen, felt, or otherwise sensed. Rather than focusing on specific content, we follow the
micro-phenomenological method to identify the structural features and temporal dynamics that
characterise the rich subjective landscape of DMT experience. The findings extend beyond traditional
constructs like 'ego dissolution' or 'mystical experience' to reveal how immersion and presence
phenomena emerge through specific dimensions, particularly the layering of sensory effects, and
subsequent layering of spatial, self-related, and social effects. This detailed phenomenological mapping
advances our understanding of both DMT's effects and the architecture of conscious experience, while
demonstrating the value of systematic first-person methods for studying profound alterations of
consciousness. The findings invite comparative analysis with other transformations of consciousness,
such as meditation and lucid dreaming, and especially with presence phenomena observed across different
experiential contexts such as lab-induced presence hallucinations and Parkinson’s.
1. Introduction
N,N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT) is a serotonergic psychedelic that has been increasingly used as
a perturbational tool for researching brain mechanisms underlying conscious experience (Timmermann et
al., 2023; Timmermann et al., 2019). It is also being explored for its potential benefits for mental health
(Timmermann, Zeifman, et al., 2024; Falci-Carvalho et al., 2024). DMT is commonly found across plant
and animal life, and it is a key psychoactive component of Ayahuasca, a psychedelic plant admixture used
by indigenous tribes of the Amazon rainforest for a variety of ritual purposes (Labate, 2016).
Previous research has characterised DMT experiences as vivid immersion into complex, other
worlds, sometimes seemingly inhabited by sentient beings (henceforth: perceived presences), as well as
radical alterations to the experience of self (Strassman, 1996; Michael et al., 2021; Michael et al., 2023).
Modifications in experience under DMT range from relatively simple sensory and spatial phenomena
through to complex phenomena related to alterations in self-related processing, the perceived
environment, and social cognition (Michael et al., 2021, 2023; Lawrence et al., 2022; Timmermann et al.,
2019). At times these experiences result in the construction of a ‘world-analogue’ in experience while
concurrently experiencing disconnection from the habitual environment (Timmermann et al., 2019), and
by pharmacologically eliciting these experiences in the lab researchers are afforded the chance to study
processes of building complexity within subjective experience and their corresponding brain activity
(Timmermann et al, 2019; Timmermann et al., 2023).
An understudied aspect of DMT phenomenology is its general immersive quality. Previous
literature has emphasised the sense of entering emergent ‘realms’ or ‘worlds’ under DMT (Shanon, 2002;
Strassman, 2008), however here - inspired by virtual reality research (Nilsson et al., 2016) - we adopt a
broader view of immersion as immersion in the experience itself. This broader conceptualisation of
immersion includes the phenomenology of being present in other worlds while also encompassing sensory
disconnection, changes in the delineation of self from world, and other forms of attentional and affective
engagement. Notably, this also includes social engagement via the perception of presences under DMT.
Broadly, the capacity of DMT to modulate immersion in and out of experience resonates with classic
techniques to study consciousness such as phenomenological reduction (Depraz et al., 2003) and
meditation (Dahl et al., 2015), and highlights the potential contribution of non-ordinary states more
broadly to the science of consciousness (Timmermann et al., 2023).
Multiple studies have documented that DMT reliably produces experiences of immersive
environments and perceived presences (Davis et al., 2020; Michael et al., 2021, 2023; Lawrence et al.,
2022), providing a robust phenomenon for phenomenological investigation. However, while previous
research has prioritised the content of the DMT experience, it has been argued that research focusing on
the structures and dynamic processes of experience can better contribute to the study of consciousness
than research focusing on content (Timmermann et al., 2023). There are grey areas between what can be
considered content versus structure, but we can generally distinguish content as the specific elements or
objects that a DMT experience is about (e.g.: a jester entity in a machine-like playpen), and structure as
the organising frameworks and relationships that structure the experience itself (e.g.: the sensory
modalities and their various involvement in a particular experience, spatial dimensions within the
experience, and the configuration of boundaries between self and world. A degree of structure is present
in the research summarised above, however it is not specifically or comprehensively explored.
Preliminary phenomenological observations showing the potential of a structural focus in DMT research
has yielded novel hypotheses pertaining specific spatiotemporal forms and constants in the visual field
under DMT (Gómez-Emilsson, 2016), however their generalisability has not been empirically tested.
Thus, a formal empirical investigation of immersion and perceived presences under DMT, with a targeted
and granular focus on the structure of experience, is lacking.
Furthermore to this lack of structural focus, we argue that phenomenological methods previously
used to study psychedelic experiences are limited by a lack of precision and temporal granularity. In
quantitative research, the dynamic properties of the experience are obscured by item scores that represent
the average intensity of a phenomenon across an entire experience, even when the experience is
characterised by distinct temporal phases with labile phenomenology (Timmermann et al., 2023).
Additionally, quantitative methods often characterise subjective experience in broad constructs such as
‘mystical experience’ or ‘ego dissolution’, which may be biased toward specific theoretical frameworks
and lack a firm grounding in phenomenology research (Taves, 2020; Milliére et al., 2018; Sanders &
Zijlmans, 2021). Qualitative methods are not without fault however, as there is reason to question the
veracity of spontaneous retrospective descriptions of experience in research contexts due to incorrect or
absent recall, post-hoc rationalisation, and demand characteristics (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Johansson et
al., 2005, Lush et al., 2020). Biases, confabulation, and other common threats to the reliability and
validity of descriptions of experience should be methodologically accounted for (Depraz et al., 2003), but
for most qualitative methods this is arguably not the case. Preliminary work shows that these issues may
be addressed using the micro-phenomenological method (Petitmengin et al., 2013), where research
participants are guided by a trained interviewer to immerse themselves in the memory of an experience
and describe it in a relatively refined and comprehensive way (Petitmengin, 2006). Additionally, the
micro-phenomenological interview and analysis method are tailored for identifying clear and coherent
timelines of experience, specifically discouraging and excluding generalised statements that are not
clearly associated with a particular moment of experience (Petitmengin et al., 2019;
Valenzuela-Moguillansky & Vásquez-Rosati, 2019).
In an early application of the method to psychedelic research, micro-phenomenology was used to
study the relationship between visual, bodily, emotional, and metacognitive dimensions of DMT
experience, and concurrent brain activity as they acutely unfold over time (Timmermann et al., 2019).
This research validated the use of micro-phenomenological approach in temporally sensitive,
neurophenomenological, psychedelic research (neurophenomenology is a paradigm in cognitive
neuroscience under which first- and third- person approaches to study the mind and brain are treated with
equal importance and rigor, under the presumption that they mutually constrain each other and are more
informative when assessed together than alone; Varela, 1996). However the coarse phenomenological
dimensions used do not reflect the richness and complexity with which the DMT experiences are
described, nor were the dimensions of immersion and perceived presence specifically explored.
Expanding on previous research, the present study adopts the micro-phenomenological interview
and analysis method to study structural dimensions of DMT experience in a lab setting. Our study was
guided by the following exploratory research questions: what are the structural features of the DMT
experience? How do these features dynamically relate to each other? What are the phenomenological
dimensions underlying the striking experiences of immersion and perceived presences under DMT? And,
how do these dimensions change over the course of the acute experience? DMT offers a unique
opportunity to dissect structural features of conscious experience by perturbing them in a systematic
fashion. The broad aim of this study is to leverage this opportunity with the use of an advanced approach
to investigate human experience, which can then yield rich hypotheses for the science of consciousness.
2. Methods
Study design
This study was part of a broader neurophenomenological investigation utilising a single blind,
between-subjects, placebo controlled design. Participation consisted of two separate testing days
performed a minimum of 2 weeks apart. On each testing day participants were screened for alcohol and
other drugs of abuse before undergoing two testing sessions: in one session they received IV DMT (20mL
DMT fumarate dissolved in 10mL sterile saline), and in the other they received IV placebo (10mL sterile
saline), in counterbalanced order. During testing sessions participants lay in the scanner bed, blindfolded,
and with eyes closed. A combination of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and EEG was
recorded for 8 minutes prior and 20 minutes subsequent to placebo/DMT administration (more details of
the neuroimaging component can be found in Timmermann, Roseman, et al., 2023). For the first session
of each day scanning was task free, and for the second session of the day experience sampling (occuring
every minute) was performed. Following the second session a micro-phenomenological interview was
performed in regard to the experience of that session only. Thus, for the purposes of this study the
interview and experience sampling data from the second scanning session was used.
Participants
25 healthy participants were recruited by word of mouth (10 female, mean age = 33.4 y, SD =
7.9). Two participants dropped out prior to the session involving the micro-phenomenological interview
(final sample: 23 participants, 8 female, mean age = 33.4 y, SD = 8.3), and interview data for two
participants was incomplete due to battery issues on the recording device used. Participants were
medically screened for conditions including heart disease, epilepsy, or a family history of psychotic
disorder. Other exclusion criteria included: <18 years old, psychedelic naivete, MRI contraindications,
and excessive use of alcohol and/or other drugs of abuse. Participants gave written, informed consent
before commencing participation. The study was conducted under the guidelines of the revised
Declaration of Helsinki (2000), the International Committee on Harmonization Good Clinical Practices
guidelines, and the National Health Service Research Governance Framework. Ethical approval for the
study was granted by the National Research Ethics Committee London—Brent, and the Health Research
Authority. The study was carried out under a Home Office licence for research with Schedule 1 drugs, and
sponsored by Imperial College London.
Experience sampling
In the sessions where live experience sampling was used, participants in the scanner heard
recorded prompts asking for ratings of the intensity of the drug effect from 0 to 10, with 0 indicating no
effect at all and 10 indicating the strongest imaginable effect. Participants spoke their answers aloud for
researchers to note. These ratings were made at 1 minute intervals throughout the entire 28 minute
fMRI/EEG recording.
Micro-phenomenological interview and analysis
The micro-phenomenological interview method was used to elicit a systematic and granular
description of the placebo/DMT experience (Petitmengin, 2006), with an additional focus on two of the
key aspects of DMT experience: immersion and perceived presences. The interviewee’s memory of the
timeline of the experience was supported by reviewing the experience sampling ratings given during the
experience. The interview was performed shortly after returning to baseline, and interview questions
concerned only the experience of placebo or DMT that immediately preceded the interview.
The micro-phenomenological analysis method (Petitmengin, 2019; Valenzuela-Moguillanksy,
2019) was used to develop phenomenological categories derived from the interviews in a bottom-up
fashion, with categories representing phenomenological distinctions made by participants. The method
was then used to assess the order in which categories emerged according to the timeline of each
experience, looking for common sequences. This was done by identifying separate phenomenological
phases within each experience (indicated by linguistic indicators of a temporal shift, such as ‘after’,
‘then’, or ‘suddenly’) and organising the phases and the categories into a matrix - one for each participant.
These phase matrices were compared using an informal visual search for repeating patterns across
participants. Where such patterns were observed, an analytical comparison was subsequently performed
to quantify its form, variations, and the number of cases in which it occurred.
Further information on the interview and analysis process is provided at Supplementary material
A.
3. Results
Structural dimensions of the emergent DMT landscape
The phenomenological categories that emerged represent the dimensions and distinctions that
structured what we refer to here as the emergent landscape of the DMT experience, including perceived
presences. Through the micro-phenomenological interviews participants described immersive experiences
as of other ‘realms’ and ‘dimensions’, the nature of which were often inextricably linked to radical
alterations in experiential structure. Thus, when using the word landscape we intend to encompass not
only conventional associations of the word with an environment featuring specific contents and spatial
properties, but also a broader association with the totality of experience as a landscape featuring its own
specific components and relational properties that may undergo radical transformation under
psychedelics. In both this conventional and broader sense, the emergent landscape is something into
which the subject is immersed - keeping in mind that we take here the view that immersion is a complex,
multidimensional experience. The qualifier emergent distinguishes these phenomena from those that
persist from prior to drug administration (i.e.: the participant’s ordinary pre-drug experience in the dosing
room). The term landscape will be used henceforth to imply the emergent landscape of experience into
which the subject is immersed.
The analysis focused on structural categories that commonly and most evidently differentiate one
phase of an experience from another, both within and between participants. 127 phenomenological
categories were extracted. Notable categories are described below, supported by excerpts. Categories
relating to the overall landscape will be described first, followed by analysis of perceived presences,
which were described in 15 of the 23 interviews. Each category presented below is grounded in at least 2
interviews unless otherwise stated. Category names are distinguished below using , and for
SMALL CAPS
reference a full list of categories with their description and substantiating examples from the interview
text is given at Supplementary material B.
Multi-sensory immersion.
The coarsest phenomenological distinction that structured the experience of the emergent
landscape was the affected by DMT: the , , and senses were
MODAL SENSES VISUAL AUDITORY BODILY
engaged.
In all interviews, a rich and complex visual component of the landscape was described. This
component varied on dimensions of and , the latter varying also on , and
BRIGHTNESS COLOUR SHADE
. Spatial properties of what was seen are detailed below.
SATURATION
An auditory component was also described, varying on dimensions of , , and
PITCH TIMBRE
. Another dimension of this auditory component was , distinguishing between
VOLUME MUSICALITY
structured music and mere sounds.
While some participants lost all bodily awareness, others described varied bodily experiences. A
recurring experience was that of pressure on the body emanating from all or part of the perceived
TACTILE
environment. Notably, tactile feelings persisting from before drug administration (e.g.: the feeling of the
body against the bed of the fMRI scanner) were at times incorporated into the emergent landscape, taking
on new significance.
“I felt I was standing up and dancing. … I was kicking rocks, and I actually felt like I physically
hit a rock, … I definitely hit something [lab equipment] that I shouldn’t have.” (P08)
When not incorporated into the landscape, these persistent tactile experiences indicated a lesser
degree of immersion into the experience.
“I could still feel the sensation of the cannula in my arm, … like a lifeline back to reality.” (P06)
Changes in bodily temperature were reported in the beginning stages of the DMT experience,
prior to any immersive experience of an emergent landscape. In these early stages, the sensation was
described as endogenous or interoceptive, for example as a sudden bodily chill. However, this sense of
, which could be warm/hot or cool/cold, was at times also described as an exogenous
TEMPERATURE
feature of the landscape, such as a “warmth [emanating] from the visuals” (P08).
The distinctness of these visual, auditory, and bodily senses varied. Depending on this
DEGREE OF
, at times they were described at times as entirely ,
MODAL DISTINCTION DISTINCT SENSORY REGISTERS
while at other times as blended. A milder form of this blending was described as .
SYNAESTHESIA
‘Synaesthetic’ experiences could involve all of the modal senses, however blends between visual and
bodily (tactile, proprioceptive) senses were particularly notable.
“That feeling of electrically vibrating, of being sawn [apart]. … it’s all part of the geometry …
the fabric of what you’re feeling. As the picture rips, your body is ripping.” (P18)
A of the senses was also described.
COMPLETE MERGE
“It felt like my senses had all conflated into one ... [an] amalgamation of everything that I’m
sensing. … from a sensory point of view it’s all really merged into one.” (P06)
Semantic complexity.
An additional dimension on which modal sensory experiences varied was
SEMANTIC
, differentiating, for example, visual experiences of shapes and
COMPLEXITY SEMANTICALLY SIMPLE
colour, from visual experiences of recognisable forms fitting categories of
SEMANTICALLY COMPLEX
objects, architecture, or beings. To clarify this distinction further: semantically simple phenomena
represent something that is relatively limited in scope and well defined in terms of its apparent features
(e.g.: a triangle, which is defined in terms of its geometry and carries a limited potential for interpreting
meaning), while semantically complex phenomena are relatively multi-dimensional and context
dependent (e.g.: a face, which is defined by a much more complex set of relations above and beyond
geometry and has rich potential for interpreting meaning). Phenomena were also at times described as
partial representations, suggesting a gradient dimension of semantic complexity.
“I started thinking about kangaroos… and could kind of see, like, the edges of kangaroos in the
blue stuff round the sides… if it would develop more it would have been kangaroos, but it was mainly just
blue stuff” (P08)
Semantic complexity also structured the auditory and bodily aspects of the experience,
distinguishing between ‘sounds’ (such as a buzzing, or ringing sound) and ‘sounds of ’ recognisable things
(such as chanting or laughter); and also distinguishing between abstract bodily feelings (such as a
non-specific tingling or vibration) and ‘feelings of’ objects perceived in the landscape. Semantic
complexity also structured experiences where bodily sensations were no longer taken as representative of
the body, but rather as abstract, dissociated phenomena in the landscape of experience.
“I wasn’t really feeling bodily sensations as bodily sensations, or as located in my body. It
wouldn’t be quite accurate to say that I felt these sensations as ‘located in my chest.’” (P10)
Space, seen and felt.
The modal sensory experience was complemented by a range of feelings and impressions outside
of the traditional modal senses, here broadly categorised as , at times explicitly
AMODAL FEELINGS
identified as a sort of experientially tangible knowing that carries a specific form or meaning.
One amodal feeling, key in structuring the landscape, was a sense of . This feeling of
FELT SPACE
space was described as distinct from, and at times occurring in absence of, any additional modal sensory
(visual, auditory) representation of space.
“When the space opens up to my right, it's not as though I'm seeing more… it's this unseeing, felt
sense … as though something had been lifted.” (P07)
Regardless of whether emergent space was seen, heard, or felt, its description varied on
SPATIAL
of , , , , , and .
CHARACTERISTICS SIZE SHAPE LOCATION DENSITY CURVATURE MULTIPLICITY ORIENTATION
The of space was key to the immersive property of the landscape, distinguishing two
DIMENSIONALITY
dimensional ( ), planar spreads of geometric visuals from three dimensional ( ) environments. When
2D 3D
, these environments had the property of , whereby they could be or
3D ENCLOSURE ENCLOSED
. When enclosed, the shape of the enclosure was alternatively described as , for
UNENCLOSED ELEMENTARY
example as a simple tunnel or cube, or , for example as a tower of interlocking hexagonal
COMPLEX
tunnels. Enclosures taking the form of a were also possible, whereby the shape
FRACTAL-LIKE RECURSION
of the boundary was arranged in a hierarchical, self-containing, repetition ad infinitum. Conversely,
unbounded landscapes were entirely open and spacious, likened to a garden, or outer space. The
HIERARCHICAL
, including objects, beings, and architecture, inhabited some .
FIGURES GROUND
“I’m in - maybe it feels like a rectangular room or hall, or big cavernous space, with
checkerboards on the floor … everything has a metallic, or kitsch, or shiny plastic sheen to it ... In the
centre of this space is this area where I’m seeing more dimensional concave areas. … like you’re slightly
seeing into different dimensions…. You’re seeing concave spaces but you’re seeing inside and around it.”
(P06)
The objects, architecture, and beings could take 3D forms, however 2D variants within 3D
environs were also at times described. were also described, whereby an object or
OTHER DIMENSIONS
space took on hyper- or otherwise unconventional- spatial dimensions, such as simultaneously revealing
the inner and outer perspective of an object.
“[I saw] toys ... with different dimensions folding into each other ... like when you see on YouTube
how a combustion engine works … as if the side had come away and you could delve through it. [But] the
way that the cubes were morphing and turning in on themselves … it’s not like you’re moving through it,
you feel like you’re seeing in more than one dimension” (P06)
Other experiences were described as , lacking spatial characteristics altogether.
NON-SPATIAL
“[It became] a timeless, space-less existence, very much like a mental realm. … like all ideas that
you could ever have, every thought that you could ever think, compressed into a singularity.” (P04)
Felt meanings.
Continuing under the category of , a series of felt meanings were described,
AMODAL FEELINGS
which conveyed complex properties of what was being experienced above and beyond raw sensory
impressions. These properties typically concern a perceived object’s conceptual relation to the self or
other things, including relations that have their roots in that perceived object’s past. For example, the
conveyed a felt sense of the experience (or its contents) being , or .
FEELING OF REALITY REAL UNREAL
This feeling of reality was at times described as an overall tone to the experience felt unto itself, while at
other times as a gestalt linked to specific sub-properties such as perceived or as shown
DENSITY CLARITY
in the quote below.
“That again links to the authenticity of it, the vividness of that feeling. It’s a really strong, crystal
clear perception. Even though I guess it’s an illusion, it feels very tangible.” (P19)
Distinct from ‘real’ was the sense of being , described here as both ‘imagined’ and
UNREAL
‘virtual’, suggesting again a link with visual form.
“These faces are happening seemingly in my vivid imagination. There’s this distinction [from
parts of the experience that felt ‘real’]. The faces have this virtual quality to them, it’s like they’re not
necessarily real and that’s why they also seemed quite harmless” (P03)
The conveyed a felt sense of the experience (or its contents) being
FEELING OF FAMILIARITY
, or alternatively . Notably, these relational categories were not mutually
FAMILIAR UNFAMILIAR OR ‘ALIEN’
exclusive.
“I feel the strange combination of novelty and familiarity… the space looks completely different,
but I have this feeling that I’ve been in this place or in this frame of mind before.” (P11)
Immersion and the configuration of self and world.
Immersion into another world under DMT was not described as a simple matter of the
environment being replaced with something new or alien. Instead, in many cases, the structural
relationship between what is identified as self and what is identified as world was changed. This is clear
in the synaesthetic bodily experience of the visual landscape described above, however further, higher
order categories are described here.
The first of these self/world configuration categories is the , distinguishing
PERCEPTUAL POSITION
between being or a perceived space. A notable recurrent structure was that of looking
WITHIN OUTSIDE
into a space from outside, described as seeing other worlds through portals or tunnels. A (i.e.,
LIMINAL
intermediate) perceptual position was also possible, as participants found themselves on the threshold of a
space.
The next dimension is , where the landscape, or parts of it, could be variously
INTERNALISATION
described as occurring , or , to the boundary of the body or mind.
INTERNAL EXTERNAL
“There are always colours around me, and in me. There were things going through me in that
moment.” (P01)
The experience of the landscape also varied on how clear the was,
SELF/WORLD DISTINCTION
meaning that at times the landscape was described as from the self, while at others the
CLEARLY DISTINCT
subject described the self as being with the landscape (either fully indistinct/fused,
INDISTINCT OR FUSED
or in the process of becoming indistinct/fused). In some cases this sense of fusion was driven by the
synaesthetic merge of the visual and bodily components of the experience, meaning that feeling what was
seen created a sense of becoming or embodying the environment.
“It no longer made sense to localise [the vibration previously felt in the body] to the body…
[Now, the feeling of vibration] was more closely affiliated with what was going on in my visual field than
it was with my body. I became the experience... I actually merged into the scene.” (P07)
In other cases the usual sensory cues that carved out self and world in the landscape were lost,
including the sense of space in which self and other were distinctly located, such that one’s mind and
awareness in a radical state of reconfiguration (beyond any self and world distinction) remained as the
main or only describable features.
“It became an abstract experience. … [Now the experience] wasn’t a thing I was seeing but
something that my perception was becoming… It wasn’t a place… very much like a timeless, space-less
existence … [I don’t remember] any visuals or any sensation … [Just a] singularity.” (P04)
Thus, the structural configuration of self and world varied, between moments of the self
perceiving an entirely distinct world (be it a flat image or a fully immersive environment), and moments
of self and world becoming fused or indistinct. This fusion collapsed structures of internalisation and
perceptual position: distinguishing the world (or a part of it) as within or outside the self, or distinguishing
the self as within or outside the perceived environment, no longer applied when self and world were fused
or otherwise indistinct. This suggests a non-orthogonal relationship between each of these two categories
and world in experience; B) a non-exhaustive range of combinations of values (state space coordinates)
for these three dimensions, with corresponding example scenarios from the DMT interviews; C) the state
space formed by these three dimensions, which is pyramidal in shape due to a non-orthogonal relationship
between the self/world distinction dimension and the other dimensions: when the world or part of it
becomes indistinct from the self, then whether the that world/part is within/outside the self
(internalisation), and whether the self is within/outside the that world/part (perceptual position), can no
longer meaningfully be distinguished. Thus, this state space shows one possible way that alteration in
sense of self under DMT might contribute to a sense of dualistic phenomenological distinctions on a
particular dimension collapsing, contributing to descriptions of experience with a non-dualistic quality.
Continuing with categories that configure the experience of self and world, the dimension of
distinguished experiences of the world that had the recognisable appearance of self, but
IDENTIFICATION
were nonetheless experienced distinctly as separate from the self ‘out there’ in the world.
“I broke into tears and I saw these sounds, and the meaning of these sounds, expressed visually
as a character face of myself, layering into this landscape. … [I saw] exactly the same content and
material as my expressions. I was certainly shaping this world.” (P01)
The previous excerpt exemplifies an additional immersive dimension that the self/world
configuration varied on: . As in the excerpt, the structure of this interactivity could be
INTERACTIVITY
, where behaviours had an unintended effect on the content of the emergent landscape. In other
INDIRECT
cases, a sense of agency permitted the subject to intentionally cause effects on this content
DIRECT
through some behaviour. These behaviours could be described as if they were the acts of an agent self in a
physical environment.
“It was a party… [All] around the room, my alien friends… We all had the same cups… someone
came to me with this green liquid and they said that this will make you have a good time… I took the
green liquid” (P05)
Or, they could be described as something akin to ‘inner’ acts of mental will, where a desired
change is willed to manifest in the landscape without need for any perceived bodily action.
“I'm no longer aware that my body exists and I need one or I have one… I see this grid of
hexagons in light blue, red, yellow and teal. … I can zoom in and out of it and look at this, like you look at
3D models” (P11)
A final dimension of self/world configuration is the of the self toward the
RECEPTIVE MODE
world. On the dimension of , the experience of the landscape could be
RESISTANCE ACCEPTED OR
- often phrased as ‘letting go’ - or, it could be . Another receptive structure was
ALLOWED RESISTED
attention, under which phenomena were described as being , or
SUBJECT TO ATTENTION NOT SUBJECT TO
. It is important to note that the specific structures of accepting or allowing, and resisting, at
ATTENTION
times incorporated attentional acts - such as resisting by averting attention. However, a full
conceptualisation of these receptive modes is beyond the scope of this study.
“Even when my attention is going off mind-wandering, the stuff is still there in front of my visual
field. It feels very bizarre. … This visual experience has a life of its own. It's going on whether I'm looking
at it or not. I can choose to think about something else and it will still go on doing its thing and then I can
choose to pay attention to it.” (P07)
Phenomena in flux.
The dynamics of immersion could be coarsely characterised by categories concerning the entry
into or exit from awareness by specific phenomena, and their changing prominence during this time in
awareness. Specifically, phenomena could be experienced as either or , and as
PERSISTING ENDING
or . With regard to the entry of phenomena into experience, this could occur in
INTENSIFYING DAMPENING
multiple, structurally distinct ways - referred to here as . The first mode of
MODES OF ENCOUNTER
encounter is , under which a phenomenon is experienced as coming into form within
EMERGENCE
experience. This is distinct from the structure of , under which a phenomenon is experienced as
NOTICING
having existed fully formed before coming into experience or attention. Finally, under the structure of
, phenomena were experienced as being brought into experience by a perceived presence.
REVELATION
“One of the figures is presenting something to me… [something] opens up, like a drawer from the
wall. In the drawer there’s this object… It’s blue and shaped like a corkscrew… there was a presentation
of that object” (P13)
Perceived presences.
In addition to revelation, many other categories described the phenomenological structure of
encounters with perceived presences. As with the general emergent landscape explored above, perceived
presences are also qualified here as ‘emergent’ to distinguish them from perceived presences that persist
from prior to the administration of DMT (i.e.: the presences of the research team, which participants
remained cognisant of during the DMT experience in some cases). Because presences were commonly
perceived as inhabiting the landscape, the phenomenological structure of both landscape and presence
overlap considerably. Here these structural similarities, as well as key presence-specific categories, are
described.
The sense of other minds.
Presences perceived as inhabiting the landscape were, like the landscape itself, described
primarily in terms of modal sensory experiences. Sometimes they were perceived through a single modal
sense, while at other times through a combination. When experienced through the visual sense, presences
were described as discrete objects located in the environment, and often had the dynamic property of
MOVEMENT
“There was a snake taking me down and round… colourful... not like a realistic snake, it’s like a
cartoon snakes-and-ladders snake… Stripy, white, black, orange and green. [With] cartoon eyes, white
and black.” (P23)
When experienced through the auditory sense, presences were heard as chanting or laughing, or
making more abstract sounds. These sounds were at times described as indicating a presence’s location in
space.
“Have you ever run something metal over an electric guitar string and you get a zing sound?
Well there were lots of those sounds. … They were happening all around me in space. I interpreted that as
there being some small things flying around me and making noises.” (P02)
For one participant only, the experience of a presence was tactile, and also through the
POSITION
of the body.
“It starts with this presence to my upper right side… There’s this intention towards me that I feel
in my body. There’s this pressure happening.”; “I feel that these presences are kind of laying me out”
(both quotes: P03)
A notable structure of presence perception is that a presence may be evident through amodal
feelings alone, a phenomenon referred to here as . This means that the presence may be
FELT PRESENCE
entirely unseen, unheard, and untouched, yet a distinct feeling reveals this presence, and at times also its
specific characteristics.
“I can’t remember seeing a face or thinking that I was ever looking at something that was a
‘thing’, but there was a deep sense of something being there… It wasn’t there in the way that a normal
physical being would be there, it was more of an essence of something that was imbued in the experience
that wasn’t physically represented in front of me.” (P06)
It is important to note that amodal feelings not only enriched or completed objects perceived
through the modal senses, but rather objects could be described as perceived entirely through amodal
feeling.
At a single moment, regardless of the dimension of experience through which a presence was
sensed, the DMT experience could feature a presence, or , and the presence could be
SINGLE MULTIPLE
located variously in the compositional hierarchy of the landscape, featuring either as the central
within the scene, as part(s) of the subordinate of the scene.
GROUND
The presence of whom?
The dimension of was also relevant to perceived presences, which could
SEMANTIC COMPLEXITY
be relatively experienced as or . In regard to perceptions
SEMANTICALLY SIMPLE SEMANTICALLY COMPLEX
of presences through the modal senses, this distinction between semantically simple and complex is
exemplified in the auditory experiences described above of hearing voices or chanting versus hearing
abstract sounds (e.g. a ‘zinging’ sound). It is also exemplified in visual perceptions of presences, where
some participants described seeing presences as specific, complex forms.
“I can see the monkey… He is black… He’d be at least 2 stories tall… He’s got a white face, He
was a ‘he’... He was on my left side. Like an emperor monkey, you know… they have black, and a white
bit, and the fur all grows out.” (P23)
And, in contrasting cases, participants described visual experiences of presences as abstract forms
with few features, yet nonetheless sentient and present.
“This space is very colourful … And moving in geometric patterns… And the shapes are also sort
of alive. So the shapes are made of some sort of beings. And they're opening up tunnels for me.” (P14)
In some cases a participant describes feeling complex characteristics about a presence that are
more than the sum of its form in the modal senses (referred to by some participants as ‘vibes’ but named
more formally here as ), such as the monkey described by participant 23 above, the experience
AMBIANCE
of which felt “fatherly or grandfatherly, that sort of vibe”. This ambiance suggests a role of amodal
feeling even during modal sensory experiences.
More remarkable, however, is the distinction made between semantically simple and semantically
complex qualities in perceived presences experienced through amodal feeling alone, without any
representation in the modal senses. A presence sensed via amodal feelings could be categorised as
semantically complex if it possesses relatively complex, specific, identifying characteristics beyond its
basic visual or spatial properties.
“There was this sense the whole time of being taught something and being shown something by a
higher power. … [It] has certain feminine qualities to it, which I can’t really understand why. It seems to
be a nurturing, teaching type sensation.” (P06);
In contrast, a presence sensed via amodal feelings could be categorised as semantically simple if
it had relatively simple characteristics without the same identifying quality, such as basic spatial
properties and/or an affective essence at the most.
“... lots of like...little, kind of, presences… they weren't like people or animals, they were just
like… whisks of alarm, like the emotion was split up into little whisky things… But I don't think I saw
them, I think I just thought like, I can feel them” (P08)
It is important to reiterate that, despite conveying specific semantic content, these felt
characteristics of presences are not mere beliefs but rather tangible experiences, described as occurring
acutely as feelings beyond the modal senses.
Modes of relating.
At times, presences were not merely perceived, but rather engaged in a variety of complex
relationship structures, each with specific roles and qualities. These , when had a
SOCIAL MODES ENGAGED
that could be , meaning the subject was passively being engaged
DIRECTION OF ENGAGEMENT PASSIVE
with by the perceived presence, or, alternatively, , meaning the subject had an experience of
ACTIVE
engaging, or going toward, the perceived presence - either figuratively or literally.
“the chanting dudes were in my peripheral vision, they were far away, not really interacting with
me, just pulling my attention a little bit” (P02); “I would look more to the monkey for reassurance than
the snake” (P23)
When , the perceived presence watched, or examined the subject. Presences were also
OBSERVING
experienced at times as , whereby an intentional transmission of information from the
COMMUNICATING
perceived presences is described, either through sound, visible gesture, or felt meaning. In the case of felt
meaning, this entails an experience of the content of the communication arising within the subject without
any clear sensory form - for example a felt meaning attributed to a presence but without a heard voice, or
a visible gesture or text.
“I've got a distinct sense [from the presences] of like, ‘Okay, you're doing this again’... ‘We were
very concerned for you last time. We're not going to be so concerned for you this time’.” (P17)
When , perceived presences were described as making actions perceived as
AFFECTING
intentionally trying to elicit an emotional response in the subject, such as taunting or reassuring. When
, the perceived presence moved the subject from one spatial location to another. Finally, when
GUIDING
, the perceived presence was experienced as physically manipulating the subject’s body.
MANIPULATING
“I feel that these presences are … spreading me in the environment, making my body expand
completely in my surroundings… they press and then spread me out in a semi-circular fashion.” (P03)
Here the became relevant too, determining whether interaction with a
RECEPTIVE MODES
perceived presence was accepted or resisted, or determining whether a presence was even brought into
attention. An additional subject / object configuration of presence experiences was internalisation, under
which presences were most commonly described as being located of the self boundary, but in
OUTSIDE
some cases described as being located outside of this boundary with a part of them , across the
ENTERING
boundary and into the self. No presences were described as located entirely within the boundary of the
self.
“"It was large and there were these tentacle-like things coming out of it … and they were entering
me.” (P01)
Phenomenological dynamics of the emergent DMT landscape
Further analysis modelling how the experience of the emergent DMT landscape developed over
time was performed, using the categories and phenomenological dimensions identified at the previous
stage. Two participants were excluded from this analysis due to incomplete interview data, leaving a total
of 21 participants.
Phase matrices
21 phase matrices were constructed and compared. We focus here on the dynamics of the
categories of sensory effects and perceived presences, as the interviews privileged the exploration of these
experiences and were common yet variable enough to distinguish one phase from the next and one
experience from another. The average number of phases in an experience was eight (minimum: five,
maximum: thirteen).
Through exploratory visual and analytic comparison of the categories and their dynamics in the
phase matrices, common patterns were observed. Two of the clearest will be described here: (1) structured
sequences in early sensory immersion and (2) dependencies between multisensory effects, spatial
complexity, and perceived presences.
Micro-development of sensory immersion under DMT.
The temporal granularity of the micro-phenomenological method allowed for precise
identification of the order in which the sensory effects of DMT were described as emerging. Comparing
the phase matrices revealed that the order in which the visual, bodily, and auditory senses were affected
by DMT was variable across participants. When the emergence of these three dimensions was mapped as
possible terminal points. Each participant made an average number of 2.85 transitions through the state
space (minimum number of transitions:1, maximum: 3). Across these sequences a general, hierarchical
through the state space, visual effects were most likely to emerge in the second transition (for sequences
that had a second transition), and auditory effects were most likely to emerge in the third transition (for
sequences that had a third transition).
of steps (with variable series length) between first onset and termination of the sequence, with, for
example, Sequence 1 representing bodily effects emerging first, visual effects emerging second, and
auditory effects emerging last, and Sequence 3 representing all three emerging at once, and a count of the
number of participants to which each sequence applied; B) all sequences visualised as plot lines through a
three dimensional state space, all beginning at point S and terminating at point A or B, with the values of
representing the percentage of participants for whom a category emerged at each transition, with the most
commonly observed category to emergence per transition made bold (columns do not sum to 100%
because multiple categories could emerge at each transition).
Micro-development of experiences of perceived presences.
Another structure observed in the phase matrices concerned the emergence of perceived presences
in relation to the sensory effects described above and 3D spatial characteristics. In all but one case, the
description of 3D spatial characteristics in the landscape did not occur unless bodily effects and effects in
one other sense modality (i.e. bodily and visual, or bodily and auditory) were previously or concurrently
described. This combination of sensory effects we refer to heretofore as multi-sensory effects (including
bodily). Additionally, in all cases where the perception of presences emerges, this did not emerge unless
both multisensory effects (including bodily) and 3D spatial characteristics were described.
When the emergence of these three dimensions was mapped as a series of transitions through a
participant made an average number of 1.8 transitions through the state space (minimum number of
whereby multi-sensory effects (including bodily) were most likely to emerge in the first transition through
the state space, 3D spatial characteristics and the perception of presences were equally most likely to
emerge in the second movement (for those sequences that had a second movement), and the perception of
presences was most likely to emerge in the third movement (for those sequences that had a third
movement).
as a series of steps (with variable series length) between first onset and termination of the sequence, with,
for example, sequence 1 representing multisensory (including bodily) effects emerging first, 3D spatial
characteristics emerging second, and the perception of presences emerging last, and sequence 5
representing all three emerging at once, and a count of the number of participants to which each sequence
applied; B) all sequences visualised as plot lines through a three dimensional state space, all beginning at
point S and terminating at point A, B, or C, with the values of 0 and 1 on each axis representing category
a category emerged at each transition, with the most commonly observed category to emergence per
transition made bold (columns do not sum to 100% because multiple categories could emerge at each
transition).
Results revealed two distinct types of bodily phenomena contributing to multisensory effects:
emergent bodily effects (e.g., vibrations, warm rushes, pressure) experienced by all participants (n=21),
and complete loss of bodily awareness reported by some (n=9). The timing of bodily awareness loss
varied relative to the emergence of 3D spatial characteristics, suggesting that the hierarchical relationship
between multisensory effects (including bodily) and 3D spatial characteristics was not dependent on any
specific type of bodily experience. Participants could be fully immersed in 3D environments whether they
maintained altered bodily awareness or lost it completely.
Results also showed that when considering the entire visual field at the moment of perceiving
presences (and not just the visual experience of those presences), the semantic complexity of the visual
content could be either entirely semantically simple, or a mixture of semantically simple and semantically
complex. Findings described above show that perceived presences need not be seen, but can rather be
heard or felt; and so we add that it also wasn’t necessary to have semantically complex visual experience
in any other part of the visual field in order for presences to be perceived (i.e., even If the visual
experience was semantically simple, semantically-complex experiences of presences were possible).
4. Discussion & conclusion
This study presents the first detailed micro-phenomenological investigation of DMT experiences,
revealing both a rich taxonomy of structural dimensions and clear patterns in how these dimensions
emerge and interact over time. The phenomenological categories we identified extend beyond traditional
constructs used in psychedelic research to capture specific ways that consciousness can be systematically
altered. These categories, combined with our temporal analysis showing the sequences in which they
emerged, provide new insights into how immersive states and perceived presences arise. This suggests
that even the most profound aspects of DMT experiences may follow discoverable patterns of
organisation. While transformations of consciousness could be either gradual or sudden, we found
consistent constraints on the ordering of phenomena - for example, perceived presences never emerged
without prior or concurrent establishment of multisensory effects and spatial structure. This hierarchical
organisation has implications for understanding both DMT's effects and the structure of consciousness
more broadly.
DMT-induced immersion
We identified a variety of dimensions through which participants described becoming immersed
in their experience, including multi-modal (and amodal) sensory engagement, shifts in the usual sense of
self, the construction (or transcendence) of an inhabited environment, and complex social engagements
with perceived presences.
Research in the field of virtual reality has similarly sought to conceptualise immersion as a broad
and multi-dimensional phenomenon, with one proposed model specifying dimensions of system
immersion, narrative immersion, and challenge immersion, which are (respectively): the degree to which
a system occludes and engages the various senses, the degree to which a subject is engaged and invested
in narrative content, and the degree to which a subject is engaged in the performance of a particular task
or activity (Nilsson et al., 2016). Due to a focus on sensory form we believe the results of the present
study align most closely with the concept of system immersion, however categories that structure the
complex relational dynamic of presence encounters also touch upon the concepts of narrative and
challenge immersion. In order to further extend this tripart model of system, narrative, and challenge
immersion to the psychedelic experience, we might broadly conceive of system immersion as the degree
to which a compound can deconstruct the usual sense of the dosing environment and reconstruct a new
environment (or perceptual landscape without environment-like qualities) in its place; narrative
immersion as the degree to which attention and emotion are captured by the content of insights and
visions as they unfold; and challenge immersion as the degree of effort with which the subject is
attentionally and behaviourally engaged in techniques for navigating their experience towards desired,
and away from undesired, states (also known as psychedelic know-how; Timmermann et al., 2022). This
framework brings together disparate aspects of psychedelic experience and centeres them on the broad yet
specific concept of immersion, which highlights a need for comparative neurophenomenological research
(see Timmermann et al., 2023) into compounds that produce experiences that differ in not just the
intensity, but the type of immersion.
DMT-induced alterations to self processing
This study supports claims that psychedelics offer unique opportunities to probe the plasticity of
self-related processes, inducing dissolution of the boundary between self and world and experiences of
unity.
Under DMT, participants reported fundamental alterations in self-world boundaries through
multiple pathways. Some experienced synaesthetic fusion of tactile and visual modalities, while others
reported complete dissolution of the perceiver-perceived distinction, leaving only a deconstructed sense of
awareness. Basic spatial relationships - such as being "inside" versus "outside" the perceived
environment, or the environment being "internal" versus "external" to the self - lost their conventional
meaning as self and world boundaries dissolved. This collapse of spatial-relational distinctions reveals
one specific structural pathway through which psychedelic experiences may generate paradoxical or
'non-dual' qualities.
These findings provide a more precise phenomenological framework for describing experiences
of unity - traditionally categorised as aspects of 'mystical experience' (Stace, 1960; Barrett et al., 2015) -
while avoiding imposing cultural and spiritual interpretative confounds (Sanders & Zijlmans, 2021). This
framework could be further developed through research with compounds like 5-MeO-DMT that reliably
induce self-world unity experiences (Timmermann, Sanders, et al., 2024).
DMT-induced perceived presences
The findings of this study sheds light on the striking phenomenon of perceived presences under
DMT by highlighting the dynamic and multifaceted nature of these experiences. Perceived presences (be
they singular or multiple) were described as inhabiting an emergent environment or suffusing the broader
experience, and were sensed in a variety of ways including visual, auditory, and tactile perceptions, and
some participants reporting amodal feelings of presence without clear sensory representation. The
presences varied in complexity, from featureless and abstract to complex and figurative, and were often
experienced as engaging with the participant in different relational modes, such as observing, affecting, or
communicating. These findings confirm the degree of structural information that is (implicitly) present in
previous research without a structural focus - for example, the variability in sensory modality, form and
identity, and type of relationship described by Michael et al. (2021) and Lawrence et al. (2022) - however,
here we explicitly lay out a network of dimensions on which further comparative phenomenological
research can be conducted. Presence phenomena are not unique to DMT and have been described under
circumstances of neurological disorder, extreme psychical and emotional stress, and intentionally induced
illusion (reviewed in Alderson-Day et al., 2023), and so comparative neurophenomenological research is
needed to identify etiology-specific qualities (both phenomenological and neurobiological) of these
presence experiences. Additionally, given the cultural significance of presence encounters to DMT users
in spiritual contexts (Luke, 2011), it remains an important comparative question whether presences
perceived under DMT are relatively often appraised as ‘real’ and if so what are there any etiology-specific
qualities that contribute to this.
Hierarchy and (de)construction
Taking a structural, dynamic, and temporally precise approach revealed hierarchical patterns in
DMT experiences that traditional psychometric tools cannot capture. Our micro-phenomenological
analysis showed that sensory modalities (especially bodily sensations) typically emerged first, followed
by visual and auditory effects, which then were followed by complex three-dimensional environments.
Perceived presences emerged only after these multi-sensory and spatial foundations were established
(unless they emerged concurrently), suggesting higher-order phenomena may require integration of more
fundamental elements. This lens of hierarchy and integration aligns with theories of predictive processing
and hierarchical brain function in constructing coherent perceptual experiences, and reflects the intricate
and layered nature of the DMT experience, where phenomenological complexity builds over time.
Importantly, these findings could inform future research to test the temporal and hierarchical relations
between specific experiences and inform the phenomenological structure of habitual experiences (e.g., of
immersion into everyday environments or of social cognition).
It is notable, however, that hierarchy was not ubiquitous across all dimensions related to
complexity, because semantic complexity of the visual sensory experience (i.e.: whether the subject had
semantically simple versus complex visual hallucinations; Shenyan et al., 2024) did not seem to predict
the emergence of presences. The differing relationship of spatial complexity and semantic complexity to
the emergence of perceived presences remains an open question for further phenomenological research.
The precedence of low-level sensory effects to both the perception of 3D space and the perception
of presences under DMT resonates with research showing that non-pharmacological disruption of
multisensory integration can produce both spatial disorientation and presence experiences (Blanke, 2014,
2016), with bodily perception being key in both cases. However, the earlier emergence of presence
phenomena versus visual hallucinations in Parkinson's disease (Fénelon et al., 2000) suggests multiple
pathways may lead to presence experiences, thus warranting further investigation into each possibility.
Future work and integration with neurophenomenology
The categories presented here do not exhaustively capture all structural dimensions of immersion
and perceived presences under DMT. Further phenomenological research can explore new categories, for
example by expanding beyond system immersion to examine narrative and challenge dimensions,
including affect, attention, and thought. Research with specialised participants - such as advanced
meditators and experienced psychedelic practitioners - could help elucidate previously unrecognised
aspects of these experiences and reveal how expertise influences the structural categories that can emerge.
Additionally, while the focus of this exploratory analysis was drawn to where sequential patterns were
most evident in the onset stage, further exploration of dynamic structures across the peak and comedown
phases is needed.
Another important key step will be assessing correlations between the phenomenological
categories identified here and the concurrently recorded EEG and fMRI data. This can provide insight
into the neural correlates of the dynamic transitions observed in the phenomenological data, and may
contribute to mechanistic theory integrating subjective and objective phenomena following the
neurophenomenological research programme (Timmermann et al., 2023; Varela, 1996). Key questions
include whether the phases of multisensory integration are associated with specific patterns of cortical
connectivity? And, does the perception of presences correspond to activity in brain regions implicated in
social cognition, such as the temporoparietal junction and other areas of the default network?
The present study focuses on identifying phenomenological dimensions that structure the DMT
experience, and further work should quantify the frequency with which certain parts of the structural state
space are visited. Such research should also quantify the average time after dosing at which each category
emerges. Additionally, while participants described clear phenomenological sequences, they could only
be anchored to clock time at one minute intervals per the frequency of experience sampling interventions.
More precise temporal data could be gathered through non-invasive methods like button presses, enabling
better correlation with brain imaging and physiological metrics.
Finally, the methodological approach presented here can be extended beyond DMT to build a
broader taxonomy of consciousness states and their structural properties, as demonstrated by recent
studies of mind-wandering, meditation, micro-dreams, and dreamless sleep (Petitmengin et al., 2017;
Nave et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024; Nielsen, 2017; Alcaraz-Sanchez, 2023). Comparative analyses could
clarify how fundamental structures of experience variously transform under a variety of specific
conditions, adding to our understanding of consciousness and lived experience.
Limitations
Despite its contributions, this study is not without limitations. The lab setting, experience
sampling procedures, and concurrent fMRI scanning may have influenced the phenomenology
(Hartogsohn, 2017; Roseman et al., 2024), though the described experiences aligned with reports from
both naturalistic and other lab contexts (Michael et al., 2021, 2023; Strassman, 1996).
Additionally, while the micro-phenomenological method aims to mitigate reporting biases such as
selective recall and post-hoc rationalisation, we cannot be certain that they are eliminated entirely. This
highlights the need for triangulation of these results with other methodologies. For example, the
recurrence of phenomenological categories could be validated by observing if this recurrence is also
evident in brain imaging data. Finally, while efforts were made to ensure analytical rigour the process
remains inherently qualitative, and therefore subjective. Further developing standardised protocols for
phenomenological analysis could enhance the replicability of these findings.
Conclusion
By adopting a structural and temporally precise approach to the phenomenology of DMT-induced
experiences, our findings may advance our understanding of the dynamic architecture of consciousness.
The categories presented here extend beyond traditional constructs such as ‘ego-dissolution’, visual
hallucination, or ‘mystical experience’ to include dimensions like semantic complexity and amodal
feeling. These insights enrich our understanding of how sensory modalities and spatial characteristics
interact to create immersive experiences, offering a richer conceptual framework for studying
consciousness and its alteration. This has implications for psychedelic science, cognitive neuroscience,
and the science of consciousness more broadly, highlighting DMT as an asset to the study of the mind and
brain, as well as the micro-phenomenological method as a means to improve validity, granularity and
precision in psychedelic phenomenology and neurophenomenology.