Title: Toward building a decision-making paradigm for dynamic and real-world addictive
behaviors
Authors:
Woo-Young Ahn1,2,3, Jeung-Hyun Lee1, and Hyeonjin Kim1
1Department of Psychology, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
3AI Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Number of Figures & Tables: 1 / 0
Number of words in the abstract: 127
Number of words in the main text: 2,184
Number of references: 36
Corresponding author:
Woo-Young Ahn, Ph.D.
Department of Psychology
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea 08826
Tel: +82-2-880-2538, Fax: +82-2-877-6428. E-mail: wahn55@snu.ac.kr
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Abstract
The decision-making framework and computational models have been
instrumental in revealing the neurocognitive processes that underlie human behaviors,
significantly enhancing our understanding of the human mind. However, traditional
approaches often fall short in closely mimicking real-world behaviors due to their
oversimplified nature, inability to capture the dynamic aspects of the human mind, and
heavy reliance on secondary (e.g., monetary) rewards that have limited ecological utility.
This article summarizes the evolution and recent developments of computational
approaches in understanding human cognition and decision-making, with a particular
focus on addiction. We highlight the transition from conventional laboratory-based
methods to innovative approaches that more effectively simulate real-world scenarios.
These advanced approaches leverage state-of-the-art computational techniques to
capture dynamic psychological processes, contributing to the ongoing development and
advances in the field.
Computational modeling serves as a critical tool for understanding the intricacies
of the human mind (Busemeyer & Diederich, 2010). By abstracting and formalizing
complex cognitive processes into mathematical algorithms and formal structures,
computational models allow researchers to generate precise predictions about human
behavior and underlying neurocognitive processes. Often, such models bridge between
formal theories or hypotheses of cognition and empirical data, providing a framework to
test and refine our hypotheses about human decision-making processes. Thus,
computational approaches facilitate the comparison of multiple theories and suggest best
accounts for observed empirical data. Computational modeling not only advances our
theoretical understanding of the human mind but also paves the way for practical
applications in areas such as artificial intelligence, cognitive neuroscience, and mental
health (Huys et al., 2016; Montague et al., 2012).
Traditionally, researchers have developed various laboratory tasks, which are
highly controlled and comprised of often hundreds of trials, to assess behaviors and
decision-making processes. The central idea is that individuals compute and make
actions based on their subjective values on such laboratory tasks. Reinforcement learning
(RL) tasks and algorithms are excellent examples. RL algorithms propose that subjective
values are updated based on feedback from the environment, such as rewards and
punishments, often on a trial-by-trial basis. Using the RL framework, researchers have
investigated decision-making tendencies associated with multiple systems, such as the
Pavlovian, instrumental, and habitual systems. For example, studies have employed a
decision-making task known as the Two-Step Task (Daw et al., 2011) to illustrate the
conflict between the habitual system (model-free) and the instrumental (model-based)
system. With computational modeling, we can estimate how a participant’s decisions are
influenced by a balance between goal-directed actions and habitual responses. Other
tasks that have been widely used in psychological sciences include the Iowa Gambling
Task (Bechara et al., 1994), the Cambridge Gambling Task (Rogers et al., 1999), and
Choice under Risk and Ambiguity task (Levy et al., 2010) and we can reveal latent
processes and quantify related individual differences using model parameters – such as
risk aversion, loss aversion, and ambiguity aversion, etc.
Computational approaches are widely accepted in psychiatric research and also
in the area of substance use disorders (SUDs) (Ahn & Busemeyer, 2016; Maia & Frank,
2011). For instance, recent studies demonstrate altered learning from reward and
punishment in individuals with SUDs, showing increased learning from punishment and
decreased learning from reward (e.g., Bağci et al., 2022), although some findings diverge.
Also, the imbalance between model-based and model-free behaviors has been linked to
alcohol use disorder, which was more prominent in individuals with shorter periods of
abstinence (Doñamayor et al., 2018) and those with chronic alcohol use (Nebe et al.,
2018). Furthermore, the degree of model-based behavior has been shown to predict
alcohol relapse in conjunction with alcohol expectancies (Sebold et al., 2017). Regarding
risk-taking, opioid use was associated with increased ambiguity tolerance (Konova et al.,
2020), while reduced loss aversion is associated with gambling, alcohol consumption
(Genauck et al., 2017), and internet gaming (Hong et al., 2023).
A diverse set of skills including mathematical proficiency and data analytic skills
are necessary for computational modeling (e.g., Montague et al., 2012). Lowering the
barrier to computational modeling is of paramount importance because it provides access
to advanced computational methods, allowing researchers from even non-computational
backgrounds to integrate these methods into their research and promoting
interdisciplinary collaboration. In recent years, several approaches and tools have
emerged (e.g., Ahn et al., 2017; Daunizeau et al., 2014; Frässle et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2020) to make computational modeling more accessible to a broader audience including
those with limited programming or mathematical background.
decision-making experimental paradigms lies in its overly simplistic and static features in
resemblance of the real-world (Lee et al., 2024; Wise et al., 2023). Specifically, traditional
decision-making tasks (1) are overly simplified and too simplistic to mimic real-world
decision-making, (2) often fail to capture the dynamic psychological processes during the
decision-making, and (3) rely heavily on secondary rewards (i.e., money).
First, a significant limitation stems from the prevalence of "toy" tasks in
psychological research. While these well-controlled, often abstract tasks are valuable for
isolating each specific cognitive processes, they may not capture the complexities of
decision-making in naturalistic settings. To bridge this gap, there is a growing emphasis
on real-time, real-world tasks to better mimic complex human behavior than simple
laboratory tasks. These tasks also require the development and application of advanced
analytic techniques to handle the intricacies of real-world data. Recent advancements in
the field have recognized these gaps and are taking innovative steps to address them.
For instance, real-world tasks including video games are being harnessed to study
decision-making in more dynamic environments (e.g., Cross et al., 2020). Researchers
are now employing more naturalistic stimuli like movie watching paradigms and video
games, which provide rich, continuous, and engaging contexts, to better approximate
real-world decision-making scenarios.
Second, traditional decision-making paradigms have put too much weight on
"snapshots" of human behavior. In other words, researchers would analyze isolated
moments or singular instances while human psychological states are inherently dynamic,
fluctuating, and variant. Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) and digital
phenotyping have been powerful tools to may address this by repeatedly sampling
individual experiences in a real time manner. By requiring multiple data collection or
sampling during various psychological states, it might be possible to capture and
understand the dynamic changes of a decision-making process over time.
Third, most of the behavioral and fMRI studies on decision-making have used
secondary rewards, such as monetary rewards and punishments, to gauge decision-
making processes. While such monetary rewards may allow us to study various aspects
of decision-making, they might be limited in reflecting the motivations and consequences
associated with primary rewards (e.g., nicotine) especially in the context of addictive
behaviors (Modak et al., 2021a).
Naturalistic decision-making task
To mimic real-world behavior and assess impulsivity, a closely related and
important construct for SUDs, Lee et al. (2024) have developed the "Highway Task", a
real-time driving test in which participants control a car on a visual highway and drive as
fast as possible without crashing into other car. It was presumed that the Highway Task
would assay many traits that are associated with SUDs, particularly impulsivity and
sustained attention. Indeed, behavioral performance in the Highway Task was very highly
correlated with the self-reported impulsivity, the Barrett Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11) (r
= -.46, p<0.01). Furthermore, unlike traditional trial-by-trial laboratory tasks, the Highway
Task continuously offers interactive trajectories, resembling complex real-world scenarios.
In real-world situations that require self-control and attentiveness, a few elements in the
environment interact with individual impulsivity, and the Highway Task better captures
this pattern compared to traditional measures such as the Go/Nogo task and the delay
discounting task. Lee et al. used a deep neural network (DNN) based inverse
reinforcement learning algorithm, which can represent complex associations between
states and actions in real-time tasks to approximate nonlinear reward functions. By
integrating DNN with inverse reinforcement learning (i.e., deep inverse reinforcement
learning), subjective rewards are inferred in real time for given states and actions. The
rewards derived by inverse reinforcement learning can be interpreted as a participant’s
internal reward or preference, making it a valuable tool for modeling human decision
making.
Rapid and efficient computational markers in an EMA setting
Upon an extensive body of preceding studies, there has been a growing interest
toward development of reliable predictors of various conditions in addiction. Accounting
for complexity and dynamicity in addictive decisions, Empirical studies have motivated
the utility of EMA and computational makers to predict addictive drug use patterns. Using
a long-term temporal window, such that smaller ambiguity tolerance characterizes
increased odd of opioid use disorder relapse (Alvarez et al., 2022; Konova et al., 2020).
A major challenge of conducting an EMA study with participants’ low engagement and
their cognitive burden.
A promising approach to address the issue is the use of a machine learning
algorithm called adaptive design optimization (ADO; Myung et al., 2013), which fine-tunes
experimental design on the fly, which enables an efficient and reliable estimation of the
model parameters. Specifically, unlike traditional tasks that consist of hundreds of trials,
the implementation of ADO can reduce the required trials to just 20-30, thereby
dramatically alleviating the burden on participants for daily data collection (Ahn et al.,
2020). Our recent study (Lee et al., in preparation) investigated computational markers of
smoking utilizing EMA and ADO-based decision-making tasks during 5-6 weeks of data
collection. With ADO, we were able to ask participants to complete decision-making tasks
on a daily basis. The results revealed that ADO-based computational markers, such as
ambiguity aversion and delay discounting rate are important predictors of future smoking behavior.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that we can capture the dynamic changes of computational
markers with ADO and just one week of ADO-based computational markers are sufficient for
predicting the success of smoking cessation in 5-6 weeks.
Delivering actual drug rewards to humans in a laboratory setting
As part of ongoing efforts to address the inherent limitations of highly controlled
laboratory experiments (i.e., reduced ecological validity and compromised
generalizability), several attempts have been made to employ experiments utilizing
addictive substances or primary rewards. Largely motivated from animal studies, deficits
in action inhibition toward addictive substances and devaluation of other primary rewards
(i.e., food) have been implicated in addiction studies (Carelli & West, 2014).
Until recently, most of the laboratory paradigms adapted monetary reward to
account for appetitive motivations for human participants. While the field has advanced
the understanding of shared neural mechanisms of dysfunction of the reward circuit in
addiction (Goldstein & Volkow, 2011), most of the studies used financial reward to
understand the neural mechanisms of decision-making underlying addiction. A most well-
known paradigm that engages drug cues is a cue-reactivity paradigm, where participants’
behaviors and neural activity during exposure to drug or related cues are measured (Kühn
& Gallinat, 2011; Tiffany et al., 2000). However, even with the cue-reactivity paradigm
typically does not deliver real drug reward to a participant.
Following previous efforts, there is an increasing trend to enhance the ecological
validity and realism of laboratory paradigms. To this end, a few recent attempts have set
participants to receive actual drug rewards (i.e., vape e-cigarettes) inside the MRI scanner
(Lim et al., 2020; Modak et al., 2021b; Wall et al., 2017). The results suggest distinct
neural circuits are engaged when processing drug and monetary rewards. In Modak et al.
(2021), recruitment of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) during nicotine anticipation was
in line with the previous findings of the ACC’s role in increased craving with drug
availability (Rose et al., 2013). Experimental environments of actual drug-use would
contribute to increased craving level compared to non-drug reward or delayed availability
of addictive drugs (Gu et al., 2016). Use of actual drug rewards to participants with
addiction is expected to expand generalizability in a sense that it is more naturalistic and
alike with actual situations when participants decide to smoke.
Conclusions and future directions
Previous studies highlight the pivotal role of computational modeling in
elucidating the complexities of human cognition and decision-making. However, the
advancements including EMA, artificial intelligence, and naturalistic paradigms in the
field have marked a significant shift in our approach to understanding human cognition
and decision-making. This body of work not only highlights the traditional strengths of
computational methods but, more importantly, underscores the innovative strategies
employed to address the limitations of conventional approaches.
We can think of several promising avenues for future research, informed by both
recent works and the limitations identified by many researchers. Importantly, future
research should focus on developing tasks that more closely mimic real-world decision-
making scenarios. This includes the use of dynamic, real-time tasks and stimuli that
provide richer, more engaging contexts. Efforts should be directed towards integrating
these real-world tasks with advanced analytic techniques to handle the complexities of
real-world data. This endeavor can be combined with methodologies that can capture
the dynamic nature of psychological states during decision-making. Techniques like
EMA and mobile technology should be further explored and refined to understand how
decision-making processes evolve over time. In addition, we believe future studies
should seriously consider employing a broad range of experiments that utilize primary
rewards, especially in the context of addictive behaviors and related psychopathology.
This approach could provide deeper insights into the motivations and consequences
associated with primary rewards, thereby enhancing the ecological validity of the
addiction research. Lastly, the application of artificial intelligence including deep neural
networks to human and animal research represents a promising frontier. This
combination can effectively model complex associations between states and actions in
real-time tasks, offering a nuanced understanding of internal reward systems and
preferences in human decision-making.
In conclusion, the field stands at a promising juncture, with computational
modeling and newly developed techniques offering a powerful tools for investigating the
intricacies of the human mind. As we move forward, it is imperative to continue
innovating and refining our approaches, ensuring that our models and tasks are as
nuanced and realistic as the behaviors they seek to understand.
Recommended Reading
Ahn, W.-Y., Gu, H., Shen, Y., Haines, N., Hahn, H. A., Teater, J. E., Myung, J. I., & Pitt,
M. A. (2020). Rapid, precise, and reliable measurement of delay discounting using
a Bayesian learning algorithm. Scientific reports, 10(1), 12091.
Cross, L., Cockburn, J., Yue, Y., & O’Doherty, J. P. (2021). Using deep reinforcement
learning to reveal how the brain encodes abstract state-space representations in
high-dimensional environments. Neuron, 109(4), 724-738.
Lee, S. H., Song, M. S., Oh, M., & Ahn, W.-Y. (2024). Bridging the gap between self-
report and behavioral laboratory measures:1A real-time driving task with inverse
reinforcement learning. Psychological Science, 35(4), 345-357.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grant funded by MSIT the Korea government [No.
2021M3E5D2A0102249311]; the BK21 FOUR Program [5199990314123] to W.-Y.A.;
the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health Industry
Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of
Korea (grant number HI22C0404 [to W.-Y.A.]); and the Creative-Pioneering
Researchers Program through Seoul National University as well as Seoul National
University Research Grant in 2019 to W.-Y.A.