Please note that this is the accepted version of this manuscript, and the published article may differ.
Reference: Matsick, J. L., Sullivan, J. T., Todd, E., Kruk, M., & Cook, J. E. (2024). A social
ecological approach to belonging in LGBTQ+ people. Nature Reviews Psychology, 3, 181-197.
A Social Ecological Approach to Belonging in LGBTQ+ People
Jes L. Matsick1, 2†, Jude T. Sullivan1, 2, Emerson Todd1, 2, Mary Kruk1, 2, and Jonathan E. Cook1
1 Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
2 Department of Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, USA.
†Corresponding author email: jmatsick@psu.edu
Author contributions
J.M. was responsible for the conception and design of the article, writing and editing, and
supervision of student authors. J.S., E.T., and M.K. reviewed the literature and contributed
writing of sections. J.C. provided content expertise, writing, and editing. All authors reviewed the
manuscript before submission.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Abstract
People who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer and other people who are
sexual and gender minorities (denoted by the umbrella term LGBTQ+) experience more
physical and mental health problems than cisgender or heterosexual people, in part due to
excess stress of experiencing stigma. Although it is important to document negative events in
LGBTQ+ people’s lives, it is also necessary to identify conditions that provide LGBTQ+ people
with the opportunity to thrive. One key psychological factor that can promote prosperity and
lessen LGBTQ+ people’s disparate health problems is a sense of belonging. In this Review, we
summarize factors identified in the psychological science, public health, and public policy
literatures that influence LGBTQ+ people’s belonging. We use a social ecological model to
describe factors that enhance and detract from belonging at the individual, interpersonal,
community, and societal levels. Our multi-pronged approach encourages the flourishing of
LGBTQ+ people as individuals while addressing structural forces that shape their psychosocial
well-being. This Review is a resource for researchers, health practitioners, and policymakers
who seek to understand diverse factors of belonging based on sexual orientation and gender
diversity.
Keywords: belonging, sexual orientation, gender identity, stigma, social identity, health
disparities
A Social Ecological Approach to Belonging in LGBTQ+ People
Introduction
People who are sexual and gender minorities experience more physical and
psychological health problems1,2 than their cisgender and heterosexual peers, in part due to the
excess stress that they experience in response to stigma3-7. The acronym LGBTQ+ is an
umbrella term used to refer to sexual and gender minority individuals, including individuals who
identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ), with the plus sign
representing other minoritized identities, sexual orientations, and behaviors that are not
reflected by the acronym’s named identities. By contrast, cisgender is a term that refers to
people who identify as their gender assigned at birth. The scientific literature and large-scale
research funding efforts have traditionally favored a differences and deficits approach that
underscores dysfunction, distress, and pathology within LGBTQ+ populations8-16. However,
relatively less attention has been given to what enriches life for LGBTQ+ people and the
conditions that promote LGBTQ+ people’s well-being, which is crucial to fully understand the
psychology of sexual orientation and gender diversity17. As a consequence of the prevailing
minority-as-deficit approach, an essential aspect of life that might both reduce health disparities
and promote thriving among LGBTQ+ people has been overlooked: a sense of belonging.
Belonging refers to the psychological state of establishing a sense of positive
connections to others18-20 and corresponds with a positive sense of self and identity15,17 (Box 1).
People acquire a strong sense of belonging through social acceptance and integration21.
However, belonging can vary from moment to moment and place to place. When people feel
greater belonging, they perform better on tasks20, express more motivation22, and experience
mental health benefits, such as less depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation 23,24. Given the
dire costs of not belonging (including loneliness and isolation), fulfilling the need to belong has
been considered on par with meeting other essential needs18, such as food and shelter. Indeed,
when people doubt the quality of their social relationships—situations that can trigger ‘belonging
uncertainty’22—they psychologically and physiologically respond negatively25,26. For example,
feeling disconnected from others is associated with more suicide attempts27, impaired cognitive
functioning28, and greater mortality risk29, leading experts to assert that belonging is a public
health priority30,31. Belonging is measured through constructs including social belonging,
Furthermore, it can be measured in different contexts, such as families, communities, and
schools.
Like other stigmatized groups, LGBTQ+ people routinely encounter challenges to their
belonging in institutions and organizations32, through laws and policies33, within communities34,
and among families35 and peers36. On average, LGBTQ+ individuals experience greater
loneliness and isolation than their cisgender and/or heterosexual counterparts37,38, and initial
evidence suggests that the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated such disparities by isolating
LGBTQ+ people from networks that affirm their belonging39. Chronic threats to LGBTQ+
people’s belonging can activate rejection sensitivity40, perceptions of low social safety41, and
heighten minority stress and mental health disparities42, all of which serve an explanatory role in
social and health disparities (Box 2). By contrast, having a robust social network and feeling
connected to one’s community contribute to positive health outcomes among LGBTQ+ people
across the lifespan, even in the face of adversity43-46. Put simply, for people to thrive, they need
one another. Researchers have therefore called for greater empirical attention to belonging and
other positive psychological states as pathways toward strengthening the psychological and
physical health of LGBTQ+ people12,15,46,47.
Conceptualizing belonging necessitates an understanding of how individuals relate to
other people and their broader social contexts. A social ecological perspective helps
conceptualize the determinants of belonging. Social ecological models are widely used and
versatile frameworks to understand factors that influence health and well-being and inform
health promotion programming48-54. These models detail risk and protective health-relevant
levels are multi-faceted and interconnected, such that multiple influential factors exist at each
level and the levels inform one another in an ongoing, reciprocal process 53. For example, the
psychological characteristics of people (individual level) can be influenced by broader social
systems in which they live49,52, and people can influence broader social systems54.
Researchers, community leaders, and health professionals draw upon social ecological
models to guide interventions at each level and to address a variety of health issues, such as
community health48,50,52, violence prevention51, bullying and victimization55, and chronic illness
management56. The multi-level, interactional approach is useful for examining LGBTQ+ people’s
well-being because it organizes and accounts for factors within each level and across levels that
might strengthen or weaken belonging. Further, interventions on the primary outcome
(belonging) have the best chance to succeed when multiple levels are targeted53,54 and this
multi-level approach increases the likelihood of goal alignment such that interventions reinforce
one another toward a shared interest57,58. The possible effects of interventions across multiple
levels operate bidirectionally54,58,59: efforts made within broader systems influence more
proximal systems (top-down effects), and interventions within smaller units influence social
structures beyond the individual (bottom-up effects). Consequently, a cross-level approach to
increase belonging simultaneously promotes the flourishing of LGBTQ+ people as individuals
while critically addressing macro-level, structural forces that contribute to people's psychosocial
well-being.
In this Review, we synthesize factors that contribute to LGBTQ+ people’s belonging. We
put forward a social ecological model of belonging to analyze how individual differences and
contextual factors—from the individual to the broader society—shape belonging. First, we
review factors influencing belonging at the individual level, focusing on psychological differences
and sociodemographic characteristics. We then examine the interpersonal level and how
relationships within families and with peers and friends might influence belonging. Finally, we
examine the broader levels, community and society, to discuss the influences of neighborhood,
work, and school connections on belonging, as well as the influences of laws, norms, and
policies. We aim to spark new ideas for elevating belonging among LGBTQ+ people and
researchers and outline future directions for researchers to consider in measurement and theory
development. Previous articles cover critical factors of LGBTQ+ people’s psychological health,
such as rejection sensitivity40, social safety41, and experiences of stigma5,7, and previous
reviews focus on the mental health of specific LGBTQ+ groups6,60,61. Our Review is unique in
integrating the social psychology of belonging so firmly with LGBTQ+ people's psychosocial
well-being. Alternative versions and approaches to social ecological frameworks exist62,63. We
appreciate a social ecological model’s flexibility and generality as it can accommodate various
outcomes, life stages, and both positive and negative psychological experiences.
We acknowledge within-group differences among LGBTQ+ people, recognizing the
multiple identities and systems of advantage and disadvantage that texturize people's
experiences of their sexual orientation and gender identity. Referring to LGBTQ+ people as a
single-category monolith is a flawed yet frequent feature of the psychology literature64,65—one
that our Review necessarily reflects. When the information is available and relevant, we specify
LGBTQ+ subgroups and use the sampling language of the original studies. The reviewed
literature mostly provides a U.S. and Western perspective because that is where most of the
research to date has been conducted, and we point out opportunities for expanding this
research across the globe.
Individual Level
We begin with the most proximal level of the social ecological model: the individual. This
section explores the diversity of LGBTQ+ people’s psychological individual differences and
Psychological Factors
Belonging varies among LGBTQ+ individuals through experiences and expectations of
stigma. Prolonged exposure to stigma increases anticipation of stigma41 and long-term
anticipatory stigma can lead to chronic threat-vigilance in which LGBTQ+ individuals alter their
behaviors to protect themselves against potential threats41, which can disrupt their sense of
belonging66. When anticipating more stigma, individuals also expect rejection from others and
exhibit higher levels of rejection sensitivity or readily perceiving rejection40 even inaccurately67.
In turn, LGBTQ+ individuals with higher rejection sensitivity actively try to avoid rejection and
perceive potential rejection as intentional, which might act as a self-fulfilling prophecy leading to
actual rejection and ultimately impacting social belonging40,67. Taken together, individuals who
experience high anticipatory stigma, chronic threat-vigilance, and rejection sensitivity might feel
less social belonging because they expect (and are sensitive to) suggestions that they do not
belong.
Although the anticipated rejection experienced by LGBTQ+ individuals might hinder
belonging in the general sense, stigma and discrimination can also enhance belonging to
LGBTQ+ communities68. Shared adversity increases group cohesion because people often turn
to other ingroup members seeking connections and people with whom they can confide69,70 and
turn to the group’s collective resources such as social support or advocacy to cope with adverse
experiences16,71,72. LGBTQ+ individuals can compensate for lost feelings of belonging from the
outgroup of cisgender and/or heterosexual people by strengthening their belonging to LGBTQ+
communities, and this restored sense of belonging can be protective against rejection from
society at large73,74. LGBTQ+ individuals who believe that their sexual orientation is not a choice
but rather beyond their control might feel more connection to LGBTQ+ communities because
that is a prevailing ideology in LGBTQ+ communities75 and might reinforce the creation of a
minoritized ingroup. Indeed, lesbian and gay people endorse essentialism (the belief that one’s
sexual orientation is given or natural) more than bisexual people do, which in turn is positively
related to lesbian and gay people’s greater belongingness and identification with LGBTQ+
communities76.
To some extent, belonging depends on individuals’ disclosure of their LGBTQ+ identity
to others (whether they are ‘out’, Box 3). Many LGBTQ+ people weigh the benefits of disclosure
and authenticity against the risk of losing belonging if they are out to unsupportive individuals70.
Some LGBTQ+ people decide to conceal their LGBTQ+ identities to preserve their sense of
belonging and avoid discrimination. Whereas some people might temporarily alter their behavior
or conceal their identity in threatening situations77, others might pursue long-term behavior
modifications by concealing their identity in some or all aspects of their life (for example,
remaining closeted at work to avoid being fired). However, individuals who conceal their identity
might not feel that they belong as their authentic selves78 and carry an increased risk of
internalizing negative views that others have about their identities79 (internalized stigma), which
is associated with worse psychological health and decreased belonging (for example, to
LGBTQ+ communities and groups of friends 73,80). The effort and stress of managing disclosure
and concealment might create a barrier to intimacy, further perpetuating belonging
concerns73,79,80.
Strategies to increase belonging among LGBTQ+ people include helping to manage the
disclosure process and leveraging tools of social psychology to help people affirm their self-
integrity and reframe belonging concerns. Although we recognize that not all LGBTQ+
individuals value disclosure to the same extent (for example, LGBTQ+ people of color often feel
tension with white LGBTQ+ communities’ emphasis on being out81), providing safe spaces for
disclosure might help increase belonging. Disclosure-related strategies include helping people
to create positive first disclosure experiences, delaying disclosure to maximize safety, and
gauging the safety of a situation to determine disclosure risks or engage in selective
disclosure82. Social psychological interventions can increase belonging by encouraging people
to affirm their core values83 and by framing feelings of belonging uncertainty as transitory20. For
example, the globally widespread It Gets Better media campaign featured LGBTQ+ individuals
sharing their stories of adversity alongside messaging that adversity experiences diminished or
became more manageable over time as people form meaningful social connections84. Brief
belonging interventions could offer a low-cost and relatively easily implemented strategy to help
people consider a similar message that belonging can improve over time20.
Long-term LGBTQ+-affirming mental healthcare can also increase belonging by offering
strategies and resources that facilitate social connections, but barriers still exist to these
interventions. For LGBTQ+ individuals to access affirming mental healthcare, there must be
practitioners with cultural competency for the variety of identities and experiences of the
LGBTQ+ population, including intersecting marginalized identities such as LGBTQ+ people of
color. Moreover, it is crucial that healthcare practitioners can provide these services without the
threat of legal action when providing gender-affirming care85,86.
Sociodemographic Factors
Despite some shared experiences among LGBTQ+ people, belonging varies by
sociodemographic factors, including gender identity and expression, sexual orientation, race
and/or ethnicity, and age.
Transgender individuals report higher rates of discrimination than their cisgender LGBQ+
peers, which hinders their belonging in general and within specific contexts61,87. Furthermore,
although LGBQ+ individuals might find solace in LGBTQ+ communities, transgender individuals
sometimes face further exclusion within those communities64,88,89. Transgender individuals who
do not ’pass’ as cisgender and instead are visibly transgender or gender non-conforming can
feel particularly excluded from society90. Both cisgender and transgender LGBTQ+ people note
that non-conformity in gender expression substantially contributes to their experiences of
stigma91,92. Although being gender non-conforming can compromise belonging because it puts
people at risk for heightened stigma, completely hiding one’s gender identity (going ‘stealth’) is
not possible or desirable to everyone93.
Bisexual people also deal with potential ostracization from LGBTQ+ and heterosexual
communities94, threatening their belonging. Compared to lesbian and gay people, bisexual
individuals disclose their sexual identity less frequently47 and feel less connected to LGBTQ+
communities95-97. Bisexual people experience different treatment within LGBTQ+ communities
depending on whether they are in same-gender or different-gender relationships. For example,
a bisexual woman’s belonging to the LGBTQ+ community might be questioned when she dates
a cisgender man98,99. Despite being the numeric majority of LGBTQ+ adults according to polling
data100, bisexual people (especially men) encounter persistent challenges to belonging in
different contexts, as they might be perceived as not ‘gay enough’ for LGBTQ+ communities
and not ‘straight enough’ for heterosexual ones101. As a consequence of the double stigma
bisexual people experience94, they might lack the psychological benefits of belonging to
LGBTQ+ communities, which helps to explain why they experience disparate health problems
compared to their heterosexual, lesbian, and gay counterparts6.
Individuals who have multiple marginalized identities endure multiple sources of threats
to their belonging. LGBTQ+ people of color might experience racism within LGBTQ+
communities and heterosexism or transphobia within their racial communities102,103; the resulting
chronic feeling of being an outsider might make it difficult to identify the communities to which
they belong68,104-106. Racial-cultural factors such as religion might compound feelings of shame
and betrayal surrounding sexual orientation and gender identity. For some LGBTQ+ people,
religious backgrounds that are unaccepting might create discomfort or tension with belonging to
families of origin and faith-based communities102,107. Further, LGBTQ+ immigrants and refugees
might experience additional difficulty feeling that they belong within their new community,
immigrant circles, or LGBTQ+ community due to the complex intersection of identity and
culture108.
Most differences in experiences across LGBTQ+ subgroups persist into older age,
accompanied by ageism and unique experiences of aging while being LGBTQ+43,109. Older
LGBTQ+ individuals might feel excluded from LGBTQ+ communities and feel forced to conceal
LGBTQ+ identities from adult children or care facilities to prevent discrimination43,110. Other
aspects of LGBTQ+ people’s personal backgrounds might weaken their sense of belonging,
such as having lower socioeconomic status111 and living in rural areas with less access to
LGBTQ+ communities112,113 or within cultures less accepting of sexual and gender diversity45,114.
An LGBTQ+ identity can be both a source of belonging and a roadblock to belonging.
Lesbian identity, beyond conveying romantic and/or sexual preferences for women, signifies a
community and political allegiance—one that centers around women, liberation, and feminist,
anti-oppressive ideologies115,116. However, tensions within lesbian communities can disrupt
belonging115. For example, minority beliefs that the lesbian community excludes transgender
people can conflict with some of the politics of lesbian women, especially among younger
lesbians who desire a diverse and inclusive lesbian community115,116. Further, women of color or
women who have a feminine gender expression and are therefore not as readily perceived as
lesbians might feel out of place in lesbian communities92,102,104,115,117, yet their sexual orientation
might prevent them from finding strong community in non-LGBTQ+ spaces. Lesbians of color
might additionally experience both racial and gender barriers to belonging within white male-
dominated LGBTQ+ spaces92,104,117.
Overall, the myriad of individual factors that might impact LGBTQ+ individuals’ belonging
are as diverse as the people that comprise the community. Social status hierarchies of general
society recapitulate within LGBTQ+ communities, presenting a barrier to belonging for people
with multiple marginalized identities.
Interpersonal Level
We next address the second level of the social ecological model: the interpersonal or
relational level. LGBTQ+ people might encounter interpersonal cues of non-belonging based on
the quality of their close relationships, including families of origin, families of choice, and friends
and peers; the quality of these relationships can strengthen or weaken how threats to belonging
Families of Origin
Families of origin—the parents, siblings, or extended kin with whom one was raised—
provide a foundation for belonging and can have an enduring impact on the well-being of
LGBTQ+ adults. Unlike people who are raised within families who all share a culturally
stigmatized identity (for example, people of color in a majority-white country or people from
religious minority groups), LGBTQ+ individuals are typically minorities within their families of
origin, most or all of whom do not share their LGBTQ+ identity. This sexual orientation and
gender identity dissimilarity might cause the family unit to become a particularly salient source
of belonging uncertainty and conflict35,118,119. For instance, approximately 85% of gay and
lesbian people describe their families’ responses to their LGBTQ+ identities as complex and
ambivalent, meaning that they encounter both positive and negative reactions from family120.
Interviews across three generations of participants suggest that coming out to parents might
yield better results for younger LGBTQ+ individuals than for older generations, but despite
generational change, negative reactions such as invalidation and rejection within families are
still common across age groups119. Belonging uncertainty and the potential for negative
reactions might be exacerbated among families from cultural contexts of high structural stigma
and greater collectivism, who might be more likely to view a sexual minority identity as a form of
disrespect or betrayal114,121. Among LGBTQ+ people, rejection and low support from parents
correlates with negative psychological health including loneliness and depression122,123,
houselessness risk34,124, and suicidal ideation125. A lower sense of belonging is likely one
mechanism that leads to these outcomes66,126. Further, strain within parent-child relationships
shapes the trajectory of psychological distress in young adulthood for LGBTQ+ individuals127
and plays a role in explaining sexual minority women’s alcohol abuse later in life128.
Research focuses more on negative than positive influences of family129, but specific
factors within families also enhance belonging and protect against threats to belonging at
different levels. For example, positive family dynamics can be protective123,130. Greater family
belonging is associated with less emotional distress131 and more self-acceptance132 among
sexual minority youth. Although disclosing LGBTQ+ identity might place youth at heightened
risk of family rejection, some LGBTQ+ individuals who come out to their parents experience less
belonging uncertainty than those who continue to conceal their sexual orientation133,134. Growing
acceptance and reduced prejudice toward sexual diversity135 among individual family members
can be safe havens for LGBTQ+ people to cope with threats encountered in other contexts.
Similarly, continuing to elevate examples of positive and loving families of LGBTQ+ children,
such as through media or awareness efforts by organizations, might be a point of intervention
for normalizing family support for LGBTQ+ individuals122.
The influence of family dynamics beyond the parent-child bond on belonging is a
promising area for future work. For example, Black gay men, bisexual men, and men who have
sex with men106 might turn to extended kin for social support, even when experiencing rejection
within the nuclear family. When studying the role of siblings, other reviews137,138 have noted a
strong research focus on sibling comparisons with LGBTQ+ individuals and predictors or sexual
orientation etiology or heterosexual siblings’ acceptance. However, the interpersonal dynamics
between siblings that contribute to belonging have received less attention. Interviews with
LGBTQ+ adults characterize how different sibling bonds carry different implications for family
belonging139. Whereas some LGBTQ+ individuals reported solidarity with siblings, which would
reinforce and bolster feelings of belonging, others reported conflictual bonds that exacerbate
problems within parents and extended family dynamics and ultimately compromise belonging.
Further, some LGBTQ+ people experience tangential bonds with siblings—defined by distant
and low impact relationships—that likely do little to benefit belonging. Compared to heterosexual
adults, lesbian, gay and bisexual adults are less close to their siblings, as measured by having
less frequent contact and greater geographic distance between them140.
Families of Choice Including Romantic Partners
Another source of belonging for LGBTQ+ individuals is their families of choice, defined
as the loving, caring, and supportive relationships that they build beyond families of origin141.
These constructed families reject the normative, biological family unit and function as places of
refuge, often to compensate for a lack of belonging with families of origin142. Indeed, peer social
support and friendships buffer the impact of negative dynamics within families of origin123,142,143.
The history of LGBTQ+ people creating chosen families includes practices such as adopting
parental figures within LGBTQ+ family or house cultures, using language like ‘sister’ or ’mother’
to denote close others, or establishing neighborhoods and housing together144,145. These
relationships provide deeper support than an average friendship but might be overlooked or
dismissed in research and clinical practices when inquiring about supportive ‘family,’ given the
discrepancy between what is traditionally considered ‘family’ and the more expansive
interpretation in chosen families.
Close friends and communities of choice provide a unique sense of belonging across the
lifespan in part because they are often the first and most supportive people LGBTQ+ youth
disclose to132,143,145 and they respond to physical and emotional needs of care in older
adulthood146,147. Families of choice and relationship partners might provide a stronger support
for LGBTQ+ people than families of origin across life stages148,149. LGBTQ-focused settings, like
Cherry Grove150 (a historically LGBTQ+ beach enclave in the U.S.) or LGBTQ+-centered
retirement communities, provide space for LGBTQ+ people to interact with similar others and
foster the important relationships that they enjoy with one another.
Some of the relationships that accompany families of choice might not be strictly
platonic. As with cisgender and heterosexual people, healthy romantic and sexual relationships
provide LGBTQ+ individuals with deep connections and sense of belonging. For example, in
older age, living with a romantic partner is associated with less loneliness151—highlighting the
importance of eliminating discriminatory policies against living arrangements for same-sex
partners in care facilities152. For LGBTQ+ people, the mere pursuit of romantic and sexual
same-sex partners can affirm their LGBTQ+ identities and facilitate belonging to LGBTQ+
communities153,154. Members of minoritized groups tend to seek out interactions with other
people who are also members of minoritized groups155,156, and for LGBTQ+ people one way to
satisfy that quest for belonging is to form romantic, sexual, and platonic relationships within
LGBTQ+ communities.
Friendships and Peer Relations
Authentic, deep friendships take time to develop but pay dividends in terms of how they
promote belonging with peers157. Establishing trusting and caring relationships, even with just
one or two people, can have a profound impact on people’s social belonging18. Compared to
cisgender and/or heterosexual individuals, LGBTQ+ people uniquely benefit from their close
relationships with one another because they face exclusion in broader society, and these
friendships can also be support systems for sexual identity development115. For example, when
lacking family and social systems for care, immigrant Latinx transgender individuals might turn
to neighbors and friends as sources of safety and belonging to cope with transphobia and
xenophobia158. Further, transgender people and people whose gender identity or expression
differs from cultural norms and expectations for their sex assigned at birth report that their sense
of belonging was more enhanced by their friendships with other LGBTQ+ people than with
cisgender and/or heterosexual friends159. Beyond in-person dynamics, online connections also
foster belonging by providing community and friendship160. LGBTQ+ youth, more than their
cisgender-heterosexual peers, perceive their online connections as important161. Online
connections can be particularly useful when in-person connections for LGBTQ+ people are
strained, such as during the COVID-19 pandemic162, or when living in regions with high
stigma163.
By contrast, whether in-person or online, LGBTQ+-based microaggressions164-166 and
negative relationships with peers threaten belonging. Peer victimization of LGBTQ+ youth,
including direct or indirect aggressive behavior based on sexual orientation and gender identity,
reduces LGBTQ+ students’ sense of school belonging and overall health167-170. When LGBTQ+
students do not feel that they belong at school or face peer victimization, they might experience
greater psychological distress than cisgender and/or heterosexual students 131 or even
contemplate suicide or die by suicide171,172.
Close relationships play a pivotal role in the belonging of LGBTQ+ people and different
relationships contribute to different domains of belonging. For example, a person might lack
belonging in their family of origin but find belonging in their family of choice. Likewise, an
LGBTQ+ young adult who experiences low belonging in school might partially find relief by
finding and fitting into social networks online. Regardless of the domain, strong and positive
interpersonal relationships provide benefits for LGBTQ+ individuals across the lifespan, and
such relationships should be facilitated to reinforce LGBTQ+ people’s sense of belonging.
Community level
Next, we identify factors within the community level. In this section, we review the
influences of communities, neighborhoods, schools, and workplaces on LGBTQ+ people’s
belonging. These external contexts shape people’s sense of identity and group membership,
Communities and Neighborhoods
LGBTQ+ people often turn to LGBTQ+ communities (their gender identity and/or sexual
orientation ingroup) and outgroup allies for social support, noting that a strength of being
LGBTQ+ is the feeling of ingroup community belonging that accompanies their gender identity
and/or sexual orientation15,174. A sense of belonging to a community contributes to more positive
health for LGBTQ+ individuals, both physical (for instance, decreased smoking rates, less use
of illicit drugs, and less engagement in high-risk sexual activities) and mental (for instance,
reduced distress and increased well-being) compared to cisgender and/or heterosexual
people70,175-178. The degree to which LGBTQ+ people feel connected to LGBTQ+ communities
(community connectedness) is related to their belonging and other psychological
outcomes96,97,174. For example, rural LGBTQ+ youth experience less loneliness to the extent
they feel like they belong to the LGBTQ+ community179. Similarly, LGBTQ+ individuals report
greater sociopolitical involvement105,180, and LGBTQ+ adults feel more positive identification with
being LGBTQ+, as they experience higher connectedness15,17,174.
Transgender and nonbinary individuals also experience improved mental and physical
health from finding community connection with other transgender individuals181. The proliferation
of gender, sex, and sexual identities that challenge traditional binaries (for example, the
increased recognition of non-binary, gender fluid, and intersex individuals) presents an
opportunity for LGBTQ+ individuals to connect with other community members who might not
feel included in mainstream society92,182,183, and social media could assist these connections.
Researchers therefore recommend that interventions address knowledge and skills that will help
individuals find and solidify connections to LGBTQ+ communities15.
Rejection from ingroup members impedes belonging and strong community relationships.
When people fail to develop a sense of ingroup belonging, they might lack access to collective
resources to cope with discrimination, experience intraminority stress (stress stemming from
dynamics within one’s minority community), and report more psychological distress68,70,155,184.
Otherwise-marginalized LGBTQ+ people might have particular difficulties in achieving ingroup
belonging because they experience stigma within and beyond LGBTQ+ groups. For example,
Black gay and bisexual men can experience racial microaggressions in white lesbian, gay and
bisexual communities and are expected to adopt the cultural norms and values of white people to
fit into the community103. LGBTQ+ women of color describe a general feeling of being left out, not
having sufficient space as an LGBTQ+ person of color, and experiencing alienation in
predominantly white LGBTQ+ spaces104,115,180. Such experiences challenge these individuals’
belonging to white LGBTQ+ communities and make it less likely for them to benefit from
community belonging.
LGBTQ+ people tend to favor ingroup friendship networks156,185. However, not all
connections to LGBTQ+ communities have a positive influence on well-being. Ingroup peer
group socialization pressures might uniquely contribute to health disparities independently
and/or indirectly from minority stress. LGBTQ+ communities are prone to more permissive
norms around high-risk health behaviors like alcohol, tobacco, and substance use and sex
work181,186-188, which might create pressure within the ingroup to engage in these behaviors to
enhance acceptance and belonging (Box 2).
High-profile community trauma events (for example, hate crimes such as the mass
shooting at the gay nightclub Pulse in Orlando, Florida in 2016) might strengthen or weaken
different types of belonging for LGBTQ+ people, but psychological research in this area is
scarce. On one hand, community-level trauma could strengthen feelings of belonging to the
ingroup: focus groups with LGBTQ+ students suggested an increase in ingroup pride and
belonging in the wake of the Pulse nightclub tragedy189. Likewise, interviews with LGBTQ+
participants uncovered a link between community and activism, such that community trauma
motivated greater social justice work and engagement with LGBTQ+ communities among older
LGBTQ+ adults180. On the other hand, a sense of belonging to society at large could be
weakened by traumatic events190, especially if public outcry, support, and resources are lacking.
For example, after the Pulse nightclub shooting, LGBTQ+ people reported concerns about their
safety and that of their peers191.
In addition to identity-related communities, physical communities (including
neighborhoods or ‘gayborhoods’— an area where LGBTQ+ people live or frequent) shape
belonging. Warm and welcoming LGBTQ+ community climates, such as neighborhoods with
inclusive recreational opportunities, are associated with positive belonging-related outcomes192-
195. Notably, sexual minority adolescents living in areas with more LGBTQ+-inclusive places of
worship, health clinics, housing services, and Pride events report less substance use than their
counterparts living in areas with fewer of these resources196. By contrast, areas that lack vibrant
LGBTQ+ communities or ignore or overlook LGBTQ+ people’s experiences hinder connections
with others and perceived inclusion197. Even the most seemingly LGBTQ+-friendly
neighborhoods might not foster the general belonging of LGBTQ+ people if broader structural
protections do not exist; we return to this issue in the Societal level section.
The gentrification of LGBTQ+ neighborhoods and places of leisure poses a threat to
community members’ sense of belonging and connectedness. Soaring housing prices,
especially in LGBTQ+-friendly metropolitan areas, leave community members with no choice
but to move from social hubs for LGBTQ+ individuals or face houselessness180,198. The effects
of gentrification are particularly pronounced for individuals from racial and/or ethnic minority,
low-income, and other disadvantaged backgrounds, further exacerbating their disparate access
to resources and support within the LGBTQ+ community180,198. LGBTQ+ individuals are also
disproportionately less able than their cisgender heterosexual counterparts to recover from
natural disasters and access resources199, which can displace their communities and places of
belonging. Although the use of online discussion forums and social networking platforms can
combat the negative effects of physical exclusion for LGBTQ+ individuals and play a role in the
identity formation and community-building of LGBTQ+ youth200, not everyone has equal access
to technology or can reap the benefits of virtual communication. For example, LGBTQ+ older
adults might not have access to technological devices or might experience difficulty navigating
social media sites due to disabilities201,202.
Schools and Workplaces
To complete our analysis of community factors, we focus on two places in which people
spend a substantial amount of time: schools and workplaces. School belonging plays a notable
role in the link between victimization and negative adjustment (for example, depressive
symptoms, academic difficulties, substance use)170,203-205. Primary schools can strengthen the
belonging of LGBTQ+ youth by implementing LGBTQ+-inclusive climate interventions (such as
anti-discrimination policies)206-209, through policies protecting against discrimination, workshops
to combat microaggressions, and LGBTQ+ programming in the curriculum157,209-212. Diversity
and inclusion centers on university campuses enhance LGBTQ+ students’ belonging by
providing a safe space where they can authentically express themselves and connect with
others through social events210,211. Moreover, favorable perceptions of a college or university’s
diversity climate are positively associated with belonging among LGBTQ+ students213. For
LGBTQ+ youth, school opportunities outside of the classroom, like sports and extracurricular
activities, also promote belonging by offering structured time to connect with peers214. Despite
these benefits, the implementation of LGBTQ+-friendly clubs and diversity and inclusion
trainings might encounter barriers, such as legislative restrictions or constraints on funding
allotments to these initiatives215,216.
Stigma within school climates threatens belonging. Sexual minority university students
who perceive their schools as less safe feel less belonging and both perceptions relate to
psychological health problems42,212,213. Further, the assumption that everyone is or should be
cisgender (known as cisnormativity) within education systems might create unsupportive
environments for transgender children, leading to higher rates of dropping out of primary and
secondary school217. Students who disclose their LGBTQ+ identity to trustworthy, accepting
staff members and peers at school can feel greater belonging than those who encounter
negative reactions or conceal their identities218. Individuals who are formal and informal sources
of support at school can play a substantial role as advocates for LGBTQ+ youth (for example,
reporting instances of bullying or ensuring that others respect students’ pronouns) and create
safe spaces for them.
Workplaces are another community with implications for belonging. Nondiscrimination
policies, support for LGBTQ+-inclusive activities, and diversity trainings within the workplace
correlate with more disclosure and less perceived job discrimination, which can lead to
increased belonging in the workplace219,220. Recognizing sexual orientation and gender identity
at work, rather than trying to distance LGBTQ+ issues from the workplace or bifurcate people’s
worker identities and LGBTQ+ identities, can also instill belonging221,222. Further, the
implementation of workplace diversity trainings and allyship networks effectively enhances
employee well-being and belonging223.
Whereas practices that acknowledge and celebrate sexual and gender diversity likely
facilitate belonging, other workplace features or inauthentic gestures can lessen belonging. For
example, ‘rainbow washing’ describes a business’s inauthentic display of support for LGBTQ+
people224,225. Sudden support for the LGBTQ+ community through rainbow imagery across
offices and corporate social media accounts might be performative and for profit, and such
manipulative branding tactics might deter LGBTQ+ consumers and employees alike, potentially
reducing feelings of belonging. Similarly, companies that present diversity initiatives as a case
for good business—rather than about fairness—lessen LGBTQ+ people’s belonging and
interest in working at such companies226. Although there is some research about threats to
LGBTQ+ people’s belonging at work, the literature for identifying positive predictors of LGBTQ+
people’s workplace belonging is relatively nascent and needs more attention.
Community-level belonging is influenced by the groups to which one belongs,
neighborhoods, schools, and workplaces. Although a strong sense of connection and contact
with LGBTQ+ communities might enhance belonging, marginalized individuals often face
barriers to inclusion within LGBTQ+ communities and therefore are at risk of feeling low
belonging within these spaces. The gentrification of LGBTQ+ neighborhoods, stigma within
educational and workplace settings, and widescale LGBTQ+-relevant traumatic incidents
underscore how characteristics of public places and events and one’s sense of belonging are
linked. Creating inclusive and supportive environments fosters a sense of belonging for
LGBTQ+ individuals, which in turn might enhance the overall health of LGBTQ+ people.
Societal Level
We finally review factors within the broadest layer of the social ecological model: the
societal level. This level includes sociocultural norms and policies that can enhance LGBTQ+
Situational Cues and Norms
One increasingly common social norm is the use of identity safety cues or features of
social situations to communicate that LGBTQ+ identities are valued and that anti-LGBTQ+
discrimination is limited224,227-229. Used by communities, organizations, and businesses, identity
safety cues signal that an organizational culture or context is welcoming to minoritized groups.
For example, cities like Atlanta and London paint crosswalks in rainbow colors to mark
LGBTQ+-friendly environments and celebrate LGBTQ+ pride, and companies like IBM
encourage employees to share their pronouns in email signatures and meetings to avoid
microaggressions and to model inclusive norms for sexual and gender diversity.
Effective safety cues that contribute to stigmatized groups’ sense of belonging include
the representation or presence of other people from under-represented groups, inclusive
features in the environment, diversity statements, and positive information that is communicated
about one’s identity224. For instance, the presence of LGBTQ+ patients in online studies of
healthcare settings suggests to other LGBTQ+ people that they would be welcomed in that
setting230. LGBTQ+-related objects online and in person act as environmental features that
foster LGBTQ+ people’s belonging, such as the rainbow-flag profile filter on Facebook231. As
another example of safety cues, diversity statements and identity-safe information can be
activated in university classrooms by providing a commitment to diversity and inclusive
information on a syllabus232. In addition, language communicates expectations for belonging.
The use of preferred words to describe LGBTQ+ people, like ‘lesbian’ and ‘gay’ rather than
‘homosexual’, inspires greater perceived belonging among lesbian and gay people233. Similarly,
when people explicitly share their pronouns at work (for example, by including their preferred
pronouns in an email signature) LGBTQ+ people feel greater organizational commitment —
including belonging, organizational pride, and feeling cared for — than when pronouns are not
present234,235. Safety cue interventions could be a low-effort and cost-effective strategy to
promote belonging across many contexts to strengthen belonging in society, communities, and
interpersonal interactions224.
Laws and Policies
Law and policy form another societal-level context that influences LGBTQ+ people’s
belonging. Implementing LGBTQ+-friendly laws and lessening anti-LGBTQ+ laws can
strengthen belonging. Laws that jeopardize or restrict LGBTQ+ people’s rights are a source of
structural stigma, defined as societal-level conditions that impact stigmatized groups by
constraining opportunities, resources, and their well-being236. In the U.S., the election of Donald
Trump in 2016 was associated with more stress, daily discrimination, depression, vigilance to
threat, and concern about safety among LGBTQ+ people136,237,238, compared to cisgender
and/or heterosexual people and compared to previous self-reported distress136. Similarly,
lesbian, gay, and bisexual people living in U.S. states that lack protective policies for LGBTQ+
people239 and/or ban same-sex marriage240 experience more psychiatric disorders (such as
generalized anxiety and mood disorders) compared to lesbian, gay, and bisexual people living
in supportive states and heterosexual people. A 2008 California law that restricted marriage to
heterosexual people, called ’Proposition 8,’ was associated with an increase in homophobic
bullying among LGBTQ+ adolescents in the period immediately before and during the passing
of the law (2008-2009) compared to prior years (2001-2007)36. This finding further supports the
link between stigma-based politics and day-to-day discrimination that weakens individuals’
belongingness. Notably, the impact of Proposition 8 on the lives of LGBTQ+ people started
before the law was enacted, during the preceding campaign for a marriage ban36,241. However,
some lesbian, gay and bisexual Californians felt that the upcoming vote brought them much
closer to others, especially other lesbian, gay and bisexual people, via increased social support
and reduced conflict241. Although the analysis did not identify meaningful individual differences
that explained how the policy differently impacted relationships, it made clear that policy matters
for people’s psychological sense of connection.
Research across psychology, public health, sociology, and public policy conveys that
laws and policies that protect LGBTQ+ people’s rights enhance their psychological and social
well-being242. Suicide attempts among sexual minority youth decreased by 7% when U.S. states
passed policies protecting same-sex marriage243, and living in states with fewer anti-
discrimination policies was associated with greater physical and mental health risks among
LGBTQ+ older adults244. Likewise, when the U.S. Supreme Court granted same-sex marriage
nation-wide, LGBTQ+ people’s psychological distress decreased and life satisfaction increased
compared to rates prior to the ruling245, and people within the U.S. perceived supporting
LGBTQ+ people and their rights as increasingly normative246.
Geography provides the foundation for the laws and policies that LGBTQ+ people face.
For instance, as of March 2023, 1 in 10 transgender youth in the U.S. live in areas that ban
transgender-affirming care247. There are increasing political attacks on spaces and activities in
which transgender people find community with others, such as drag shows and sports43. Using
a coding scheme based on the ratio of affirming versus exclusionary proposed bills about
gender identity248, researchers found that transgender and gender non-conforming people who
live in affirming areas experience greater belonging than those living in other areas. However,
research that directly explores the links between transgender affirming laws and belonging is
limited248.
LGBTQ+-friendly policies also coincide with belonging-related outcomes, often
measured as health and well-being. However, societal-level factors that promote belonging tend
to focus on highly visible LGBTQ+ people (such as young people) and issues (such as marriage
equality), sometimes overlooking pressing issues of belonging among people who are multiply-
marginalized and therefore might experience compounded and unique experiences of stigma.
LGBTQ+ people of color, individuals experiencing homelessness, and immigrants and refugees
have distinct connection points to the societal level that might diminish their sense of belonging,
including tense and hostile relationships with police249, insufficient treatment or access to public
services34, and/or immigration-related barriers and concerns158,239,250,251. LGBTQ+ people’s
belonging concerns also might become heightened in older age when encountering
heteronormative assumptions within care-providing facilities, housing discrimination, and other
stressors. For example, LGBTQ+ older adults might feel that care-providing institutions force
them to either conceal their identity (re-enter the closet ) or ignore their LGBTQ+ identity
entirely, which contribute to older adults’ belonging uncertainty110. Although the link between
policy and belonging is evident in some research, the literature often lacks nuance in teasing
apart which policies matter most for belonging and for whom.
This final level of our social ecological model for belonging comprises factors that
characterize societal and cultural dynamics, such as norms, policies, and laws. These higher-
order societal structures create a sociocultural context that promotes or impedes belonging.
Interdependence and Intersectionality
We reviewed factors that can promote or hinder a sense of belonging among LGBTQ+
people separately according to levels for conceptual clarity, but these levels are
interdependent62. Change at any point in a social system has the potential to reverberate and
induce ongoing reciprocal changes across system levels58,252. For instance, over time, societal
level policies can promote downstream change at the community, interpersonal, and individual
levels62. New generations of people who have formative experiences and expectations based
on more inclusive policies might come to expect further change, creating upwards pressures in
an ongoing reciprocal cross-level dynamic. This dynamic process over time is key to an
ecological framework.
Factors that increase a sense of belonging among LGBTQ+ people at the individual
level can ultimately lead to broader societal change54. Although we recognize that disclosure is
not safe or desirable for all LGBTQ+ individuals, LGBTQ+ people who disclose their sexual or
gender identity can alter interpersonal-level and community-level dynamics in ways that spread
to society82. For instance, changes in public opinion, influenced in part by the micro-decisions of
individual people to disclose their LGBTQ+ identity (at increasingly younger ages253), ultimately
contributed to marriage equality becoming a legal right across the U.S.254,255, which fostered a
more hospitable social and legal environment121. This example demonstrates how efforts to
promote belonging and inclusion at any level have the potential to help generate change across
levels.
The social ecological model’s interlocking levels for understanding belonging also work
well for considering intersectionality theory, given that both perspectives emphasize how
individuals and broader systems coexist. Intersectionality theory emerged from decades of
Black women’s theorizing about their lives and social locations in hierarchy256-259. An
intersectional analysis addresses social forces (such as power, systems and structures,
oppression, liberation) as well as the influences of multiple intersecting identities260,261. It also
emphasizes social and political action toward justice and social change65,262,263. Given the
diversity of identities and social systems that characterize LGBTQ+ people’s lives, an
intersectional approach advances the psychology of sexual orientation and gender diversity
from a study of white, cisgender, middle-class, urban, young sexual minority people to one that
acknowledges within-group differences and structural intersectional oppression46,65,260.
An advanced social ecological model can integrate intersectionality theory to yield
specific facilitators and barriers to belonging for different groups of LGBTQ+ people, focusing on
how a positive sense of belonging is supported at different levels. Psychologists most often
employ intersectionality theory to account for dynamic, multiple negative experiences of stigma,
leaving its potential for identifying positive aspects of experience or strengths largely
unaddressed46,103. The histories of LGBTQ+ life carry trauma and oppression but also are often
rich in pleasure and fun, performance, art and culture, and families of support and love.
LGBTQ+ people find and create joy in their social connections with others, despite prevailing
stigma. For instance, LGBTQ+ people of color can draw belonging from various identity-based
sources, such as working toward racial justice with LGBTQ+ and heterosexual people of color,
socializing and organizing within LGBTQ+ communities, and finding solidarity and advocating
for spaces designed for LGBTQ+ people of color81. Embracing the sociopolitical potential of their
identities and leaning into communities of similar others can heighten belonging while promoting
social change and disrupting oppression. As researchers begin to examine the positive and
functional aspects of LGBTQ+ experiences from an intersectional perspective and how they
contribute to belonging, the roles of power and oppression still must be held central (for an
exemplar of such an approach see92).
At the societal level, intersectional perspectives recognize that some LGBTQ+
subgroups gain less than others from interventions that target sexual orientation and gender
diversity but do not address racism, classism, and sexism65. For example, LGBTQ+ advocacy
groups should incorporate broader sociopolitical issues into their missions (such as racism,
health care, reproductive justice, houselessness) to foster a sense of community belonging and
engagement from a more diverse population of LGBTQ+ individuals180. Intersectionality-Based
Policy Analysis offers a promising strategy for ensuring that policies that serve one group do not
exacerbate a problem for another263,264. For example, participation in LGBTQ+-inclusive
organizations nurtures the belonging of some LGBTQ+ students but might create added stress
and conflict for students who experience biphobia, transphobia, or racism within LGBTQ+
organizations, or who fear that LGBTQ+ visibility would lead to losing current support systems
(such as cultural-based or faith-based groups). Engagement with intersectionality theory can
therefore equip researchers to consider influences across levels and monitor unintended
consequences of seemingly positive efforts toward belonging intervention.
Summary and Future Directions
Answering the call for research to focus on determinants of LGBTQ+ people’s positive
psychological experiences10,13,17, in this Review we highlighted the factors that strengthen or
influenced by various psychological factors and social identities that vary from person to person,
reflecting the diverse nature of LGBTQ+ people as a group. At the interpersonal level, LGBTQ+
people’s close relationships substantially impact belonging, with family and peers playing strong
roles in belonging across the lifespan. Community factors of belonging emerge from the
inclusive and supportive groups that LGBTQ+ individuals associate with, and LGBTQ+-affirming
norms, laws, and policies create conditions that bolster LGBTQ+ people’s sense of belonging.
Throughout our review of each level, we identified knowledge gaps and strategies for
strengthening belonging. Our use of a multi-level framework intentionally avoids placing the
burden of well-being or onus of change on individuals by attending to the higher-level factors
that influence LGBTQ+ people’s psychosocial well-being, such as groups and social structures.
We also emphasize the benefits of attending to interlocking systems and intersectionality in
future research.
Researchers who develop time-lagged survey designs will be well positioned to
examine how major positive and negative events at the societal or community levels impact
individual and interpersonal outcomes for belonging. Longitudinal designs and the growing use
of ecological momentary assessments with cell phone applications can be useful for tracking
top-down and bottom-up processes—recognizing how individual and interpersonal experiences
drive and are reflected by occurrence of major events and societal changes. Investing time and
resources into assessing factors at multiple levels within the same study will pay dividends for
empirically documenting the interconnected links of belonging across levels. Another productive
research direction would be to explore the subversive strategies that marginalized individuals
use as they contend with systematic oppression. Working within the approach of
intersectionality theory, researchers should investigate how people push back upon and resist
interlocking forms of oppression and how belonging is leveraged toward that end.
A major methodological challenge for future research will be to account for interlocking
systems and intersectional perspectives to unlock a nuanced understanding of for whom, when,
how, and under which conditions belonging is enhanced. As LGBTQ+ people make strides
toward social inclusion but are faced with sociopolitical setbacks, a multi-level, multi-faceted
approach to belonging offers the best chance for health and prosperity by reinforcing LGBTQ+
individuals’ sense of belonging from a variety of sources.