Exposure to low-credibility health websites is limited and is
concentrated among older adults
Evidence from linked survey and digital trace data
1,2 1,2 3
Benjamin Lyons, PhD† , Andy J. King, PhD , Rebecca L. Barter, PhD , and
1,2
Kimberly A. Kaphingst, ScD
Department of Communication, University of Utah
Cancer Control and Population Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute
University of Utah School of Medicine
December 31, 2024
Abstract
Older adults tend to engage with more untrustworthy news and information online. However,
this research has focused on , suggesting this could be driven by changes in par-
political content
tisanship across the lifespan. This raises questions about generalizability of this pattern across
information domains (e.g., health). We examine web-browsing behavior and linked survey data
for a representative sample of Americans ( = 1,059). Using a novel coding scheme tailored
to health content, we find that while overall exposure to low-credibility health sites is limited,
exposure increases with age and is not solely a function of health website visit volume. Ex-
posure is greater for those who tend to believe inaccurate health claims, suggesting exposure
is not merely incidental. Lastly, we find that exposure is not driven primarily by search or so-
cial media. In sum, older adults, while facing greater health burdens, also appear to be more
vulnerable to health misinformation exposure.
Keywords: Aging; health misinformation; behavioral data; computational social science; health
communication.
†Corresponding author:
ben.lyons@utah.edu
Age has emerged as one of the most consistent predictors of engaging with untrustworthy news
and information online (Brashier & Schacter, 2020; Moore et al., 2023). It is rarely acknowledged,
however, that the numerous studies on this topic nearly universally limit their analyses of websites
to those that are explicitly political or otherwise dedicated to public affairs. For this reason, we cur-
rently cannot say whether we should expect this pattern to hold in other information domains — like
science, entertainment, sports, or health (Swire-Thompson, Lazer, et al., 2020). One possibility, for
example, is that because political interest and partisan attachments strengthen across the lifespan,
these drive older adults to engage with partisan misinformation, in particular, but not misleading
content in other domains (Lyons et al., 2024). Indeed, survey studies suggest older adults may be
less susceptible to health misinformation, at least in some forms (Nan et al., 2022).
While there is work looking at health misinformation and misperception across the lifespan, this
work tends to employ surveys or survey experiments to assess vulnerability (Nan et al., 2022). Lim-
ited attempts have been made to match such data to web-tracking data, or other forms of digital trace
data, which can reveal patterns of real-world engagement for those exhibiting greater or lesser belief
in false claims assessed via survey. Such results could inform us about the cross-domain general-
izability of claims about age and misinformation, and in turn can inform policy and interventions
designed to tackle this issue (Moore & Hancock, 2020, 2022). Further, assessing vulnerabilities
to inaccurate health claims among older adults is especially important given that health burdens
increase with age (Prince et al., 2015).
In this study, we make use of nationally representative U.S. survey data linked with substantial
online browsing records (a total of 9.7m web addresses, logged over approximately 4 weeks for each
participant). We present descriptive data concerning exposure to low-credibility health sites, corre-
lates of exposure, and sources of traffic to these sites. In all, we find that while problematic exposure
to low-credibility health information is rare, exposure is most prevalent among older adults, and is
more common among those who are less able to identify erroneous health claims in the first place.
These results raise new concerns about how online communication environments may potentially
shape public health and well-being.
Age and misinformation online
Research focusing on digital trace data – that is, traces of online behavior like link-clicking or
sharing – has consistently shown that older adults are more prone to sharing and consuming
political
misinformation online than their younger counterparts (Allen et al., 2020; Grinberg et al., 2019;
Guess et al., 2019). For instance, one study (Guess et al., 2019) found that individuals aged 65 and
older shared misinformation at more than double the rate of the next youngest cohort, emphasizing
that “no other demographic characteristic we examined — gender, income, education — had any
consistent relationship with the likelihood of sharing fake news."
Scholars have proposed several explanations for this gap. Some researchers focus on cognitive
aging (Brashier & Schacter, 2020; Dodson et al., 2015; Lyons, 2023), but more commonly, scholars
focus on older adults’ status as digital “nonnatives,” struggling to judge truth in a new environment
(Guess et al., 2019; Hargittai & Dobransky, 2017; Jo et al., 2022; Moore & Hancock, 2020, 2022).
Still other recent work casts doubt on the importance of digital literacy and instead suggests that
increasing levels of partisan identity and related factors drive consumption and sharing of favorable
hyper-partisan misinformation (Lyons et al., 2024).
It is less clear if these greater levels of engagement hold for questionable media content
outside
of politics. Might older Americans consume more low-credibility health content as well, even after
accounting for greater topic interest? Or might self-interest — protecting one’s own health —
help buffer against this risk for aging populations facing increasing health burdens? If older adults
were found to consume low-credibility health content at greater rates, what might account for this
pattern (particularly if heightened partisanship is responsible for this cohort’s engagement with
political misinformation)? We address these questions below in a series of analyses of nationally
representative survey data linked with web-browsing records covering a roughly 4-week span.
We pre-registered a series of exploratory research questions and analyses regarding age and health information
planned analyses are reported in the Supplemental Materials. See Appendix F for more detail.
Methods
Sample
We analyzed data from from a survey (total = 1,200; respondents logging web visits in this
period = 1,059) conducted by YouGov from October 25 to November 21, 2023. Respondents
were selected by YouGov’s matching and weighting algorithm to approximate the demographic
attributes of the U.S. population (see Supplementary Material, Appendix A for a full description of
sampling procedures).
Our participants closely resemble the U.S. population in demographics. All descriptive statistics
reported here are unweighted. Respondents are 53% female, 45% male, and 2% non-binary/other.
They are 71.8% white, 11.7% Black, 8.8% Hispanic, 2.8% Asian, 0.8% Native American, and 4.8%
two or more races or other. Median age is 53 ( , range = 18-89), 40% hold a
M = 51.6, SD = 15.9
four-year college degree or higher, 91% had some form of health insurance, and 11.75% reported
having a prior cancer diagnosis. Median household income is $50,000 - $59,999 (39.9% had an
income of $39,999 or less, 33.3% had an income between $40,000 and $79,999, 12.4% had income
between $80,000 and $119,999, and 14.1% had an income over $120,000).
Digital trace data
We accessed participants’ digital trace data from YouGov’s Pulse Panel, which collects data from
participants who opt in to online tracking of digital devices. Our Pulse data included 9.7m web
addresses across participants, including 1.9m unique addresses and 89,562 unique parent-level do-
mains. These visits were logged over a roughly 4-week span (2 weeks pre-survey and 2 weeks
post-survey).
We provide a more detailed documentation of data processing and coding in Appendix A. We
briefly summarize here. As a first pass, URLs were coded for health information content (1=pres-
ence of health information). To attain this coding, we rely on a "Health" category tag automatically
generated by the data provider as well as subsequent efforts to capture any missed URLs contain-
ing health information – specifically those tagged "News and Media" or "Forums" – by way of the
OpenAI “text-embedding-3-small” model via the Python OpenAI API.
Subsequently, looking only at domains with a "health" tag, we hand coded a "low-credibility"
health domain label. This took the form of a binary indicator for whether the domain was deemed to
be credible (0) or not (1), with both coders assessing all sites. This hand-coding was based only on
the domain portion of the URL. Of the 1,155 domains with a health category tag, only 78 (6.8%)
were manually determined to be low-credibility. Primary criteria were site including inaccurate
or misleading health information, site focusing primarily on sales products featuring unverified
claims, site indicated as "deceptive," “untrustworthy,” or similar by web browser, or site featuring
content that primarily lacked sources, links to credible sites, or appeared to be generated by large
language models. Our two coders exhibited agreement on credibility ratings (Krippendorf’s alpha
= 1.00). Based on this label, we then created two key outcome measures for low-credibility health
site exposure: a binary measure (any exposure to at least one of these domains in the approximately
4 week period) and a count measure (total number of visits in this period). We additionally created
a sub-code for all low-credibility domains called "Sales." This sub-code indicates if the domain
appears to exist primarily to sell health products, rather than disseminate news, information, or
other content. Our two coders also reached high agreement for this sub-code (Krippendorf’s alpha
= .92).
To account for volume, we look at – a count measure of all credible and non-
total health visits
credible health site visits. This also allows us to create a ratio measure to look at low-credibility
health visits as a proportion of a respondent’s total health visits.
In addition, we measure health seeking behavior by looking at search engine usage. Health
seeking behavior is defined as a visit to a URL with a “Search Engine” category tag where the
associated “search term” query is deemed health-related. Whether or not a search query is deemed
health-related was also determined using a text-embedding model and manually inspected. This
allows us to create a measure of and a ratio of health searches as a proportion
total health searches
of total health visits.
In addition to the various measures of health visits described above, we also created three mea-
sures of news consumption: left-leaning partisan news, centrist news, and right-leaning partisan
news. To classify the ideological leaning of news domains, we rely on scores from prior work
(Robertson et al., 2018) (see also (Eady et al., 2019)). We use the same cut points employed in
(Wojcieszak et al., 2023).
Lastly, we look at referrer data for low-credibility health site visits. We examine the category of
the site the respondent visited immediately before any low-credibility health visit. We call these pre-
ceding sources “referrals.” We created the following categories of referrals using the category tags:
search engine; social networking; chat and instant messaging; messageboards and forums; business
+ shopping. We also calculated referrals from other low-credibility sites, as well as left-leaning par-
tisan news, centrist news, and right-leaning partisan news, each from our coding described above.
News discernment task
In addition to their browsing behavior, we collected a number of other forms of data from respon-
dents via survey. In this survey, respondents were assigned to one of two media literacy interven-
tions or a control group for an experiment analyzed separately (Authors, 2024a). As part of this
study, respondents also received an orthogonal assignment to one of two outcome measures to pro-
vide during the subsequent headline rating task – either 1) accuracy or 2) sharing intent. We focus
on accuracy ratings in the present manuscript.
Respondents were exposed to and evaluated a total of 18 article headlines relating to cancer. The
articles, all of which were actual online news stories available to us prior to our field date, published
by actual online sources. Respondents rated the accuracy, or their sharing intention, regarding 6
inaccurate headlines (randomly drawn from a pool of 16) and 12 accurate headlines (randomly
drawn from a pool of 44). We present respondents with a 2:1 accurate/inaccurate ratio (rather than
1:1) to better mirror the prevalence of dubious content in the actual information environment (A. M.
Guess et al., 2020). Headlines are presented in Supplementary Material, Appendix B. The order of
the headlines was randomized for each respondent. Headlines were presented as they would appear
on the Facebook News Feed to enhance ecological validity (featuring a headline, photo, and the
news source’s web domain).
Perceived accuracy for each item is measured on a four-point. scale (“Not at all accurate” (1) to
“Very accurate” (4)). We look at perceived accuracy for each news type (accurate and inaccurate)
at the headline (item) level. We also examine ability to distinguish accurate from inaccurate cancer
news – – as mean (accurate news accuracy) - mean (inaccurate news accuracy) at the
discernment
respondent level. Descriptives are reported in Appendix C.
Cancer risk factor (mis)perceptions
We also collected data regarding respondents’ beliefs about cancer risk factors – both accurate and
inaccurate. The seven accurate belief statements focused on alcohol use, excessive weight, sun-
burn, age, family health history, human papillomavirus, and physical activity. The seven inaccurate
belief statements focused on non-ionizing electromagnetic frequencies, stress, cleaning products,
genetically modified food, COVID-19 vaccines, microwave ovens, and drinking from plastic bot-
tles. The proportions and standard errors are reported in Appendix C. From these items, we create
separate indices for true and false items, as well as a difference score (mean [true items) - mean
(false items)].
Additional variables
We collected a number of additional demographic and attitudinal variables used as covariates and/or
moderators. We employ a standard set of pre-registered control variables across all primary analyses
(age, college, female, nonwhite), following prior work (Guess et al., 2020); in lieu of political
variables, we also control for personal cancer history as many of our outcomes pertain directly to
cancer information. We also examine self-reported political ideology (standard five-point scale) and
conspiracism (4 items, Chronbach’s alpha = .87) (Han et al., 2022) as moderators of age differences.
Full question wording is included in Supplementary Material, Appendix C.
Results
We use OLS regression with robust standard errors unless otherwise noted. For all analyses, we
use the following as a pre-registered standard set of covariates: female, college education, non-
white racial background, and cancer history. Our primary analyses use dichotomous indicators for
a standard set of age groups for a few reasons. First, fitting linear interaction models can mask
nonlinearities in interaction effects (Hainmueller et al., 2019). Second, the studies examining age
differences in news consumption outline above stress that the oldest sub-group of users, specifically
those 60+, are most likely to consumer low credibility news or media content (Guess et al., 2020;
Moore et al., 2023) (however, we report robustness tests using a linear term for age).
In the results sections below, we first present descriptive evidence about the overall rate of
exposure to low-credibility sites, followed by observational analyses of age differences in exposure
levels. Next, we overview data concerning exposure across levels of in misinformation.
belief
Finally, we detail of exposure.
sources
Overall exposure to low-credibility health sites is limited
First, it is worth emphasizing that the overall level of exposure to low-credibility health sites is quite
low. We begin by presenting descriptive statistics for our exposure measures using survey weights to
4 weeks per respondent), about 13% saw any URLs from these domains (95% CI: 10-15%). There
is considerable variance, however. The average respondent made only about .5 visits to such sites
( = 3.14, max = 122). This comes in contrast to health information more generally. We find
SD
that about 77% of our sample saw health content during this period, averaging about 34 total health
visits ( = 77.21, max = 1,064). This means low-credibility visits are a small proportion of all
SD
health visits (roughly 3%). As mentioned, however, exposure may be highly concentrated among
some users.
Variable M SD Min Max 95% CI
Low-credibility health site exposure (binary) 0.13 0.33 0 1 0.10 - 0.15
Total low-credibility visits 0.50 3.14 0 122 0.33 - 0.67
Health information exposure (binary) 0.74 0.44 0 1 0.70 - 0.78
Total health visits 33.57 77.21 0 1064 28.94 - 38.20
Low-credibility ratio 0.03 0.12 0 1 .02 - 0.04
Means and 95% confidence intervals calculated using survey weights for a four week period in October-December 2023
among YouGov Pulse panel members (N = 1,059).
Exposure to low-credibility health sites is concentrated among older respondents
the for both binary and count measures, exposure to low-credibility health sites increases across
significantly more likely than those age 18-29 to be exposed ( = .18, = .03, < .001). This holds
b SE p
for the model using a count measure of exposure as well ( = 1.07, = .30, < .001). The marginal
b SE p
there are few other strong demographic predictors of exposure (although female is significant in
not a result of our modeling choices; employing a logistic model for the binary outcome, a negative
binomial model for the count outcome, and employing a linear age term across models each produce
similar results. Likewise, we assess the robustness of this finding by excluding all sales-oriented
low-credibility health visits. We do so as these visits may be more likely the result of pop-up ads
low-credibility sites, they are also more likely to visit information-oriented low-credibility sites.
Although this pattern is troubling, it may be a byproduct of increased health information expo-
that total health visits indeed increase with age. However, older adults still have a greater ratio of
low-credibility site visits as a proportion of all health visits, and likewise age remains a significant
.25
.2
.15
.1
.05
)yranib(
erusopxE
1.5
.5
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
)tnuoc(
erusopxE
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
Exposure to low-credibility health sites by age.
and 95% confidence intervals calculated using survey weights. Data come from a four week period
of browsing in October-December 2023 among YouGov Pulse panel members (N = 1,059).
predictor of low-credibility site exposure when controlling for total health visits.
Those exposed to low-credibility health sites also tend to exhibit poor veracity discernment
It is still possible, however, that those exposed to low-credibility health sites are not prone to believe
and inaccurate cancer news headlines is associated with greater exposure to such sites. Similarly,
greater belief in false cancer risk factors is associated with greater exposure. In other words, those
visiting these sites appear to be more susceptible to health misinformation, in general (see also
In Tables D.7 and D.8, we then look at age differences in headline discernment and cancer risk
factor beliefs. Adults 60+ exhibit worse discernment across both measures (though this is somewhat
nonlinear). Finally, we look at the interaction terms for these measures of (mis)belief and age in
Tables D.9 and D.10. We find a few significant outcomes. Specifically, older adults who show
stisiv
htlaeh
latoT
.06
.04
.02
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
stisiv
htlaeh
ytilibiderc-wol
fo
oitaR
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
Total health visits (a) and ratio of low-credibility health site visits as a proportion of
all health visits (b) by age.
calculated using survey weights. Data come from a four week period of browsing in October-
December 2023 among YouGov Pulse panel members (total N = 1,059; N = 848 for ratio depicted
in panel (b) as this measure excludes respondents who visited none of these sites).
worse headline discernment were especially likely to be exposed to low-credibility sites. We find a
similar pattern for older adults who show greater belief in false cancer risk factor items. As shown
belief in false health items (though these confidence intervals are quite wide).
Finally, we complement our above findings on exposure across belief in misinformation by pro-
viding some suggestive evidence that older adults higher in conspiracist worldviews were relatively
-1
-2
noitciderp
raeniL
-1
-2
-1 0 1 2 3
Headline discernment
noitciderp
raeniL
1 2 3 4
Perceived accuracy (inaccurate)
-1
-2
noitciderp
raeniL
-1
-2
-2 -1 0 1 2 3
Cancer misperception (diff. score)
noitciderp
raeniL
1 2 3 4 5
Cancer misperception (false)
Marginal effects of belief in health (mis)information on visits to low-credibility health
sites.
standard demographic controls and employ survey weights. Data come from a four-week period of
browsing in October-December 2023 among YouGov Pulse panel members (N = 1,059).
Exposure to low-credibility sites tends not to be preceded by social media or search engine
visits
of the traffic to low-credibility sites originated via search engine or social media visits. Instead,
respondents, especially those over 60, were more likely to have been referred from another low-
credibility visit. This could suggest that those predisposed to visit such sites do so not instrumentally
(via search) or through social media, which may apply moderation to such content, but through a
rabbit-hole dynamic, with like-minded sources cross-linking to one another.
in access choices. As such, these findings together may suggest that older adults are especially
)tnuoc(
erusopxE
Exposure across ideology
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
Liberal Moderate Conservative
)tnuoc(
erusopxE
Exposure across right-leaning news consumption
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
Low Mid High
Exposure to low-credibility health sites across self-reported ideology and age (a) and
consumption of right-leaning news and age (b).
ideology is collapsed into a 3-point scale for clarity. Levels of news consumption are calculated
using browsing data and divided into terciles. Means and 95% confidence intervals calculated using
survey weights. Data come from a four week period of browsing in October-December 2023 among
YouGov Pulse panel members (N = 1,059).
likely to be exposed to dubious health content through more habitual scanning habits. In other
words, their broader media ecosystems may drive these differences in exposure.
Older conservatives are especially likely to be exposed to low-credibility health sites
One way we can indirectly shed light on whether older adults’ broader media ecosystems could
help drive differences in exposure is by considering measures of political identity. Specifically,
the supply of untrustworthy news tends to be skewed far to the right. In 2016, over 90%
political
of such articles were pro-Trump (Guess et al., 2020). Likewise, in 2020, researchers found that
”most misinformation, as identified by Meta’s Third-Party Fact-Checking Program, exists within
this homogeneously conservative corner, which has no equivalent on the liberal side,” (González-
Bailón et al., 2023). This dynamic might have spillover effects that are not immediately obvious.
Referrals from search Referrals from social media Referrals from chat
.6 .6 .6
.4 .4 .4
.2
.2 .2
0 0
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+ 18-29 30-44 45-59 60+ 18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Referrals from business/shopping Referrals from low-cred sites
.6 .6
.4 .4
.2
.2
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+ 18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Referrals by source for low-credibility health visits across age.
tive means. Means and 95% confidence intervals calculated using survey weights. Data come from
a four week period of browsing in October-December 2023 among YouGov Pulse panel members
(N = 1,059).
Those on the right may be more likely to be exposed to low credibility sites dedicated to not only
political topics, but also health, especially as these topics (and sources covering them) became more
interconnected during the COVID-19 era (Baker, 2022; Hart et al., 2020).
As a first, exploratory step toward this question, we model exposure to low credibility health
conservatism is associated with greater exposure to these sites. This pattern mirrors meta-analytic
findings drawn from survey evidence (Nan et al., 2022). Additionally, we show that older conser-
4 (left panel). Next, we include measures of actual partisan news consumption as predictors of
predicts binary exposure to low-credible health sites (column 1). We also test for an interaction of
sehcraes
htlaeh
latoT
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
erusopxe
htlaeh
latot/hcraes
fo
oitaR
18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
Age
Health searches and search ratio across age.
and 95% confidence intervals calculated using survey weights. Data come from a four week period
of browsing in October-December 2023 among YouGov Pulse panel members (N = 1,059).
age and this partisan news consumption (divided into terciles of low, medium, and high consump-
tion) in columns 3 and 4; these models suggest that exposure to low-credibility health sites (binary
and count measures) is significantly higher among respondents over 60 who are in the highest tercile
that consumers of right-leaning partisan news also tend to consume more untrustworthy political
content (Guess et al., 2020). That said, partisan news does not appear to serve a role in directly
Discussion
Although overall consumption of dubious political media is limited, past work shows it is highly
concentrated — among conservatives, and among those over age 60 (Guess et al., 2020; Lyons
et al., 2024; Moore et al., 2023). We extend this work by examining trace data centered on health
information. We similarly find low levels of exposure to low-credibility sites in this domain, but
exposure is again highly concentrated, among similar groups.
We find that exposure to these sites is also concentrated among those over 60 years of age.
Although this group consumes more health content overall, their heightened exposure to low-
credibility health sites cannot be attributed to volume alone. In addition, exposure is relatively
higher among those who tend to already believe some other forms of health misinformation or hold
conspiracist worldviews. In other words, exposure is greatest among those most susceptible to this
content (or among those more likely to select into it).
When examining referral data, we find that these visits come primarily through other low-
credibility sites (and business and shopping domains), rather than through search engines or social
media platforms as often feared. Coupled with our finding that age’s association with exposure is
greatest among conservatives and those who consume more right-leaning news, one explanation for
this finding may be that those on the right tend to consume online media within an ecosystem that
can indirectly drive exposure to low-credibility health sites. However, hyper-partisan news sites do
not appear to directly refer users to such sites. Alternatively, exposure may be driven by broader on-
line behaviors, such as general browsing habits or preferences for sensationalist content; past work
shows that Republicans and older adults exhibit a greater preference for partisan clickbait headlines
(Munger et al., 2020). Our findings, then, might suggest that this behavior transcends politics; a
preference for clickbait content may underlie exposure to low-credibility sites among these groups
regardless of domain.
Regardless, our results may imply that misinformation targeting or otherwise engaging older
audiences is not isolated to strategic partisan messaging. As such, interventions aimed at assessing
or improving the quality of older adults’ information environments may need to be broadened to
consider forms of health misinformation and their impacts. If exposure to low-credibility health
sites is entwined with, or driven in part by, broader patterns of hyper-partisan media consump-
tion, though, it may be especially difficult to address, given for instance the central role of partisan
identity in belief structures (Brandt & Sleegers, 2021; Turner-Zwinkels & Brandt, 2022). Though
difficult, this is an important task given greater health vulnerabilities of seniors (Prince et al., 2015;
Smith et al., 2009).
Of course, these findings come with a number of limitations. Web-tracking data, though rich,
does not allow us to observe exposure that occurs without resulting in a click-through visit (e.g.,
browsing headlines on social media news feeds), and misses much mobile browsing. We are also
unable to examine the effects of exposure on relevant beliefs, attitudes, or behaviors, and present
instead correlations with (unrelated) health misinformation to suggest such audiences may be sus-
ceptible to similar effects. Finally, we conduct our study in the United States, where much of the
prior work on age and misinformation has been performed (though evidence suggests similar age
gradients globally on political topics (de León et al., 2024; Rossi et al., 2023)).
Overall, though, we bring valuable data to bear on an important question. These findings may
bring additional attention to age gaps in the quality of online health information exposure.
Ethical Approval
All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the eth-
ical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki
declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
771c94ca