Name uniqueness and the rise of individualism in Imperial
China (540-1880 CE)
Preprint
Zhaolun Fan, Valentin Thouzeau, Ying Zhong, Coralie Chevallier and Nicolas Baumard
Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études cognitives, Ecole normale supérieure,
Université PSL, EHESS, CNRS, 75005 Paris, France
Corresponding author: Zhaolun Fan (zhaolun.fan@outlook.com)
Address: 29 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris
Abstract
Individualism, characterized by autonomy, independence and self-expression is typically seen as a
modern and Western phenomenon. Cultural historians, however, have pointed out that its roots
extend much further into the past. In this paper, we delve deeper in time to quantify the rise of
individualism in history. Using data from the China Biographical Database (CBDB, N = 641,568)
spanning 1,500 years of Chinese history (540-1880 CE), we observe a long-term increase in name
uniqueness, a common proxy for individualism. Our analysis reveals that this general increase
parallels the economic development and modernization of China throughout the Imperial period.
Consistent with this, the economically advanced Yangtze River Delta exhibits consistently higher
levels of name uniqueness compared to less developed regions. Finally, we observe a decline in
name uniqueness during the late Qing dynasty, coinciding with a period of economic crisis. These
results suggest that the rise of individualism is tied to economic development and modernization,
transcending cultural and geographic boundaries. Our findings contribute to a more nuanced
understanding of cultural evolution in China and challenge long-held assumptions about the
immutability of Chinese culture. This research provides new insights into the complex relationship
between economic development, cultural change, and the emergence of individualistic values in
non-Western contexts.
Introduction
Individualism refers to a set of psychological traits that centers on personal autonomy,
independence, and self-expression. In individualistic cultures, people define themselves through
personal achievements, aspirations, and unique characteristics, rather than through their roles
within a group or community. They carve out their own paths in life, whether in terms of career,
relationships, or self-identity. This contrasts with collectivist cultures, where people tend to
subordinate personal desires to maintain group harmony and fulfil societal expectations 1–4.
Standard theories hold that individualism is first and foremost a modern and a Western
phenomenon. It appeared recently in Europe during the early modern period with the Renaissance
and the Reformation, after which it spread to the rest of the world 5,6. Yet, historians have reported
qualitative observations that suggest a rise in individualism in Western Europe as early as the 12th
c. 7–9. Moreover, cultural historians of China have reported increase individualistic value as early as
during the Tang dynasty 10–14.
In line with this idea, large-scale international surveys have demonstrated that individualism has
risen globally, in relation to economic development and rising living standards 15–17. This trend has
also been observed in non-Western countries like China, Japan, and South Korea, where traditional
collectivist values are also gradually giving way to individualistic ideals, particularly among younger
generations 18–21. Even in lower-income nations, signs of growing individualism are emerging with
the early phase of economic development 15–17,22. These works suggest that individualism is not
necessarily tied to the Western culture and to modernity, but increase when urbanization,
education and economic prosperity create conditions for personal autonomy and self-expression
15–17.
In this paper, we aim to explore this idea further and quantify the evolution of individualistic values
in the long run. To do so, we use names. Naming practices are a solid proxy for individualism 18,21–
24. The prevalence of unique first names correlate with individualistic values across countries and
regions. A dataset of baby names including 38 countries and 13 subnational regions revealed that
countries with a higher proportion of unique first names exhibited higher levels of individualism.
This correlation held even when controlling for factors like ethnic fractionalization and other
cultural dimensions. Additionally, within-country analyses based on the World Values Survey and
the European Values Study have shown that in districts where unique first names were more
prevalent, individuals were more likely to value individualistic traits such as autonomy and self-
expression over collectivistic qualities like obedience and conformism, reinforcing the use of
common first names as a proxy for individualism. Researchers have also documented increasing
“name uniqueness” in Japan, China, the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and Brazil
throughout the 20th century, mirrored the rise in individualism in social surveys 26–28. In sum,
existing empirical evidences suggest that naming practices serve as a reliable indicator of
individualism. Building on this body of work, we use “name uniqueness” as a historical indicator
to trace the development of individualism over time.
We focus on Imperial China, which presents a particularly interesting case for several reasons.
First, Chinese archives provide extensive historical data dating back to the Tang dynasty—much
earlier than any comparable European records. Second, China is widely regarded as the
quintessential collectivist society. Although younger generations in China are becoming
increasingly individualistic, this shift is generally viewed as a recent phenomenon. Third, while
Western countries are often seen as having undergone significant cultural changes over the last
millennium, China is typically considered relatively static, with a stable cultural tradition. This
makes China an ideal test case for the hypothesis that individualism has risen over the past
millennium. If we can demonstrate a historical increase in individualism within China, it would
provide strong evidence against the notion that individualism is exclusively modern or uniquely
Western.
We used the China Biographical Database (CBDB) for this study. The CBDB includes biographical
information on 641,568 individuals from the 7th to 19th centuries. It compiles data from a diverse
array of primary historical sources. These include official and private historical texts, such as
dynastic histories and official records that document the careers and lives of prominent individuals.
Local gazetteers provide detailed information about individuals within specific regions, while
genealogies offer family histories, tracing lineages and familial relationships across generations.
Literary collections and anthologies of works by scholars and officials further enrich the data by
capturing their intellectual contributions. Additionally, archival materials, including private letters,
official memorials, and epitaphs, contribute to a rich and comprehensive dataset, reflecting the
provides unparalleled longitudinal data, and enables researchers to analyze patterns across a
thousand years of Chinese history 29,30.
Access)
Building on previous work, we create a single continuous index capturing the relative rareness of
names within its community. This “Name uniqueness score” corresponds to the mean value of
name frequencies in a specified time period (usually 1 or 10 years) 18,27. More precisely, we
calculated name uniqueness by dividing the frequency of a specific name in the given time period
by the total number of names recorded during that period. For example, if the name "xinhe" was
given to 10 children out of a total of 100 unique names in a 10-year period, the frequency of the
name "xinhe" for that decade was 0.1. We then log-normalized this frequency to produce the
“name uniqueness score”:
−6
𝑈 = −𝑙𝑜𝑔 ( + 10 )
Let n be the number of instances of a name i within a specified time period, N be the total number
of names recorded during the same time period and U be the uniqueness score, a very small
number of 10-6 is added to prevent rounding to 0. We then took the mean of all individual
uniqueness scores within the designated period, to produce the name uniqueness score.
One key aspect that might interfere with the calculation of name uniqueness is migration, different
ethnic groups have different languages and cultures, which potentially gives rise to different
naming practices. To control for this, we focused our main analyses on the Han ethnic group,
which account for more than 90% of Chinese elite population. As robustness test, we replicated
the analysis including minorities. The test shows that the inclusion of other major ethnic groups
such as the Manchu made no significant difference in the evolution of name uniqueness (see
Drawing on insights from cultural historians of China, we expect an increase individualistic value
through Chinese history, notably during the Ming and Qing dynasties 10–14. This increase is expected
as individualistic values tend to grow with economic development and living standards 15–17,22. Since
the beginning of the imperial era, China has experienced a gradual process of modernization
marked by increasing economic output 31,32, increasing urbanization 33, rising literacy rates (Baten
et al., 2010), a flourishing of literary production 35, especially during the Ming and early Qing
dynasties 36–38.
We also expected regional differences in name uniqueness and individualistic values. During the
imperial period, China was a vast and diverse empire marked by significant regional economic
disparities. In particular, during the Ming and Qing dynasty, the Yangtze River Delta and the
coastal central region emerged as some of the most economically advanced areas of China 32,33.
The Yangtze Delta, including cities like Suzhou, Hangzhou, and later Shanghai, became a center
of agricultural productivity, commercial trade, and textile production. This predicts that the
Yangtze River Delta and the coastal central region would likely exhibit a higher level of
individualism.
Lastly, we predicted that name uniqueness and individualistic values would ultimately decrease
during the end of the studied period. During the late Qing dynasty (late 18th and 19th c.), China
experienced a notable economic decline due to a combination of internal turmoil and external
pressures 32–34. The devastation caused by uprisings like the Taiping Rebellion and natural disasters
severely disrupted agricultural production and strained the imperial treasury. Simultaneously, the
forced opening of China to foreign powers through unequal treaties eroded the control of the state
over key economic sectors, while foreign competition undermined local industries, contributing to
a weakening of traditional economic structures and increasing regional disparities 33,39. We thus
predicted a decrease of name uniqueness starting from the late 18th c., after the High Qing era.
Results
Study 1
In line with modernization theory, which posits that economic and societal development drives
cultural value shifts, study 1 examined how these changes manifest in naming practices over time.
a notable decrease during periods of economic and political instability, such as the An Lushan
Rebellion and the end of the Tang dynasty (8th-9th c.), the Mongol invasion and the decline of the
Song dynasty (13-14th c.), and finally, the foreign invasions and the decline of the Qing dynasty
(19th c.). To test the prediction that individualism increased over the imperial period, we ran a
mixed model with “year” as the independent variable and different sources as random effects (see
0.11, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.550, see model 1 in the method section), supporting our prediction of a
general increase in name uniqueness.
dynasties. Different shapes show different sources (the original names of the sources are provided in the
supplementary material).
Study 2
As mentioned in the introduction, we expected regional differences in name uniqueness and
individualistic values. To test this prediction, we divided China into several regions based on recent
northern China, whereas the majority of individuals from the Song dynasty are found in the south,
paralleling a shift in the economic center from north to south following the end of the Tang
dynasty 39. Based on the regional data, we calculated the evolution of name uniqueness for each
the national level, it provides a more nuanced understanding of local patterns. The trends in the
Qing dynasty highlight pronounced distinctions between the north and the south. In particular,
the north shows signs of decline by 1770, whereas the provinces near the Yangtze River delta
continued to exhibit an increase in name uniqueness. We ran a linear model with interaction term
to test whether the Yangtze River delta region had an advantage over the rest of the regions during
River delta region had a consistently higher level of name uniqueness than the rest of the regions
(β = 0.10, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.618, see model 2 in the method section). This result supports our
prediction name that uniqueness will be higher in the economically more advanced Yangtze River
delta region.
shows the number of available datapoints (individuals) in each region. Figures 3B display the color code of each region,
the regions where data are important enough to estimate name uniqueness. Regions exhibit different pattern of
evolution in late Qing dynasty, Yangtze River delta region(yellow) continues to grow while northern China (green)
seen a decline.
Note: Green = Northern China, Cyan = Northwestern China, Purple = Southwestern China, Red = Central China,
Yellow = Eastern China (Yangtze River Delta), Blue = Southern China
Study 3
The late Qing era marked a period of turmoil and decline for China. While the imperial court
gradually lost its control over it whelm amidst the unstable power transition, preying eyes from the
West were eager to exploit the situation. we predicted that name uniqueness and individualistic
values would ultimately decrease during the end of the studied period. To test whether uniqueness
decreased alongside this economic decline, we fitted a mixed model with year and a quadratic term
of year. This model tests for a significant decline in name uniqueness during the Qing dynasty,
alongside the general linear increase. The first order year variable tests for a linear relation and the
quadratic term tests for a U-shaped or inverted U-shaped relationship. To control for the different
The significant negative quadratic term (β = -0.01, p = 0.017) suggests that the increase in name
uniqueness decelerated over time, indicating a curvilinear pattern. The first-order year variable also
showed a significant association with the dependent variable (β = 0.02, p = 0.001, see the model
3 in method section), indicating a linear increase over time.
level during Qing dynasty (right), CGED-Q data highlighted in red. Box plot of the CGED-Q data in the two periods
of CGED-Q data (left) corresponding to the highlighted red dots in the graph on the right.
The abundance of available data in the late Qing era provides an additional opportunity to refine
the hypothesis test. Given significant results from both first-order term and quadratic term, we
further compared the linear model (increase in name uniqueness) and quadratic model (increase
and decline of name uniqueness), with another dataset. The China Government Employee
Database – Qing (CGED-Q) is the official Qing dynasty record of government employees, it has
a very large sample size of 1,247,751 individuals, covering the periods 1760-1798 (before the
We use this additional database to replicate our finding at the late Qing for as a robustness test,
only). In line with the quadratic model (rise and fall), we found a statistically significant difference
which suggests a decline of name uniqueness along with the economic decline at late Qing dynasty.
This supports our prediction that name uniqueness decreased as the economy declined.
Discussion
Our analysis demonstrates that the rise of individualism has deep historical roots, with evidence
suggesting it increased over a period of at least 1500 years. In particular, we showed that
individualism increased during the Imperial era paralleling the development of China. We also
demonstrated that individualism was higher in the most economically advanced region (the
Yangtze Delta) and that it declined during the late Qing dynasty, a phase of pronounced economic
crisis. More broadly, we showed that Chinese culture, far from being static, had undergone
significant changes over the past 1,500 years. This evidence challenges long-held assumptions of
cultural immutability in China, and highlights the country’s profound modernization and cultural
transformation. Our results suggest that individualism is not an exclusively Western and modern
phenomenon, but that it emerges alongside the process of modernization and economic
prosperity, transcending geographic and cultural boundaries 16. As societies modernize, traditional
structures that emphasize collective responsibilities and community-based decision-making, such
as extended families or tight-knit local groups, tend to weaken. Individuals gain more economic
and social mobility, allowing them to prioritize personal goals, self-expression, and unique
aspirations over communal or familial expectations. The rise of education, urbanization, and
market economies creates opportunities for people to make independent life choices—whether in
careers, relationships, or lifestyles—leading to a shift from collectivistic to individualist values 15–
17.
The historian of China, Bret Hinsch 12 emphasized that the process of individualism is not specific
to Western history: “"the utility of personal uniqueness runs counter to the blunt Western
stereotype that Chinese lack any sense of individualism. To many Americans and Europeans,
emphasis on the uniqueness of each individual constitutes a cornerstone of their culture. They
often contrast their own individualism with the group-oriented ethos found in many other cultures
to claim this as a unique aspect of Western identity. However, denying individualism to China and
other peoples presents this matter in overly simplistic terms. Although Chinese valued the family
and other groups, they held a very clear consciousness of the distinct individual as well.” These
results converge with qualitative research in cultural history, where signs of increasing
individualism have been observed, particularly among the rising urban elites and merchants who
gained more social mobility and financial independence 11,13.
In line with these observations , the rise of individualism is also visible in the Ming and Qing
literature, reflecting a growing emphasis on personal expression over the collective themes of
earlier periods 11,13,14,40,41. During these periods, Chinese novels began to emphasize qing ( 情 ), or
inner sentiment, as a legitimate guide for personal behavior. Novels like Dream of the Red Chamber
and others in the Scholar and Beauty genre increasingly portrayed characters pursuing personal
emotional fulfillment, often in defiance of traditional social norms. For instance, Jiao Hong Ji, a
popular late Ming novel, narrates the tragic love of Wang Jiaoniang and Shen Chun. Despite falling
in love, Jiaoniang’s father forbids their marriage and orders her to marry another man. In defiance,
Jiaoniang starves herself to death, and Shen also dies for their love, showing that individual will
cannot be destroy by collectivistic pressures. Their spirits are ultimately transformed into mandarin
ducks, symbolizing their eternal union. In Jiao Hong Ji, Wang Jiaoniang stands apart from traditional
female figures in earlier Chinese literature, who typically adhered to Confucian expectations of
obedience. She defies her father’s authority, refusing to marry someone she does not love, and
asserts her personal desires despite societal and familial constraints. By placing her emotional needs
above family duty, Jiaoniang demonstrates a strong sense of individual agency. In Jiao Hong Ji, love
becomes a personal, self-determined choice, reflecting a broader cultural shift toward valuing
individual preferences in matters of the heart.
The shift toward individualism in Chinese literature during the Ming and Qing periods mirrors
developments in Western literature during the rise of sentimentalism and the Romantic movement
40. In both cultural contexts, personal emotions and individual desires began to take center stage,
replacing collective ideals or moral duties as the primary drivers of narrative. In Western literature,
sentimental novels like Samuel Richardson's Pamela (1740) and Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Julie, or the
New Heloise (1761) placed an unprecedented focus on characters’ emotional experiences and inner
lives. The Romantic movement, which followed in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, went
further by celebrating individual autonomy, personal freedom, and the defiance of social
conventions in pursuit of personal fulfillment, as seen in works like Goethe’s The Sorrows of Young
Werther (1774).
The parallel between these two literary traditions suggests a global shift in which individualism and
personal expression began to gain prominence, signaling a wider cultural transformation in both
East and West. Discussing the work of the historian Jacob Burckhardt on the rise of individualism
during the Renaissance, Bret Hinsch (2015) has said: “Although Burckhardt wrote about Italy in
the late Middle Ages, he could just as well have been describing China during the Tang/Song
transition. A strikingly similar process played out on the other side of the globe. Like their Italian
counterparts, Chinese gentlemen employed tea culture and other civilized pursuits to win
approbation for their special individual accomplishments, thus forging a distinctive public image
that could bring them praise and honor. Future research should strive to uncover additional
evidence of early signs of individualism in China and the West, and further study this apparent
cultural convergence. This would contribute to a broader understanding of the global patterns of
individualism and offer a more nuanced perspective on its development beyond Western
contexts.”
Materials and methods
Material
This article draws primarily from the China Biographical Database (CBDB, N = 641,568, panning
from 316 BCE to 1900 CE). The CBDB gives exact first and last names, along with year and
location of birth. For people whose birthday is unclear, the dataset produces an index year
according to a series of rules. For example, “rule 20: If the ego’s birth year is unknown, ego’s index
year = death year - 63". With a total of 20 rules, we estimated the date of birth for as many
individuals as possible, a similar method was applied to locations for the same purpose. The dataset
also includes the exact sources from which the names and other biographical information are
extracted, giving us control over selection bias by the sources.
To enhance the robustness of our study, we also incorporated the China Government Employee
Database – Qing Jinshenlu (CGED-Q JSL), compiled by the Lee-Campbell Group, which includes
records of officials from the Qing dynasty’s jinshenlu, prepared quarterly by the Department of
Selection under the Ministry of Personnel. The database CGED-Q JSL contains 1,247,751
individuals, with name and birth place, but it encompasses only three periods: 1760-1798, 1850-
Method
Calculating name uniqueness based on name frequency allows for the indexing of name uniqueness
within a subset of the sample. However, this method is primarily used with contemporary,
complete name registers with a very large sample size. In this article, we modified the calculation
to better accommodate historical data with much smaller sample size. We extended the time period
for calculating name uniqueness from a single year to a decade, thereby increasing the sample size
and achieving a more consistent distribution. Furthermore, we also employed a bootstrapping
sampled 200 individuals from each time period and calculated uniqueness within each bootstrap
sample, resulting in 200 individual uniqueness values based on the 200 randomly selected
individuals. Next, we averaged the 200 individual values to obtain a name uniqueness score for
that specific time period, in our case, 10 years. This process was repeated 1,000 times to ensure
that all individuals within the 10-year span were covered, yielding 1,000 uniqueness scores for a
single decade. We then averaged these 1,000 scores to derive a single mean value for the decade,
representing the name uniqueness for that period. This method ensures that the calculation of
name uniqueness is based on a dataset of uniform size, minimizing potential bias from fluctuations
in the number of observations.
Moreover, the CBDB aggregates various biographies, epitaphs, and chronicles, which may
introduce selection bias due to the diversity of sources. To address this, we controlled for sources
during the bootstrapping process: The calculation of name uniqueness and the bootstrapping were
performed within each individual source, ensuring that the final results were not skewed by source-
related selection bias.
To test the relationship between uniqueness and value predictors, we constructed a series of linear
models:
Model 1. Overall model
U ~ Year + 1|Source
Model 2. Regional model
U ~ Year + Region + Region*Year
Model 3. Quadratic model
U ~ Year + Year2 + 1|Source
Variables:
U: Adjusted uniqueness score
Year: Standardized continuous variable of year
Year2: Square of standardized year variable
Region: “Yangtze river delta” or “Other regions”
1|Source: 7 different sources within CBDB, included as a random effect
Data and code availability
Data as well as code for the project are available on OSF | Project Name.