CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 1
This paper has not yet undergone peer review and may be subject to changes.
How do Intellectually Curious and Interested People Learn and Attain Knowledge?
A Focus on Behavioral Traces of Information Seeking
1* 2,3 4,3 2,3
Aki Schumacher , Yvonne Kammerer , Christian Scharinger , Steffen Gottschling , Nicolas
1 1 5 1 3 1,6
Hübner , Maike Tibus , Enkelejda Kasneci , Tobias Appel , Peter Gerjets , and Lisa Bardach
University of Tübingen
Stuttgart Media University
Knowledge Media Research Center, Tübingen
Ulm University
Technical University of Munich
University of Giessen
* Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Aki Schumacher, University of
Tübingen, Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology, Walter-Simon-Straße 12, 72072
Tübingen, Germany; Phone: +49 7071 29-76532; E-mail: aki.schumacher@uni-tuebingen.de
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge that the data used in Study 1 stemmed from a research project supported
by the LEAD Graduate School & Research Network [GSC1028], which was funded within the framework of the
Excellence Initiative of the German federal and state governments. We acknowledge financial support for Study
2 from the intramural funding program of the LEAD Graduate School & Research Network (awarded to Aki
Schumacher). Aki Schumacher is a doctoral student at the LEAD Graduate School & Research Network, which
is funded by the Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts of the state of Baden-Württemberg within the
framework of the sustainability funding for the projects of the Excellence Initiative II. Lisa Bardach is supported
by a Jacobs Foundation Research Fellowship and an Elite Program for Postdocs Fellowship from the Baden-
Württemberg Foundation. We thank André Klemke for his support with data collection for Study 2.
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 2
Abstract
Intellectual curiosity and personal interest are both believed to spark information seeking and facilitate
learning. In two preregistered studies (Study 1: exploratory lab study, N = 312; Study 2: online
conceptual replication study, N = 960), we investigated effects of curiosity and interest on participants’
information seeking as they studied a hypertext on a historical topic. We captured their behavioral
traces with log files. We also examined effects of curiosity, interest, and information-seeking
behaviors on knowledge attainment. In both studies, latent profile analyses based on behavioral trace
data revealed more adaptive information-seeking profiles (e.g., broad and deep-diving information
searches, Study 1, or only broad information search, Study 2) and less adaptive (e.g., disengaged)
information-seeking profiles. More adaptive profiles were consistently related to better knowledge test
performance. Curiosity and interest positively predicted more adaptive information seeking (Study 1)
and knowledge test performance (Study 2); however, these effects were inconsistent across study
contexts. Furthermore, curiosity and interest did not interact in predicting information seeking and
knowledge attainment (Studies 1 and 2). Overall, our work extends the understanding of how
intellectually curious and interested individuals learn and attain knowledge and underscores the
promise of using behavioral trace data to study interindividual differences.
Keywords: curiosity, interest, information seeking, knowledge attainment, behavioral process
data
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 3
Plain Language Summary
Does it make a difference if you are curious in general or interested in the specific topic you are
studying?
Different personal characteristics are conducive to learning. Here, we asked whether it makes
a difference if you are curious in general and want to learn about many things (i.e., intellectual
curiosity) or if you are interested in the specific topic that you are studying (personal topic-specific
interest). We conducted two studies to investigate how intellectual curiosity and personal interest
manifest in how people search for information in a text on a historical topic (the Panama Canal) that
they read online. The text included various hyperlinks that participants could click to access additional
information on certain aspects of the text. In our first study, learners with high interest in the topic
were more likely to look at many different pieces of information and click on different links in the text
(“broad” information seekers), whereas intellectual curiosity was related to a “deep-diving information
search” in that intellectually curious people revisited information by clicking on the links in the text
again. In our second study, however, neither intellectual curiosity nor interest were related to specific
information-seeking behaviors. Being a broad (Studies 1 and 2) or deep-diving information seeker
(Study 1) was beneficial for learning. These findings suggest that intellectual curiosity and interest are
reflected in different ways of searching for information and learning. Furthermore, in Study 2, people
who were intellectually curious and interested did better on a knowledge test after reading the text. By
contrast, in Study 1, we did not find that being intellectually curious or interested was beneficial for
knowledge test performance. Our work contributes to the understanding of broad and specific
personality characteristics. As the roles that intellectual curiosity and personal interest played in
learning and knowledge attainment varied between the two studies, more research comparing effects
across different study contexts are needed.
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 4
How do Intellectually Curious and Interested People Learn and Attain Knowledge?
A Focus on Behavioral Traces of Information Seeking
People differ in how much they generally take pleasure in learning and like to seek out new
information. This thirst for knowledge is captured by the personality trait of intellectual curiosity
(Litman & Spielberger, 2003; Mussel, 2013; von Stumm, 2018). Intellectual curiosity is considered a
basic element of human cognition and an important driver of successful learning (Grossnickle, 2016;
Kidd & Hayden, 2015).
To date, there are different lines of research that have shed light on intellectual curiosity and
learning. First, intellectual curiosity has been linked to “real life” learning outcomes (e.g., measures of
academic achievement representing accumulated knowledge; Chamorro-Premuzic et al., 2006; Tang &
Salmela-Aro, 2021). Scholars have also connected research on curiosity with research on other
variables relevant to learning, for example, by examining unique and combined effects of curiosity and
topic-specific interests (e.g., Shin et al., 2023; Ziegler et al., 2018). However, although highly
informative, studies in this line of research may be missing an important piece, as they typically do not
account for the processes (i.e., specific learning behaviors) that lead to learning outcomes. If they do,
they rely on self-reported learning behaviors, which may be prone to response biases (e.g., Roth et al.,
2016).
Second, a large body of laboratory studies have investigated whether being curious about the
information an individual is processing makes them more likely to remember it (Fastrich et al., 2018;
Kang et al., 2009). This assumption has been repeatedly tested with the trivia paradigm: Participants
are given various trivia questions, asked to rate how curious they are to find out the answer, and then
presented with the answer, which they are later asked to recall (e.g., Baranes et al., 2015; Jach et al.,
2022). Even though this kind of research has significantly contributed to knowledge about curiosity
and learning, it can be criticized for a lack of ecological validity, as acquiring random trivia does not
represent how individuals seek information and acquire knowledge in everyday life.
Third, researchers have investigated more realistic, self-directed information seeking (e.g.,
participants freely exploring Wikipedia) and examined how intellectual curiosity is related to this type
of information-seeking behavior (e.g., Lydon-Staley et al., 2021; Sher et al., 2019). In doing so, they
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 5
have capitalized on actual behavioral traces instead of self-reports. However, such studies have usually
not assessed how much knowledge was acquired during the information search, as they did not
conceptualize information seeking as a way to learn, thus potentially leading to an incomplete
understanding of how self-directed information seeking can act as a learning behavior in people’s
everyday lives.
The present research aimed to overcome some of the limitations of previous studies on
intellectual curiosity and learning while harnessing several of their key strengths. Specifically, we
investigated how trait intellectual curiosity and personal interest manifest in people’s information-
seeking behavior and information integration and whether intellectual curiosity, interest, and learning
behaviors are related to knowledge acquisition. We zoomed in on more naturally occurring learning
behavior in terms of information-seeking behavior by using behavioral process data in the form of log-
file data from participants studying a hypertext on a historical topic. This task more closely resembles
real-life learning and knowledge acquisition than, for example, trivia question tasks. Furthermore, our
work adds to the understanding of how intellectually curious and interested individuals navigate
learning experiences and to what extent they profit from doing so by focusing on both learning
behaviors (log-file data) and learning outcomes (performance on knowledge tests of content covered in
the hypertext). We conducted two preregistered studies. In Study 1, we examined links between
intellectual curiosity, personal interest, distinct information-seeking profiles based on log-file data, and
knowledge test performance in the lab. Study 2 provided a conceptual replication of Study 1,
transferring the hypertext learning task to an online experimental environment. In both studies, we
controlled for well-established predictors of learning in terms of fluid intelligence, verbal abilities,
prior knowledge, and conscientiousness.
Intellectual Curiosity
Curiosity is a very diverse construct space that can be organized along several dimensions
(Grossnickle, 2016; Wagstaff et al., 2021). For instance, people can be curious about different things:
Whereas perceptual curiosity is triggered by complex or ambiguous sights and sounds (Collins et al.,
2004), social curiosity is characterized by the desire to obtain information about other people (Renner,
2006). Intellectual curiosity, also labeled epistemic curiosity (Litman & Spielberger, 2003) or intellect
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 6
(e.g., Mussel, 2013), signifies an eagerness to learn about abstract concepts and motivates behaviors
that are directed toward intellectual achievements (Mussel, 2013). Intellectually curious people “enjoy
thinking” and like to engage in cognitively stimulating activities, such as solving riddles or puzzles
(von Stumm & Ackerman, 2013). It has often been argued that a dispositional tendency to seek out
knowledge and effortful cognitive activities should play a role in learning and long-term cognitive
development (e.g., Ackerman’s Intelligence-as-Process, Personality, Interest, and Intelligence-as-
Knowledge [PPIK] model, 1996; which built on Investment Theory by Cattell, 1943, 1963). Aligned
with this idea, intellectual curiosity has been associated with measures of cognitive performance, such
as fluid and crystallized intelligence and academic achievement (Anglim et al., 2022; Chamorro-
Premuzic et al., 2006; DeYoung et al., 2005; Kaufman et al., 2016; Stanek & Ones, 2023; von Stumm
& Ackerman, 2013).
Intellectual curiosity is considered a component of the openness to experience factor from the
Five-Factor Model of Personality Traits (Digman, 1990; McCrae & Costa, 2008) and is often
operationalized using the Ideas facet of openness to experience (DeYoung et al., 2007; von Stumm &
Ackerman, 2013). Prior findings underscore the value of focusing on intellectual curiosity instead of
using a broad measure of openness to experience when studying effects on knowledge attainment
(Gatzka, 2021; Gatzka & Hell, 2018; but see von Stumm, 2018). Specifically, meta-analyses have
revealed significant positive, albeit weak, associations between openness to experience and academic
performance (Mammadov, 2021; Poropat, 2009). As demonstrated by Gatzka and Hell (2018; see also
Gatzka, 2021), a reason for such weak correlations may be that the intellectual component of openness
to experience benefits knowledge attainment, whereas the senso-aesthetic components may actually be
disadvantageous.
Intellectual Curiosity and Personal Interest: Similarities, Differences, and Integrated Perspectives
Intellectually curious people are generally more open to learning about a new topic compared
with less curious people. But some topics will still capture their attention more than others because
It should be noted that there are also constructs outside of the Big Five such as need for
cognition (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982) or typical intellectual engagement (Goff & Ackerman, 1992) that
capture intellectual curiosity or very similar concepts (Mussel, 2010; Powell et al., 2016).
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 7
certain topics will match their preexisting interests better (Ziegler et al., 2018). Whereas both curiosity
and interest are essential for learning, there is an ongoing debate on their similarities and differences
(Ainley, 2019; Alexander, 2019; Donnellan et al., 2022; Grossnickle, 2016; Murayama, 2022;
Murayama et al., 2019; Pekrun, 2019; Peterson & Hidi, 2019; Schmidt & Rotgans, 2021; Shin & Kim,
2019; Silvia & Kashdan, 2009; Tang et al., 2022). On a state level (i.e., momentary experiences of
curiosity or interest), it is difficult to distinguish whether someone engages with a piece of information
because it sparked their momentary interest or their curiosity. However, on a trait level, scholars agree
that these constructs are distinguishable: Trait curiosity describes a diverse, undirected fascination
with all kinds of topics, whereas personal interest is a stable motivational orientation toward a certain
topic, characterized by positive feelings and increased knowledge about it (Hidi & Harackiewicz,
2000; Hidi & Renninger, 2006). However, the two constructs are often investigated separately from
each other, thus potentially preventing the development of a better understanding of how each of them
uniquely benefits learning, above and beyond the effects of the other trait.
In addition to the unique effects of trait curiosity and interest, scholars have theorized about
their interplay. Specifically, Ziegler et al. (2012) suggested that learning should be especially fruitful
when high interest and openness to experience (especially its intellectual component, intellectual
curiosity) coincide. In their Openness-Fluid-Crystallized-Intelligence (OFCI) model, openness
represents the overall propensity to seek out information and engage with it, whereas interest directs
this energy to a specific area. Initial empirical tests of the model demonstrated that the interaction of
trait openness and subject-specific interest predicted school grades at the end of a semester or school
year (J. Zhang & Ziegler, 2022; Ziegler et al., 2018). However, studies have yet to test whether the
potential beneficial effect of concomitant intellectual curiosity and interest on learning outcomes can
mainly be observed over extended periods of time or also in a single learning session (see Ziegler et
al., 2012).
Intellectual Curiosity, Interest, and Information Seeking
Information seeking is considered a behavioral expression of curiosity (Kidd & Hayden,
2015). Many different behavioral tasks have been developed to assess participants’ curiosity through
their decision to seek out information or not. For instance, different types of lottery games have been
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 8
used to investigate whether people are willing to invest time or money to see information about a
reward outcome in advance, even if the information does not change the outcome itself (Bennett et al.,
2016; Jach et al., 2022; van Lieshout et al., 2018). To specifically quantify intellectual curiosity,
researchers commonly use the trivia paradigm in which participants can decide to seek out semantic
information (Baranes et al., 2015; Bennett et al., 2016; Fastrich et al., 2018; Gruber et al., 2014; Kang
et al., 2009; Ligneul et al., 2018; Marvin & Shohamy, 2016). In these studies, participants are
presented with a trivia question and are usually asked to rate how curious they are to find out the
answer. Higher self-reported state curiosity has been associated with better recollection of the
information, even at follow-up assessments (Gruber et al., 2014; Kang et al., 2009; Ligneul et al.,
2018; Marvin & Shohamy, 2016), and increased activity in reward systems in the brain (Gruber et al.,
2014; Kang et al., 2009), indicating that curiosity benefits learning and makes it a rewarding
experience.
However, in our everyday lives, we rarely acquire knowledge from trivia facts being presented
to us. If we want to learn something new, we must often seek out meaningful information ourselves.
For instance, someone may be intrigued by something they heard on the news and then decide to read
up on the topic later. In other cases, information seeking can be a required learning behavior in formal
education settings, for example, when students are instructed to prepare for the next lesson as
homework and independently do research on a new topic. Thus, curiosity research may benefit from
using tasks that allow for more natural occurrences of information seeking, thereby increasing
ecological validity (Murayama et al., 2019). Studying information seeking in a more natural manner
yields another benefit: Not only can we investigate the effects of intellectual curiosity (and interest) on
the decision to unveil one piece of information, but we can also study the information-seeking process
itself (e.g., how thorough or widespread the information search is) and whether that process is related
to the amount of knowledge that is acquired (i.e., we can view information seeking as a learning
behavior). This kind of research question calls for the use of behavioral data. However, most studies
examining the relationship between personal dispositions and learning behavior have relied on self-
report measures (e.g., Bidjerano & Dai, 2007; Chamorro-Premuzic & Furnham, 2009; Heinström,
2005; Lavrijsen et al., 2021). Self-reports can be problematic in the sense that they are prone to social
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 9
desirability, and they can be influenced by learners’ incomplete memories of their experiences (Roth et
al., 2016; van Halem et al., 2020). Expanding research by using objective behavioral measures is
important because they are unobtrusive and can provide a more fine-grained understanding of learning
processes.
Beyond Self-Reports: Behavioral Traces of Information Seeking
A naturalistic, noninvasive, and implicit assessment of individuals’ information-seeking
behavior can be achieved by tracing how they search for information digitally. Nowadays, digital
information seeking has become a critical skill for modern learners (Anthonysamy et al., 2020).
Sources on the Internet are usually organized in so-called hypertexts, which are nonlinear digital texts
that include hyperlinks through which the reader can access other web pages containing additional,
related information (Naumann et al., 2008). The reader must constantly decide which page or link is
relevant and interesting for their learning goal, in which order to read them, and the extent to which
they want to go into detail. Using automatically collected log-file data, researchers can re-create a
reader’s behavioral traces and try to draw conclusions about the reader’s characteristics. For instance,
when participants are presented with texts on different subjects to choose from, the order in which
they choose to read the texts can be seen as a sign of topic interest, whereas time spent reading can be
interpreted as persistence or engagement (Ainley et al., 2002; Brandmo & Bråten, 2021). Lydon-
Staley et al. (2021) investigated whether participants’ deprivation-type curiosity is reflected in the way
they browse Wikipedia. Deprivation-type curiosity describes the disposition to seek out information
because one is driven by the unpleasant feeling of a perceived knowledge gap that sparks a need to
know (Litman & Mussel, 2013). They found that those high in deprivation-type curiosity were more
likely to create tighter knowledge networks by visiting conceptually similar concepts, whereas
participants low in deprivation-type curiosity were broader in their information seeking. This
observation indicates that different facets of trait curiosity may manifest in different types of
information-seeking behavior (Lydon-Staley et al., 2021). There are various behavioral indicators of
information seeking that can be extracted from log-file data, such as information on when the
participants clicked on which hyperlink, how long they spent on the linked website, and when they
returned to the main body of text (Richter et al., 2003). Thereby, it seems particularly promising to
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 10
look at complex configurations of different information-seeking indicators instead of looking at
separate indicators, as the former will allow researchers to acquire a comprehensive understanding of
how individuals search for information (Antonenko et al., 2012; Kornmann et al., 2016).
The Current Research
The current work integrates different lines of research to gain a comprehensive understanding
of the interplay between curiosity, interest, information seeking, and knowledge attainment. We
sought to overcome some of the limitations of previous studies, such as by increasing ecological
validity by using a more naturalistic information-seeking task, testing effects of information seeking
on participants’ knowledge acquisition, and considering interest as another relevant person
characteristic in addition to trait intellectual curiosity. Specifically, we aimed to investigate how
intellectual curiosity and personal interest manifest in information-seeking behavior and are related to
knowledge attainment and whether information seeking predicts knowledge attainment. We
additionally explored the extent to which the interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest
benefits both information seeking and knowledge attainment. We focused on actual information-
seeking behavior by analyzing log files from a hypertext learning task. We used different behavioral
indicators of information seeking extracted from the log-file data to identify distinct information-
seeking profiles. As learning material, we chose a hypertext on the history of the Panama Canal, as
most people have limited prior knowledge on the topic, and it includes various thematic fields (e.g.,
history, politics, and geography), making it likely to spark information seeking. We present two
studies: first, an exploratory study set in an experimental laboratory setting, and second, a
confirmatory online study as a conceptual replication of Study 1. In both studies, we controlled for the
effects of other well-established predictors of learning behaviors and knowledge attainment (e.g.,
intelligence and conscientiousness).
Study 1: Exploratory Study
Research Questions and Hypotheses
Research Question 1: Using behavioral information-seeking indicators derived from the log-
file data of the hypertext (number of unique clicks on links, number of links revisited, overall time
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 11
spent on links, average time spent on different links, time spent reading the main text), can participants
be clustered into different meaningful information-seeking patterns? Due to the exploratory person-
oriented approach we used, the exact number and configurations of information-seeking profiles were
not known a priori; therefore, it was not possible to derive hypotheses for specific profiles.
Research Question 2a: Do intellectual curiosity and interest predict information-seeking
behavior? On the basis of conceptual considerations and prior research focusing on other (learning)
behaviors (e.g., Han et al., 2018; Van Alten et al., 2021), we tentatively proposed that individuals with
higher levels of intellectual curiosity and higher levels of personal interest would be more likely to
belong to more adaptive information-seeking behavior profiles (i.e., they should engage more with the
text and seek more information).
Research Question 2b: Does the interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest predict
information seeking? We expected to find a significant interaction such that the combination of higher
levels of intellectual curiosity and personal interest would predict membership in more adaptive
information-seeking profiles (Ziegler et al., 2018).
Research Question 3: Do information-seeking profiles predict knowledge test performance
(i.e., questions about the content of the hypertext)? We hypothesized that belonging to a more (vs.
less) adaptive information-seeking profile would positively predict knowledge test performance
(Lawless et al., 2002; List & Alexander, 2017).
Research Question 4a: Do intellectual curiosity and interest predict performance on the
knowledge test? We hypothesized that both higher levels of intellectual curiosity and higher levels of
personal interest would significantly and positively predict better knowledge test performance (e.g.,
Grossnickle, 2016).
Research Question 4b: Does the interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest predict
knowledge attainment? We expected to find that the combination of higher levels of intellectual
curiosity and personal interest would predict better knowledge test performance (Ziegler et al., 2018).
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 12
Method
Participants and Procedure
We conducted a secondary data analysis of data from a larger project conducted at the [name
of university blinded for peer review] in Germany. The project examined self-regulation in a variety of
different learning tasks across three testing sessions. All questionnaires and tests were administered on
laptops. Ethical approval was provided by the university’s ethics committee.
as well as participants’ questionnaire data and performance on cognitive tasks. Three hundred twenty-
one participants were recruited for the project. They were 18–30 years old, and most were university
students. Participants were paid 8€ per hr and an additional 15€ when they had completed all three
testing sessions. Four participants were excluded for not participating in all testing sessions. For the
current study, another five participants were excluded due to technical issues during the assessment,
because data from different measures could not be unambiguously matched, or because both their
behavioral data (log-file data) and knowledge test scores were missing. Thus, the final sample we
analyzed consisted of 312 participants (M = 23.33, SD = 3.04; 70.5% women). For the analyses
age age
including the behavioral data, an additional nine participants had to be excluded because they did not
follow instructions and used multiple browser tabs to access hyperlinks, resulting in log files that were
correlations for all measures.
All measures considered in this study were assessed in one testing session. Participants
completed the intelligence test and filled out the personality questionnaire before the learning task. In
the learning task, participants first rated their previous knowledge of the history of the Panama Canal
and their interest in American history and Central America (personal interest). They were then
presented with a hypertext on the political history of the Panama Canal and instructed to educate
themselves on the topic, as they would be asked questions about the content afterward (knowledge
test). They were informed that they could read the text for 15 min; however, they could prematurely
end the information search whenever they felt ready for the test or study the text for longer if they
wished. There were 18 hyperlinks embedded in the hypertext, six of which provided more information
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 13
Example From the Hypertext Learning Task
Note. The main text on the history of the Panama Canal contained 18 hyperlinks that were underlined
and colored blue. Once a link was clicked, it turned purple. At the end of each hyperlink page, a
“Back” button allowed participants to return to the main text.
about political facts (e.g., treaties and conflicts), geographical facts (e.g., countries and cities),
or people (e.g., ambassadors and presidents). All texts were derived from the respective Wikipedia
articles and modified in length and readability to fit the purpose of the study (main text comprised 464
words, hyperlink texts comprised between 139 and 190 words). Participants were instructed to freely
navigate the hypertext, while their log-file data was recorded. After reading the text, participants
completed the knowledge test. A general reading ability test was administered after the knowledge
test.
When data were first collected for the larger project from which the data for our study
stemmed, researchers planned to address different research questions about the effects of an
experimental manipulation that was unrelated to the research questions addressed here. Specifically,
before studying the hypertext, participants were given six multiple-choice questions on topics related
to the topic of the Panama Canal (Group A: geographical questions [n = 80]; Group B: person-related
questions [n = 71]; Group C: political questions [n = 72]; or questions that were unrelated to the topic
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 14
[Group D, n = 96]). These questions were also part of the knowledge test administered after the task.
Before conducting the main analyses in Study 1, we tested for differences between the experimental
groups on all variables, which are reported in Tables S2 and S3. Importantly, we included
experimental condition as a control variable in all our main analyses.
Measures
Intellectual Curiosity. Intellectual curiosity was measured with the Ideas facet of the
openness to experience scale from the German version of the NEO-PI-R questionnaire (Ostendorf &
Angleitner, 2004). Seven items were used (sample item: “I like to solve complex problems”; the
internal consistency, computed as Cronbach’s alpha, was α = .77). Participants responded to the items
on a scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Personal Interest. To measure personal interest, we used three items that were developed for
the purpose of the study, drawing on conceptualizations of interest from the literature and prior interest
assessments (e.g., Renninger & Hidi, 2011; items: “I am interested in the history of Central America”;
“I am interested in the countries of Central America”; “I am interested in the history of the United
States”). The same response options as for intellectual curiosity were used (ranging from 1 = strongly
disagree to 5 = strongly agree). The scale had good internal consistency (α = .81).
Knowledge Test Performance. After reading the text, participants worked on a knowledge
test constructed for the purpose of the study. They were presented with nine inference questions (true-
false questions) that could be answered by reading only the main body of the hypertext and without
accessing any hyperlinks (sample item: “The Clayton-Bulwer Treaty allowed France to build the
Panama Canal”). Then, participants were given 18 multiple-choice questions on each of the hyperlinks
(sample item: “Which party did U.S. President Zachary Taylor belong to?”) and six multiple-choice
questions on unrelated topics (information not included in the hypertext; e.g., “What are the
inhabitants of Guatemala called?”). For the outcome measure of knowledge test performance, we
excluded the unrelated questions. For each correct answer, participants received 1 point, resulting in a
total maximum score of 27 points. The reliability of the knowledge test, based on item response theory
(IRT) analyses using a 2-parameter logistic model (Birnbaum, 1968; De Ayala, 2009) was acceptable
(WLE [weighted likelihood estimate] reliability = .65).
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 15
Behavioral Indicators of Information Seeking. The following indicators of information-
seeking behavior were extracted from the log files: Number of unique clicks on links (indicating
whether the participant attempted to explore a wide range of information), number of links revisited
(indicating the reconceptualization or reevaluation of information in light of other information
presented in the text), overall time spent on links, average time spent on links (time on links/number of
links clicked), and time spent reading the main text (overall time minus time spent on links; see Jeske
et al., 2014, for similar indicators).
Control Variables. As participants knew that they would be tested on the content of the
hypertext before they read the text, information seeking could have been motivated by the desire to
perform well on the test rather than curiosity. Thus, we controlled for trait conscientiousness, which
was assessed with the respective scale of the German version of the NEO-PI-R questionnaire
(Ostendorf & Angleitner, 2004; 48 items, sample item: “I work hard to achieve my goals”; α = .92).
Furthermore, we controlled for the effects of self-rated previous knowledge on the history of the
Panama Canal with one self-developed item (“How do you rate your previous knowledge about the
Panama Canal?”) with a response scale ranging from 1 (no knowledge at all) to 10 (expert). Fluid
intelligence was assessed with the CFT-R (internal consistency estimate: KR-20 = .78). We relied on
the reading comprehension score on the German Reading speed and comprehension test
(“Lesegeschwindigkeits- und Verständnis-Test,” LGVT; Schneider et al., 2007) as a measure of
reading ability (KR-20 = .87). We added experimental condition as a covariate to account for potential
influences of the experimental manipulation on our analyses (four experimental groups: geographical
vs. person-related vs. political vs. unrelated questions).
Analyses
Data processing and the computation of descriptive statistics were conducted in R Version
4.1.2 (R Core Team, 2023). All other analyses were performed in Mplus 8.6 (Muthén & Muthén,
1998) using maximum likelihood estimation with robust standard errors (MLR). The amount of
missing data ranged from 0.00% to 6.09% on the item level. Full information likelihood estimation
(FIML) was used to deal with missing data (Enders, 2010). In preliminary analyses and as
preregistered, we tested the factor structure of the personal interest measure, which was developed for
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 16
the purpose of the research project, by running a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). On the basis of
the CFA results (see Online Supplement S1), we retained three out of the five items (see Measures for
all items).
In the preregistered analyses that were designed to address our research questions, we
modeled intellectual curiosity, personal interest, and the control variable conscientiousness as manifest
variables (i.e., mean scores on the respective scales) and used sum scores for performance indicators
(reading performance, fluid intelligence, knowledge test). For the control variable previous
knowledge, we used the score from the single-item measure. The control variable experimental group
was dummy coded using the group primed with unrelated questions as the reference category.
A latent profile analysis (LPA) was conducted to identify different profiles on the basis of the
information-seeking indicators. We employed the three-step latent profile approach described by
Asparouhov and Muthén (2014b) and as implemented in Mplus to investigate the latent profiles’
associations with auxiliary variables. This approach allowed us to investigate the relationships of the
latent profiles with auxiliary variables without this estimation influencing the measurement model of
the latent profiles (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014b; Vermunt, 2010). Five hundred random sets of
starting values with 50 initial stage iterations and 50 final stage optimizations were requested. We first
estimated LPAs with k = 2 to k = 6 profiles to identify the optimal number of latent profiles. Statistical
indicators and theoretical considerations were combined to select the optimal latent profile model. As
statistical indicators, we relied on the Akaike information criterion (AIC), the Bayesian information
criterion (BIC), and the sample-size-adjusted BIC (SABIC) to compare different models. Lower
relative values on these indices indicate a better model fit while considering model complexity (i.e.,
number of estimated parameters). Additionally, we used the Vuong-Lo-Mendell-Rubin likelihood ratio
test (VLMR) and the Lo-Mendell-Rubin adjusted likelihood ratio test (LMR) for model comparisons
(Lo et al., 2001). A significant p-value obtained with these two tests means that a particular model fits
better than a model with one fewer profile (Nylund et al., 2007). Furthermore, we checked the entropy
value as a measure of classification accuracy, which ranges from 0 to 1 and should preferably be at
least .80 (Clark & Muthén, 2009). With respect to content-related indicators, we relied on the principle
of parsimony, along with theoretical considerations (e.g., whether a profile was theoretically relevant and
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 17
unique), as well as the interpretability and meaningfulness of the profiles. We then employed Asparouhov
and Muthén’s (2014b) three-step approach to examine whether intellectual curiosity and interest predicted
the information-seeking profiles using multinomial logistic regressions. Two models were set up, one
without and one with the interaction between curiosity and interest. Next, the three-step approach was used
to test whether profile membership predicted knowledge test performance. Specifically, we relied on
equality tests of means across profiles to investigate relationships between the profiles and knowledge test
scores, treating the knowledge test score as a distal variable with unequal means and variances
(Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014b). Finally, to examine the effects of intellectual curiosity and interest
on knowledge attainment, we set up two multiple regressions (the first model without and the second
model with the interaction term). All hypotheses were tested against a significance level of α = .05,
and we relied on two-tailed tests.
All research questions, hypotheses, and their respective analysis plans were preregistered on
the Open Science Framework (OSF, anonymized link for peer review:
analyzed. Some deviations from the preregistration were applied to improve the analyses (see Online
Supplement S2). The preregistration and all analysis scripts can be found on the OSF. Study 1 was
based on a secondary data analysis, and the data are currently not publicly available due to data
privacy/ethical restrictions.
Results
Latent Profile Analysis
We investigated latent profile models with k = 2 to k = 6 latent information-seeking profiles
the likelihood-ratio-based tests VLMR and LMR favored a three-profile solution. Therefore, we first
inspected the three-profile solution more closely. In the three-profile solution, profiles mostly differed
quantitatively in their information seeking, differentiating profiles that exhibited little versus moderate
versus high information seeking. As the AIC, BIC, and SABIC values favored solutions with more
profiles, we inspected the four-profile solution next. Compared with the three-profile solution, the
four-profile solution included another group of participants who also displayed high information
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 18
seeking but stood out by their large number of revisited hyperlinks compared to their number of
unique hyperlinks. This qualitative—rather than quantitative—difference in information-seeking
behavior seems meaningful, as revisiting information is commonly considered in the literature on
source evaluation and may be interpreted as a way to validate and integrate information (Kammerer et
al., 2021; Leroy & Kammerer, 2023; List & Alexander, 2018). Albeit this profile was smaller than the
others (n = 34; 11.60% of the sample), the Average Latent Class Probability for Most Likely Latent
Class Membership for this profile was good (.96). Furthermore, entropy was high for the four-profile
solution (.91). We also took a look at the five-profile solution. This solution included two profiles that
were fairly similar and depicted moderate engagement. Participants in these two profiles spent nearly
the same amount of time on the main text and differed only slightly in the number of unique clicks on
hyperlinks and subsequently the time spent on the hyperlinks. We deemed this slight variation
between the two moderately engaged profiles as less informative and theoretically less meaningful
than the differences between the profiles in the four-profile solution. To conclude, taking both
statistical and theoretical indicators (parsimony, theoretical meaningfulness) into consideration, we
Configuration of the Four Latent Profiles
700,00 14
600,00 12
500,00 10
400,00 8
300,00 6
200,00 4
100,00 2
0,00 0
Disengaged Broad Superficial Deep-diving
(n = 93) (n = 51) (n = 115) (n = 34)
Note. The left y-axis refers to the indicators Main text time, Hyperlink time, and Average hyperlink
time (in s), whereas the right y-axis refers to the indicators Number of clicks on unique links and
Number of revisited links (in absolute numbers). Error bars represent standard errors.
ni
emiT
skcilc
fo
rebmuN
Four-profile solution
Main text time
Hyperlink time
Average hyperlink time
Number of clicks on unique links
Number of revisited links
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 19
Of the final four information-seeking profiles, one group of participants (n = 93) displayed
little commitment to the task and spent less than 5 min on the hypertext on average while hardly
accessing any hyperlinks. We thus named this group “disengaged information seekers.” The largest
group of participants (n = 115) seemed moderately engaged with the hypertext. They clicked on some
hyperlinks (on average 6.5 links out of 18), but the overall time they spent on the hypertext was
relatively low; therefore, we labeled them “superficial information seekers.” Fifty-one participants
were characterized by a widespread search for information and sought out many different additional
pieces of information (i.e., accessing many different hyperlinks), making them “broad information
seekers.” They spent even more time on hyperlinks than on the main text. The last group of
participants (n = 34) spent nearly as much time on the main text as on the hyperlinks and clicked on
many different hyperlinks, though not as many as the broad information seekers. Their most notable
feature was the large number of links they revisited (three on average) compared with the other
profiles. Revisiting pages allows learners to reevaluate and reconceptualize information in light of
other information (e.g., Kammerer et al., 2021); therefore, we interpreted this information-seeking
behavior as a desire for a deeper understanding of certain concepts and labeled this group “deep-diving
information seekers.” All in all, the deep-diving and broad information-seeking patterns are
characterized by higher engagement with the hypertext and are presumably more adaptive for
knowledge acquisition compared with the disengaged and superficial information-seeking patterns
Intellectual Curiosity, Interest, and Information Seeking
Results from the three-step approach (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014b), which relied on
multinomial logistic regression models in which each profile was contrasted with all other profiles (see
interest were more likely to be broad information seekers than disengaged information seekers (b =
0.46, p = .048). High levels of intellectual curiosity increased the probability of being a deep-diving
information seeker compared with a broad information seeker (b = 0.84, p = .036). Even though the
other effects failed to reach statistical significance, it is worth noting that participants high in
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 20
intellectual curiosity also tended to be more likely deep-diving than disengaged (b = 0.62, p = .090) or
superficial information seekers (b = 0.63, p = .071). With respect to the control variables, participants
with higher previous knowledge were more likely to be classified as disengaged information seekers
than as the other three profiles (disengaged vs. broad: b = 0.35, p = .037; disengaged vs. superficial: b
= 0.24, p = .037; disengaged vs. deep-diving: b = 0.39, p = .047). Higher intelligence was associated
with a higher probability of being a broad information seeker compared with being a disengaged (b =
0.12, p = .005) or a superficial information seeker (b = 0.09, p = .023).
Next, we included the interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest in the model. The
interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest was not a statistically significantly predictor of
membership in any information-seeking profile, with bs ranging from 0.02 to 0.43 and ps ranging
Information Seeking and Knowledge Test Performance
Equality tests of means across profiles revealed that the different information-seeking profiles
had significantly different performances on the knowledge test (χ² = 108.23, p < .001). Participants
belonging to the broad information-seeking profile performed better (M = 18.32, SD = 3.32) than
participants from the deep-diving profile (M = 16.47, SD = 2.85; χ² = 7.80, p = .005), the superficial
profile (M = 15.22, SD = 2.83; χ² = 32.12, p < .001), and the disengaged profile (M = 13.08, SD =
2.73; χ² = 94.33, p < .001). Furthermore, the deep-diving profile performed better than the superficial
profile (χ² = 4.35, p = .037), and the superficial profile performed better than the disengaged profile (χ²
= 29.14, p < .001).
Intellectual Curiosity, Interest, and Knowledge Test Performance
Multiple regression results showed that neither intellectual curiosity (b = 0.38, p = .177) nor
interest (b = 0.30, p = .135) statistically significantly predicted knowledge test performance.
Knowledge test performance was significantly and positively predicted by fluid intelligence (b = 0.12,
p = .001) and reading ability (b = 0.06, p = .011). Furthermore, effects of experimental condition were
significant, with the groups that were primed with geography questions and person-related questions
performing significantly better than the group primed with unrelated questions (geography: b = 1.17, p
= .021; person: b = 1.17, p = .025). Adding the interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 21
revealed that the interaction did not significantly predict knowledge test performance (b = -0.01, p
estimates).
Discussion
Using behavioral indicators of information seeking extracted from log-file data, we identified
four different information-seeking profiles of participants who read and learned from a hypertext. Two
information-seeking patterns (disengaged and superficial) could be classified as less adaptive,
characterized by little information seeking and low knowledge test performance. Among the more
adaptive information-seeking patterns, broad information seekers sought out many different forms of
additional information, whereas deep-diving information seekers were more likely to revisit certain
links. Broad information seekers performed best on the knowledge test, followed by deep-diving,
superficial, and disengaged information seekers. Trait intellectual curiosity was related to a higher
likelihood of being a deep-diving information seeker compared with the other information-seeking
profiles, whereas higher personal interest in the topic was linked to a greater likelihood of being a
broad information seeker compared with being a disengaged information seeker. In line with
theoretical accounts that regard curiosity as the desire to address specific knowledge gaps
(Loewenstein, 1994), adopting a deep-diving information-seeking pattern could be most effective for
accomplishing this goal (e.g., revisiting crucial concepts that are particularly important for closing the
identified gap). Conversely, personal interest has been argued to lead to more sustained engagement
with a topic (Hidi & Renninger, 2006, 2019), which might have manifested in exploring as many
topic-related aspects as possible. In contrast to the large body of research documenting how curiosity
and interest are related to learning outcomes (Renninger & Hidi, 2019; von Stumm et al., 2011), in our
study, intellectual curiosity and personal interest were not significantly related to knowledge test
performance.
Furthermore, the results did not reveal beneficial effects of the interaction between intellectual
curiosity and interest on information-seeking behavior or knowledge attainment. We hypothesized that
we would find a synergistic interaction effect (high levels of both openness and interest should be
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 22
most beneficial for learning), originally suggested by the OFCI model (Ziegler et al., 2018). However,
recent studies have found mixed results on whether the interaction is synergistic or compensatory (a
high level of either openness or interest can compensate for a low level on the other variable; see J.
Zhang & Ziegler, 2022). Therefore, more research is needed to determine whether the interaction
between curiosity and interest can be obtained in different contexts and to investigate the exact
interplay of openness and interest. Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the
first to test the OFCI model in a single learning session and the first to expand the outcomes to include
learning (information seeking) behaviors. In doing so, our work contributes to current research on the
OFCI model (Lechner et al., 2019; J. Zhang & Ziegler, 2022) and research combining curiosity and
interest more generally (Tang et al., 2022).
Study 2: Conceptual Replication
Although Study 1 provided relevant insights into the interplay between intellectual curiosity,
interest, information seeking, and knowledge attainment and had considerable strengths (e.g., the use
of behavioral information-seeking indicators), it was also limited in several regards. For instance, the
sample size was relatively small, which did not allow for latent variable modeling and may have led to
insufficient power; the data set included experimental conditions that we controlled for but that were
nevertheless unrelated to our research questions; and the instructions that participants were given
before the experiment did not fit the purpose of our study perfectly, as participants were aware of the
upcoming knowledge test, which may have potentially superseded their intrinsic curiosity. We
therefore conducted a second confirmatory study as a conceptual replication and extension of Study 1
to overcome the limitations of Study 1 and to build a more robust evidence base (Plucker & Makel,
2021).
Research Questions and Hypotheses
In Study 2, we tested whether we could replicate the results from the exploratory study, and
we retested the hypotheses that had previously not been empirically supported. Using the same
behavioral indicators of information seeking, we first asked whether we could identify the same
profiles as in Study 1 (Research Question 1). Then we asked: Do participants’ intellectual curiosity
and interest (Research Question 2a) and the interaction of these two variables (Research Question 2b)
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 23
predict participants’ information-seeking behavior? We hypothesized that individuals with higher
levels of intellectual curiosity and individuals with higher levels of personal interest would be more
likely to belong to more adaptive information-seeking profiles than to less adaptive information-
seeking profiles. In line with the OFCI model, we expected that the interaction would also predict
profile membership in more adaptive profiles. Next, we asked: Does information-seeking profile
membership predict knowledge test performance (Research Question 3)? We hypothesized that
belonging to a more (vs. less) adaptive information-seeking profile would positively predict
knowledge test performance. Finally, we asked: Do intellectual curiosity and interest (Research
Question 4a) and their interaction (Research Question 4b) predict performance on the knowledge test?
We expected that higher levels of intellectual curiosity, higher levels of personal interest, and their
interaction would significantly and positively predict knowledge test performance. For both research
questions addressing the interaction effect, we expected to find a significant interaction on the basis of
theory; however, we left open how exactly curiosity and interest would interact in predicting the
outcomes (e.g., compensatory vs. synergistic effects), as prior research has not only been based on
different research settings than our study but has also yielded mixed results (J. Zhang & Ziegler,
2022).
All hypotheses and methods were preregistered on the OSF before the data were collected (see
Method
Participants and Procedure
To ensure that we recruited a sufficiently large sample, Study 2 was conducted as an online
experiment. It was approved by the ethics committee of the university of [blinded for peer review]. We
translated the materials into English to leverage the significantly larger number of English-speaking
participants who were recruited on the online research participation platform Prolific
In addition to the broader hypotheses that referred to more and less adaptive information-seeking profiles, we
also preregistered specific hypotheses for the four information-seeking profiles found in Study 1 in case they
also emerged in Study 2. As these profiles did not emerge in Study 2, we did not include the hypotheses in the
paper, but they can be found on the OSF (see the end of this section for the link).
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 24
so that the study was displayed only to potential participants who fit our inclusion criteria. Participants
were eligible to participate if they were between 18 and 30 years old, had acquired a high-school
diploma/completed A-levels, and had not been medically diagnosed with dyslexia. We decided to
exclude potential participants from the US, Colombia, Panama, and other Central American countries,
as they might have more extensive prior knowledge about the Panama Canal than the original German
sample. To test the operability of the experimental setting, we conducted a pilot study with N = 31
participants prior to the preregistration.
We used G*Power (Faul et al., 2009) to conduct a power analysis to determine our target
sample size. To be maximally conservative, our power analysis was based on the analyses for
Research Question 2 (effects of intellectual curiosity and interest on information-seeking profiles)
because we expected to find the smallest effects here and because multiple tests were conducted
(comparing each of the latent profiles against one another). We aimed to obtain 90% power to detect
small effect sizes (f²) of .02 with a conservative alpha error probability of .008 to correct for the use of
multiple tests (Bonferroni). The power analysis yielded a required sample size of 1,002.
We collected data from N = 1,102 participants. As preregistered, participants (55 participants,
4.99%) were excluded if their questionnaire and behavioral data could not be unambiguously matched,
data could not be clearly assigned to one participant, or if it became apparent from the log-file data
that participants did not follow instructions (e.g., used tabs to access hyperlinks). Next, as Study 2 was
conducted in an unsupervised online testing setting, we performed outlier analyses for the behavioral
data aimed at identifying unrealistically long reading times (e.g., spending more than 1 hr on one link),
which indicate off-task behavior. We thus calculated the estimated reading time for each page of the
hypertext, based on the word count and an average silent reading rate for adults in English of 238
words per min (Brysbaert, 2019). As participants generally differ in their reading speed and were free
to reread texts, we defined unusual reading behavior as four times the expected reading time for the
main text and three times the expected reading time for each hyperlink. If participants exceeded any of
these thresholds, they were excluded, which led to the exclusion of 87 participants (resulting in a total
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 25
exclusion rate of 12.89% ). Thus, our final sample consisted of 960 participants. The final sample was
slightly smaller than the sample size determined by the power analysis. However, our power analysis
was very conservative and was based on comparing effects across four different latent profiles,
whereas our main analyses reported below were based on a two-profile solution. The 960 participants
were 25.54 years old (SD = 3.19) on average. A total of 51.25% identified as female, 47.08% as
age
male, 1.67% as a gender variant/nonconforming). The vast majority of participants were British
(71.35%), followed by South African (9.06%) and Australian (3.85%).
We used the German survey software SoSci Survey (Leiner, 2023) to implement the online
questionnaire, whereas the hypertext was hosted on a local webserver at the [name of research institute
blinded for review] to ensure high data privacy standards for the collection of log-file data. After
giving consent, participants completed a short (figural) fluid and a short verbal intelligence test. Next,
they filled out questionnaires on sociodemographic data, personal interest in and previous knowledge
about the topic, and personality (intellectual curiosity, conscientiousness). For the hypertext learning
task, participants were instructed to freely explore the given text on the history of the Panama Canal
and familiarize themselves with the topic. Participants were told that they could browse the text for as
long as they wanted and that they could click on as many links as they wanted. In contrast to Study 1,
there was no experimental manipulation, and they did not know that they would be tested on the
content of the text afterward. After reading the text, participants took the knowledge test. They were
then redirected to Prolific and reimbursed (£5.40). The median time spent completing the study was 33
Measures
We used English versions of the measures used in Study 1 by either translating the items
(proofread by professional translators) or using the respective English versions of the scales. All items
were pilot tested by Native English speakers. To analyze the information-seeking behavior, we used
the same five behavioral indicators extracted from the log-file data as in Study 1. For intellectual
As a check, we ran LPA analyses that were based on the information-seeking behavioral indicators in the larger
sample without the exclusions that had resulted from the outlier analyses (N = 1,047). Most models did not
converge, which was likely due to the extreme outliers.
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 26
curiosity, we used the Ideas facet from the openness to experience scale from the original English
version of the NEO-PI-R (Costa & McCrae, 1992) with the same response scale ranging from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Internal consistency was good (α = .80). To assess personal
interest, we translated the three items used in Study 1 and kept the same response format (1 = strongly
disagree to 5 = strongly agree). Internal consistency was also good (α = .88). We translated the
knowledge test but excluded the six questions unrelated to the text, resulting in a 27-item measure. We
conducted IRT analyses using a 2-parameter logistic model (Birnbaum, 1968; De Ayala, 2009) and
derived WLEs (Warm, 1989) of participants’ test scores (WLE reliability = .70).
We aimed to include the same control variables as in Study 1; however, we needed to adapt
several measures, as the original measures were either not workable or were too long for an online
study. Fluid intelligence was assessed with the 11-item Matrix Reasoning Task from the International
Cognitive Ability Resource (ICAR; Condon & Revelle, 2014; The International Cognitive Ability
Resource Team, 2014), which demonstrated acceptable internal consistency (KR-20 = .70). To
account for differences in verbal abilities, we included a measure of verbal intelligence using 11 items
from the ICAR Verbal Reasoning Task (Condon & Revelle, 2014; The International Cognitive Ability
Resource Team, 2014; KR-20 = .63). To measure conscientiousness, we used the respective scale from
the NEO-FFI, which is a short 12-item form of the original NEO-PI-R scale (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
The internal consistency estimate was high (α = .87). Prior knowledge was measured with the same
item as in Study 1 (“How do you rate your previous knowledge about the Panama Canal?”) with a
response scale ranging from 1 (no knowledge at all) to 10 (expert).
Analyses
For data processing and the computation of sample descriptives, we used R Version 4.1.2 (R
Core Team, 2023). We also used R (and the TAM package; Robitzsch et al., 2022) to derive WLE
scores for our central outcome, the knowledge test, for the main analyses in which we used a
measurement-error-corrected single indicator approach for knowledge test performance (see below for
details). All further analyses (CFAs to test the factor structure of all multiple-item scales, main
analyses addressing our research questions) were performed in Mplus 8.6 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998)
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 27
using maximum likelihood estimation with robust standard errors (MLR). There were no missing
values in this study.
For our main analyses, we modeled intellectual curiosity, personal interest, and the control
variable conscientiousness as latent variables (for details on the measurement models, see Online
Supplement S3). For the main analyses involving knowledge test performance, we used a single-
indicator (SI) approach to account for measurement error (e.g., Hoyle, 2012), fixing the residual
variance of the respective WLE knowledge test scores to (1-WLE reliability)*sample variance. The
control variables prior knowledge (single item) and fluid and verbal intelligence test scores were
included as manifest variables. We followed the same statistical analysis protocol as in Study 1. We
again utilized the three-step latent profile approach outlined by Asparouhov and Muthén (2014b);
however, we could not rely on the automatic functions offered by Mplus but had to implement it
manually, as we used more advanced secondary models involving latent variables (see Asparouhov &
Muthén, 2014b, and Appendix D and E in Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014a).
First, we identified latent profile models with k = 2 to k = 6 profiles on the basis of the five
behavioral indicators (number of unique clicks on links, number of links revisited at least once, overall
time spent on links, average time spent on different links, time spent reading the main text). Five
hundred random sets of starting values with 50 initial stage iterations and 50 final stage optimizations
were requested. We relied on the same statistical indicators as in Study 1 (AIC, BIC, SABIC, VLMR,
LMR) and additionally considered the Bootstrap Likelihood Ratio Test (BLRT) alongside theoretical
considerations (parsimony, interpretability, meaningfulness) to choose the best model. We then
conducted multinomial logistic regressions to investigate whether intellectual curiosity and interest
predicted information-seeking profile membership (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014b) and estimated two
models (one without and one with the curiosity–interest interaction). In Step 2, we determined the
measurement error for the most likely class variable N, which was used in the subsequent and final
step of the estimation. In Step 3, the desired auxiliary model was estimated, where the latent class
variable was measured by the most likely class variable N, and the measurement error was fixed and
prespecified to the values computed in Step 2. The model without the interaction included the latent
predictor variables intellectual curiosity and interest and the control variables. In the model with the
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 28
interaction, a latent interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest was added (see Maslowsky
et al., 2015). Next, we examined whether information-seeking profile membership predicted
knowledge test performance, which again required manual implementation due to the (latent) SI
approach specifications for knowledge test performance. Finally, we explored the relationship between
intellectual curiosity and interest with knowledge test performance by setting up two structural
equation models (one without and one with a latent interaction; Maslowsky et al., 2015).
All hypotheses were tested against a significance level of α = .05. We relied on one-tailed tests
for effects for which we had specified directed hypotheses, and two-tailed tests for the remaining
effects (including control variables). We used Benjamini-Hochberg corrections (Benjamini &
Hochberg, 1995) to adjust for multiple tests (corrections were applied for each research question
separately and for all variables for which we had specified hypotheses). The preregistered analysis
plan, data, and analysis scripts are publicly available (anonymized link for peer review:
Results
Latent Profile Analysis
3). The AIC, BIC, SABIC, and BLRT favored solutions with increasing numbers of profiles, whereas
the VLMR and LMR favored a five-profile solution. However, profile solutions with three or more
profiles included a very small profile with only 10 or fewer participants (1.04% of the total sample),
which is hardly interpretable (Nylund et al., 2007). Thus, we inspected the two-profile solution more
to the task; therefore, we named them the “disengaged information seekers.” Similar to the group of
disengaged information seekers in Study 1, they spent an average of less than 5 min on the task.
However, they proportionally spent more time seeking out additional information than in Study 1. But
all in all, even if they did click on links, they spent only a little time on it (average hyperlink time =
14.88 s). The other group of participants (n = 356) sought out most of the additional information;
therefore, we named them the “broad information seekers.” Compared with the broad information
seekers in Study 1, this group sought out more links (16.26 hyperlinks on average) but spent less time
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 29
reading them. Overall, the broad information seekers exhibited a more adaptive information-seeking
style compared with the disengaged information seekers. Furthermore, entropy was high for the two-
for both latent profiles).
Configuration of the Two Latent Profiles
450,00 18
400,00 16
350,00 14
300,00 12
250,00 10
200,00 8
150,00 6
100,00 4
50,00 2
0,00 0
Disengaged Broad
(n = 604) (n = 356)
Note. The left y-axis refers to the indicators Main text time, Hyperlink time, and Average hyperlink
time (in s), whereas the right y-axis refers to the indicators Number of clicks on unique links and
Number of revisited links (in absolute numbers). Error bars represent standard errors.
Intellectual Curiosity, Interest, and Information Seeking
Results from the multinomial logistic regression model in the manually implemented three-
step approach (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014a) showed that neither intellectual curiosity (b = -0.17, p
unstandardized estimates and Odds Ratios). Similar to Study 1, participants with higher previous
knowledge were more likely to be disengaged information seekers (b = 0.17, p = .003). Furthermore,
fluid intelligence significantly predicted the likelihood of being a broad information seeker (b = -0.07,
p = .019). Next, we added the interaction between intellectual curiosity and interest, which did not
ni
emiT
skcilc
fo
rebmuN
Two-profile solution
Main text time
Hyperlink time
Average hyperlink time
Number of clicks on unique links
Number of revisited links
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 30
Information Seeking and Knowledge Test Performance
The difference in knowledge test performance between the two profiles was significant (test
for latent mean differences = 1.08, p < .001). Broad information seekers performed better (M = 15.63,
SD = 4.06) on the knowledge test than disengaged information seekers (M = 12.53, SD = 3.68).
Intellectual Curiosity, Interest, and Knowledge Test Performance
Structural equation modeling results revealed that both intellectual curiosity (b = 0.12, p
= .045) and personal interest (b = 0.19, p < .001) significantly predicted knowledge test performance.
Furthermore, knowledge test performance was significantly and positively predicted by verbal
intelligence (b = 0.11, p < .001), previous knowledge (b = 0.06, p = .023), and fluid intelligence (b =
0.04, p = .024). We fit another structural equation model that included the interaction between
intellectual curiosity and interest; the interaction did not predict knowledge test performance (b = 0.05,
p = .457). Tables S11 and S12 in the Online Supplement show all effects from the models without and
with the interaction, respectively (unstandardized and standardized estimates).
Robustness Checks (Studies 1 and 2)
We included (preregistered) theoretically relevant control variables in our analyses for Studies 1
and 2. However, we also report the results of our analyses without control variables on the OSF. For Study
2, for which we had relied on latent variable modeling, we reran all analyses using manifest variables
(following the analysis protocol of Study 1). The results, which we uploaded onto the OSF, were very
similar, with one exception: In the manifest variable analyses, intellectual curiosity was a statistically
significant predictor of the likelihood of being a broad information seeker, as compared with being a
disengaged information seeker. In the Discussion sections below, we focus on the (preregistered)
latent results.
Discussion
Study 2 provided a conceptual replication of Study 1 with several notable strengths, including
the larger sample, which also made it possible to conduct latent variable modeling. Relying on the
same behavioral indicators as in Study 1, we identified two information-seeking profiles (broad vs.
disengaged). Broad information seekers spent more than twice as much time on the hypertext and
sought out many different hyperlinks. Disengaged information seekers, on the other hand, spent most
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 31
of their reading time on the main text and hardly sought out any additional information. Likely due to
their more comprehensive information seeking in the hypertext, broad information seekers performed
better on the subsequent knowledge test. Surprisingly, intellectual curiosity and personal interest did
not predict information-seeking profile membership, which contrasts with prior research that relied on
self-reported adaptive learning behavior (e.g., Dan & Todd, 2014; Evans et al., 2003) and the results of
Study 1. However, in line with previous research, which employed different markers of knowledge
attainment (e.g., Anglim et al., 2022; Hyland et al., 2022), individuals scoring high on intellectual
curiosity and interest performed better on the knowledge test. Again, no empirical support for the
OFCI model’s predictions on the combined effects of curiosity and interest could be established, as we
did not obtain significant interaction effects on adaptive information-seeking behavior or knowledge
attainment.
General Discussion
The present two-study paper integrated different lines of research on curiosity, interest,
information seeking, and learning to gain a comprehensive understanding of how people differ in how
they search for information to acquire knowledge. We leveraged behavioral data from a hypertext
learning task to identify distinct information-seeking profiles. Furthermore, we examined the effects of
information-seeking profiles on knowledge attainment and investigated the unique and combined
effects of participants’ intellectual curiosity and personal interest on their information-seeking
behavior and knowledge attainment.
In both studies, we identified behavioral information-seeking profiles that can be characterized
as either more or less adaptive. However, in Study 1, these profiles were more differentiated, as two
profiles (broad and deep-diving information seekers) exhibited adaptive characteristics, and two
profiles (disengaged and superficial information seekers) exhibited more maladaptive characteristics.
Disengaged and superficial information seekers sought out hardly any additional information. Broad
information seekers extensively explored additional information across different topics, whereas deep-
diving information seekers tended to visit fewer unique links but instead revisited the same links. We
interpreted the revisiting as a desire for a deeper understanding of certain concepts and as
reconceptualizing and reevaluating information in light of new information (Goldman et al., 2012;
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 32
Kammerer et al., 2021; Leroy et al., 2023; List & Alexander, 2018). In the online study (Study 2), we
did not replicate the four-profile solution but identified only a broad information-seeking profile and a
disengaged information-seeking profile, similar to those in Study 1. The granularity of different
information-seeking types may depend on the specific context of the information-seeking task. Even
though we used the same material (translated from German to English) and extracted the same
behavioral indicators, there were several differences between the two studies. For instance, in the lab
study, participants were told beforehand that they would be tested on the content of the hypertext,
whereas participants in the online study did not know about the subsequent knowledge test when
reading the text. In the lab study, some participants may have visited and revisited links that they
considered the most important for the upcoming knowledge test rather than the most interesting.
Furthermore, the sample in the online study was more heterogeneous than the university student
sample in Study 1. When inspecting the behavioral data, we noticed that the online sample exhibited
more extreme behaviors, such that there were many participants who either hardly read the text or read
the text very thoroughly, with fewer participants who were moderately engaged. Such behavior may
account for why only two profiles—disengaged and highly engaged—emerged in Study 2, whereas we
were able to detect more subtle qualitative differences in the information-seeking behavior of the
participants in the lab. To conclude, in both studies, we were able to show that participants differed in
their more versus less beneficial information-seeking behavior in line with previous research (Hahnel
et al., 2023; Lydon-Staley et al., 2021), which seems to be a robust finding. The qualitative differences
from Study 1 appear to be less robust and may be more context-specific.
Next, we addressed the question of how participants’ trait curiosity and personal interest in the
topic were related to their information-seeking behavior. In Study 1, we found that higher intellectual
curiosity made a participant more likely to be a deep-diving information seeker than a broad
information seeker. Curiosity is often defined as an urge to close a knowledge gap (Loewenstein,
1994). Highly intellectually curious readers may be more likely to identify their own knowledge gaps
and then direct their search to close such gaps rather than engage in widespread, possibly undirected
information seeking. Such directed actions may include rereading the most important texts to ensure
that a specific knowledge gap is closed. Empirically, the deep-diving information-seeking style is
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 33
similar to the findings by Lydon-Staley et al. (2021), who found that higher levels of deprivation-type
curiosity were related to visiting conceptually similar pages and creating tighter knowledge networks
when reading Wikipedia (naming this a “hunter”-like information-seeking style). Furthermore, we
found that higher personal interest was related to the likelihood of being a broad versus a disengaged
information seeker in Study 1. This finding fits with interest theory, which argues that established
interests should lead to continued engagement with the topic (Hidi & Renninger, 2006, 2019).
However, unexpectedly, we did not replicate these findings. In Study 2, no deep-diving profile
emerged. We also did not obtain significant relationships between intellectual curiosity or personal
interest and membership in the two profiles identified in Study 2, even though theory and prior
empirical evidence (Ainley et al., 2002; Jach et al., 2022) have suggested that both constructs should
predict being a more adaptive (broad) compared with a less adaptive (disengaged) information seeker.
Furthermore, as the online study represented an even less structured learning situation, we would have
expected curiosity and interest—as they tap into intrinsic motivational processes—to be even more
relevant for prompting information seeking. Nonetheless, the findings in Study 1 indicate that
curiosity and interest may manifest in distinct information-seeking behaviors, thus adding to the
extensive literature on the similarities and differences between curiosity and interest (e.g., Grossnickle,
2016). To our knowledge, no study has yet tried to disentangle the effects of the two constructs by
using behavioral process data (e.g., log-file data). Hence, tasks such as the hypertext learning task
employed in our study could be a promising study paradigm to investigate further in future studies,
leveraging behavioral data to study interindividual differences (Boyd et al., 2020).
In both studies, we found that the participants with the more adaptive information-seeking
profiles performed better on the knowledge test than those with the less adaptive profiles. In Study 1,
broad information seekers performed best, followed by deep-diving, superficial, and disengaged
information seekers. Correspondingly, in Study 2, broad information seekers outperformed disengaged
information seekers. These findings support the validity of the behavioral indicators that we selected
to measure information seeking as a means to learn from a hypertext across two studies with different
contextual conditions (lab vs. online). However, it is important to bear in mind that we administered
the knowledge test right after participants read the text. Even though we were able to show that
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 34
information seeking plays a role in knowledge attainment, it would be insightful to test the effects of
different information-seeking styles on long-term learning using delayed knowledge tests in future
research. For instance, whereas broad information seekers may perform better on an immediate
knowledge test because they visited more pages, deep-diving information seekers may have grasped
some concepts more deeply and may thus remember the content for a longer period of time (Fayn et
al., 2015; Smillie et al., 2016). Thus, the evaluation of whether an information-seeking style is more or
less relevant to learning should be extended by adopting a longer term perspective on knowledge
attainment.
Both trait curiosity and interest are important for learning (Renninger & Hidi, 2019; Tucker-
Drob & Briley, 2012; von Stumm et al., 2011), and in our studies, we tested whether they would
predict knowledge attainment in a single learning session. In Study 1, trait intellectual curiosity and
personal interest were not significantly related to knowledge test performance. In Study 2, we found
the expected statistically significant positive effect, but the effect sizes were small, especially for
curiosity. However, we also controlled for a range of other highly relevant variables (e.g.,
intelligence), and in Study 2, curiosity and interest still significantly contributed to the prediction of
knowledge test performance above and beyond the effects of these other variables. Taken together, we
propose that the hypothesized positive (small) effects of curiosity and interest on knowledge
attainment exist but require a rather large sample (i.e., higher statistical power) to detect it. The trait-
level assessments of curiosity and interest employed in our study could be another reason for the small
effect sizes we obtained. Stronger effect sizes may be expected for immediate, state-level assessments
of curiosity and interest (i.e., asking participants how curious they felt before reading the text; Nuutila
et al., 2020; Roemer et al., 2023; Rotgans & Schmidt, 2018). However, it can be challenging to
distinguish between state curiosity and situational interest (Ainley, 2019). Conversely, trait curiosity
(general openness toward various topics) and personal interest (directed toward a specific topic) are
more clearly distinguishable. As it was an important goal of this study to consider and compare the
effects of both curiosity and interest on information-seeking behavior and knowledge attainment
through an intertheoretical integration, we found the trait-level assessment to be both informative and
valuable. In the future, combinations of trait- and state-level assessments may be considered.
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 35
Additionally, we investigated whether the combination of interest and curiosity played a role
in information seeking and knowledge attainment by testing the OFCI model’s predictions (Ziegler et
al., 2018) in a different context (single session including a hypertext learning task) and expanding the
model to consider a novel learning-relevant outcome (information-seeking behavior). According to the
OFCI model, a curious person might be even keener to seek out information if the topic of the text
matches their pre-existing interests. However, we did not find statistically significant interaction
effects in either study. Previous research on the interplay between openness and interest has found
beneficial interaction effects, when using either trait (J. Zhang & Ziegler, 2022) or state (Ziegler et al.,
2018) measures of openness and interest. However, such studies mostly conducted longitudinal tests
of the effects on scholastic performance over the span of a semester or school year. It might be the
case that the co-occurrence of openness (or intellectual curiosity) and interest specifically fosters
learning behaviors that are beneficial for long-term learning that cannot be observed in a single
learning session. To follow up on our two studies, additional research in different contexts is
warranted to further determine under which conditions the predictions made by the OFCI model will
hold.
Finally, we included established control variables related to learning behaviors and outcomes
and found largely consistent effects. Higher previous knowledge was consistently associated with
being a disengaged information seeker, in line with previous research on hypertext reading in which
prior knowledge was associated with shorter reading times (Madrid & Canas, 2009; Sullivan &
Puntambekar, 2015). Fluid intelligence increased the likelihood of being a broad information seeker,
potentially because higher intelligence levels may reduce the cognitive load associated with hypertext
reading. Moreover, knowledge test performance in both studies was directly predicted by participants’
fluid intelligence and verbal abilities, likely due to their higher complex reasoning abilities, general
knowledge (Furnham & Chamorro-Premuzic, 2006), or enhanced reading comprehension and speed
(Johann et al., 2020).
Limitations and Directions for Future Research
Several limitations should be acknowledged. The lower degree of experimental control in the
online study might have influenced participants' task compliance but may have potentially also
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 36
affected information-seeking behavior itself. Jach et al. (2022) demonstrated that the decision to seek
out information depends not only on the person but also on situational factors, especially how
intellectually engaging, positive, and negative they perceive the situation to be. Applied to our studies,
it is possible that participating in an online study from the comfort of one’s home may be a less
intellectually stimulating situation than being invited to a lab and tested by a researcher. This might
have made participants less inclined to seek out information to learn something new. Future research
should carefully test how situational constraints influence information-seeking behavior by further
comparing lab studies, online studies, and even field studies that investigate people’s natural
information-seeking behavior on the Internet (see, e.g., Zhou et al., 2023). Additional insights into
situational effects can be obtained by incorporating participants’ explicit perception ratings of the
situational characteristics of the information-seeking task (Jach et al., 2022; Rauthmann et al., 2014).
Another limitation involves the selection of our measures. Although the focus on intellectual curiosity
and domain-specific interest add to current knowledge, it would have been desirable to compare their
effects with other conceptually similar (e.g., need for cognition; Cacioppo & Petty, 1982; or interest-
type vs. deprivation-type curiosity; Whitecross & Smithson, 2023) and conceptually distinct constructs
(e.g., neuroticism; Z. Zhang et al., 2021) to gain an even more comprehensive understanding of how
different individual difference variables manifest in behavioral traces of information seeking (see also
Rauthmann, 2023). Also, an even more fine-grained understanding may be gained by looking at item-
level effects in the future (e.g., Achaa-Amankwaa et al., 2021). Finally, log-file data capture rich,
time-sensitive information of overt information-seeking behavior but cannot make mental processes
visible. For instance, a long reading time can mean various things—a participant might be thoroughly
reading a text, pausing and contemplating what they just read, they might be engaged in mind-
wandering and in need of more time because they are unfocused, or they might simply be a slow
reader. Thus, caution must always be taken when psychological processes are inferred from trace data
(Goldhammer et al., 2021). Future research could enrich the log-file data by adding multimodal data
(e.g., eye-tracking or think-aloud protocols) to enhance the validity of interpretation (e.g., Kammerer
& Gerjets, 2013).
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 37
Conclusion
In two studies, we used behavioral data from a hypertext learning task and linked participants’
information-seeking behavior with their trait curiosity and personal interest in the topic. There were
indications that curiosity and interest are related to more adaptive information-seeking profiles (Study
1) and knowledge attainment (Study 2); however, these effects were not robust across study contexts,
thus also underlining the importance of (conceptual) replications to gain insights into the
generalizability and boundary conditions of research findings (Plucker & Makel, 2021). More adaptive
information-seeking behavior consistently predicted knowledge test performance (Studies 1 and 2).
Furthermore, curiosity and interest did not interact in predicting information-seeking behavior or
knowledge attainment (Studies 1 and 2). The hypertext learning task mirrors more natural information
seeking, thereby enhancing ecological validity (Murayama et al., 2019), while maintaining high
experimental control over the material that was used. By assessing the knowledge participants gained
through information seeking, (i.e., studying information seeking as a way to learn), we built a bridge
between “classic” curiosity research and information seeking in the lab and research on real-life
learning (e.g., educational research, learning sciences; see also Jach et al., 2023).
Data Accessibility Statement
For Study 1 (secondary data analysis), the preregistration, code, and materials are openly
accessible. The Study 1 data are not publicly available due to data privacy/ethical restrictions. For
Study 2, the preregistration, data, code, and material are openly accessible. Everything is publicly
link for peer review).
CURIOSITY, INTEREST, INFORMATION SEEKING, AND KNOWLEDGE ATTAINMENT 38