Sleep and selective memory consolidation in infants: Exploring the impact of learning contexts
Neele Hermescha, Sabine Seehagena, Rachel Barrb, Jane S. Herbertc, and Carolin Konradd*
a Developmental Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitaetsstrasse
150, 44801 Bochum, Germany
b Department of Psychology, White-Gravenor Hall, 413, Georgetown University, United States
c School of Psychology, University of Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia
d Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, Mental Health Research and Treatment Center, Faculty of
Psychology, Ruhr University Bochum, Massenbergstraße 9-13, 44787 Bochum,Germany
*Carolin Konrad is now at Developmental Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, Ruhr University Bochum
Correspondence concerning this proposed article should be addressed to Neele Hermesch or Sabine
Seehagen, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitaetsstrasse 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany. Email:
neele.hermesch@rub.de and sabine.seehagen@rub.de)
Conflict of Interest Statement: We have no conflict of interest to disclose.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in
Ethics Approval Statement: This study was approved by the local Ethics Committee of the Faculty of
Psychology, Ruhr University Bochum.
Acknowledgements: Research was funded by the German Research Foundation (SE 2154/6-1; KO
5811/1-1). Gefördert durch die Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) – Projektnummer
448036156. The authors would like to thank all families who participated in this study. Thank you to
Pauline Obereiner and Amelie Enste for their assistance with recruitment of infants, data collection,
and coding.
Research Highlights
 Post-encoding sleep benefited memory consolidation of digital and live content in infants.
 Infants struggled to transfer digital information to a real-life setting.
 Caregiver scaffolding disrupted memory performance in 15-month-old infants.
Abstract
Post-encoding sleep facilitates memory consolidation from early infancy. Digital content might
benefit, too, although infants find it more difficult to learn and remember screen content (transfer
deficit) and may only recognize its relevance when scaffolded by caregivers. We investigated infants’
memory performance as a function of presentation mode (live or video), post-encoding sleep and
caregiver scaffolding with the aim of replicating the transfer deficit and the beneficial effect of a
post-encoding nap. We expected the nap benefit to be less pronounced when information was
encoded from videos. We compared data from a live (n = 68) and a video experiment (n = 69;
Hermesch et al., 2024). In both experiments, 15- and 24-month-olds watched demonstrations of two
deferred imitation tasks (live or on prerecorded video). During one of the demonstrations caregivers
scaffolded the task. Half of the infants in each age-group napped for ≥30 minutes after
demonstration, whereas the others remained awake for ≥4hours. Memory performance was
assessed after 24 hours counting the reproduced target actions. Contrary to expectations, the nap
benefit did not replicate in the live demonstration sample. However, when both samples were
examined together there was a main effect of nap condition showing that nappers retrieved more
target actions than awake infants. Moreover, cross-experiment comparisons revealed a transfer
deficit and an unexpected disruptive effect of caregiver scaffolding on memory performance in 15-
month-olds. Results are discussed in light of limits on detecting sleep-mediated memory effects and
the challenges of remembering digital information in infancy due to cognitive load.
Keywords: sleep-dependent memory consolidation, transfer deficit, infants, scaffolding, screen media,
deferred imitation
Introduction
Sleep supports memory consolidation in adults (e.g., Diekelmann & Born, 2010; Klinzing et
al., 2019; Walker & Stickgold, 2004). Over the past decade, there has been growing evidence that
post-encoding sleep enhances memory consolidation in infants and young children as well (Konrad &
Seehagen, 2020; Mason et al., 2021). Sleep-dependent memory consolidation has been shown in
infants aged between 3 months to 36 months for a variety of tasks including declarative memory
tasks (e.g., Friedrich, 2015, 2020; Horváth et al., 2018; Seehagen et al., 2019), motor learning tasks
(e.g., Berger & Scher, 2017), and generalization tasks (e.g., Friedrich et al., 2017; Gomez et al., 2006;
Konrad et al., 2016). However, most studies were conducted with infants between the ages of 3 and
17 months of age, which has resulted in a paucity of research exploring the effect of sleep on
memory consolidation in infants between the ages of 18 and 24 months (Mason et al., 2021).
Memory benefits of post-encoding sleep in adults and children alike have been explained
with the active systems consolidation theory and the synaptic homeostasis hypothesis, and both
mechanisms could also work in concert to explain the effects (see Mason and Spencer (2021) for
review). According to the synaptic homeostasis hypothesis, learning increases synaptic potentiation
during wakefulness. Sleep episodes are necessary for synaptic downscaling, preserving important
memories while reducing the overall synaptic load (Tonini & Cirelli, 2006). According to the active
system consolidation theory memories are initially stored in the hippocampus and then gradually
transferred to the neocortex for long-term storage during sleep (Diekelmann & Born, 2010). This
involves a reactivation of recently encoded memories, thereby strengthening and stabilizing them.
Frequent sleep in infants may be necessary due to the immaturity of their brain structures, which
may require frequent transfer of newly encoded memories to the long-term storage. From this
perspective, changes in sleep behaviour may also indicate brain maturation processes (Spencer &
Riggins, 2022).
Now that the first findings have shown robustly that sleep supports memory consolidation
even in early life, it is particularly relevant to investigate the circumstances under which sleep
becomes effective. Replications with different tasks and across various age-groups are essential to
test the robustness of these phenomena and to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms
underlying the relationship between sleep and memory in infancy. This is especially important in
developmental science, where replication helps to confirm the reliability of research findings (Frank
et al., 2017). Therefore, the first objective of the present study was to replicate the beneficial effect
of a post-encoding nap on memory in 15- and 24-month-old infants using a deferred imitation
paradigm (research question 1, RQ1). Deferred imitation procedures are a widely used method,
which is assumed to serve as a non-verbal measure of declarative memory in infants (Hayne et al.,
2004).
Not all memories encoded during wakefulness undergo sleep-dependent memory
consolidation. Stickgold and Walker (2013) proposed that sleep-dependent memory consolidation
might be a selective process favoring those memories that are tagged as “relevant”. In adults, the
personal value attributed to learned material (van Rijn et al., 2017), the anticipation of being tested
(van Dongen et al., 2012), or the prospect of monetary rewards (Fischer & Born, 2009) can serve as
relevance tags, thereby facilitating sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Preliminary evidence
exists for selective sleep-dependent memory benefits in infants. In Konrad et al. (2019), 15- and 24-
month-old infants participated in a deferred imitation task in which an experimenter demonstrated
target actions with unfamiliar objects that were either relevant or irrelevant for achieving the goal of
getting access to an attractive object. Half of the infants napped after the demonstration session
(nap condition) while the others stayed awake during the subsequent 4 hours (no-nap condition). All
infants were tested for their ability to reproduce the target actions after a 24-hour delay. The results
revealed a differential impact of sleep on memory consolidation. Whereas infants in the no-nap
condition exhibited faithful reproduction of the demonstrated order (irrelevant action, then
relevant), infants in the nap condition failed to reproduce the actions in the demonstrated order.
However, contrary to the hypothesis, no significant difference was observed in the reproduction of
only relevant actions between the two conditions. Potentially, in that study the differentiation in
actions that were relevant versus irrelevant might not have been salient enough to trigger selectivity
in sleep-dependent memory consolidation.
More broadly, it is still unclear which memories could receive relevance tags in infancy as
cues of relevance may differ from those that signify future significance to adults. One “relevance
cue” could be the presentation mode of a potential learning experience. Despite infants’ ability to
learn and remember information delivered on screens (see Barr, 2013, Rusnak & Barr, 2020; for a
review), many studies also demonstrated that infants’ performance when learning and remembering
screen-based information lags behind that of real-live interactions (e.g., Barr, 2010; Barr & Hayne,
1999; Brito et al., 2012; Strouse & Samson, 2021). Several explanations of this so-called “transfer
deficit” have been discussed, although none of the approaches alone can explain the effect (see Barr
& Kirkorian, 2023 and Strouse & Samson (2021) for review). Due to the perceptual impoverishment
of 2D-video presentations, fewer cues are available for infants to facilitate memory retrieval after a
delay. Moreover, it also leads to a mismatch between perceptual cues encoded from the video
demonstration and perceptual characteristics present “in the real world” (Barr, 2010, 2013). This
complicates memory retrieval particularly for infants because their memory processes are highly
specific (Hayne & Herbert, 2004) and memory retrieval is vulnerable to even minor changes in cues
between encoding and test. Second, understanding of screen content as a representation for actually
existing entities (i.e., their symbolic thinking) develops throughout infancy and early childhood
(Troseth, 2010). Lastly, and most importantly for this study, infants are predisposed to learn from
contingent responsive social interactions (Cisbra & Gergely, 2009; Kuhl, 2009), whereby caregivers
are an important reference for what is of relevance (Harris & Corriveau, 2011). Thus, the transfer
deficit is attributed to infants’ inability to perceive media content as relevant due to a lack of
contingent social reactions typical for educative in-person interactions (Troseth et al., 2006). In this
sense, caregivers can mitigate the transfer deficit by embedding screen content in a social interaction
(i.e., caregiver scaffolding, Seehagen & Herbert, 2010). For example, Strouse and Ganea (2021) found
that 30-month-olds benefited from scaffolding when learning labels for objects from a screen (see
also Barr & Wyss, 2008). A recent meta-analysis that included 17 studies revealed a small, but
significant positive association of adults interactively co-using digital media with 0-6-year-olds and
learning outcomes (Taylor et al., 2024).
The effect of post-encoding sleep remains largely unexplored in the context of the transfer
deficit. So far, one study has provided preliminary evidence that screen-based memories for target
actions in a deferred imitation task may also benefit from post-encoding sleep in late infancy
(Hermesch et al., 2024). In that study, infants watched two videos each showing an adult model
three target actions. One video was accompanied by caregiver scaffolding such that the caregiver
commented on the model’s actions, whereas the other video was not. Infants were randomly
assigned to a nap or a no nap condition. Reproduction of target actions was assessed 24 hours later.
Twenty-four-month-olds exhibited retention of the target actions, whereas 15-month-olds did not.
Furthermore, in the 24-month-old group, temporal recall of the target actions was significantly
enhanced by sleep, but not by caregiver scaffolding.
The present study extends this line of research by investigating whether sleep differentially
benefits memory consolidation for actions learned through live demonstrations compared to video
demonstrations in 15- and 24-month-old infants. There were two main reasons for selecting these
age- groups: a) Ecological relevance: Parents more intentionally provide media experiences in the
second year of life than in the first year of life (Rideout, 2017), and b) numerous transfer deficit
studies have been conducted during the second year of life (for review, see Barr, 2019).
Consequently, identifying strategies to mitigate this phenomenon is of particular significance in this
age group. By comparing data from the current live demonstration experiment to the previously
completed video experiment (research question 2, RQ2), we aimed to gain a deeper understanding
of how the presentation mode of learning experiences and subsequent sleep influence memory
consolidation in infancy. If televised content is perceived as irrelevant, it should be less likely to
undergo sleep-dependent memory consolidation and a potential memory benefit of post-encoding
sleep should be less pronounced. To allow cross-experiment comparisons, and thereby to answer
RQ2, we used the exact same procedures in the live experiment as in the video experiment
conducted by Hermesch et al. (2024), including the within-subject manipulation of caregiver
scaffolding.
We tested two following hypotheses: First, in RQ 1 (Replication of the beneficial effect of a
post-encoding nap) the primary hypothesis was that in both age groups, infants in the nap condition
would reproduce a higher number of target actions than infants in the no-nap condition. Moreover,
we expected that infants in the nap and the no-nap condition would show retention of the target
actions. That is, infants in these conditions will perform a significantly higher number of target
actions compared to infants in the age-matched control conditions. We also expected a main effect
of age with infants aged 24 months reproducing a greater number of target actions than infants aged
15 months. The impact of caregiver scaffolding was investigated through an exploratory approach.
In RQ 2 (cross-experiment comparison) we predicted that a memory benefit of post-encoding
sleep in the nap condition (vs. the no-nap condition) would be more pronounced when infants saw a
live (vs. video) demonstration (i.e., a presentation mode x condition interaction). We also expected
to find a transfer deficit: infants who watched a live demonstration will perform a higher number of
target actions than infants who watched a televised demonstration of target actions. Moreover, we
predicted that 24-month-old infants would remember more target actions than 15-month-old infants
across both experiments.
Methods
Design
In a first step, the present study examined the effect of sleep on infants’ imitation
performance from a live demonstration. In a second step, the data were compared to those of a
previously published video experiment (see Hermesch et al., 2024 for a more detailed description).
Sample 1 Live Demonstration. The sample of the live experiment comprised n = 68 infants,
distributed equally between two age groups of 15 months and 24 months (+ / - 1 month). The mean
age of the 15-month-olds was 469 days (SD = 12.2; 41% female). The mean age of the 24-month-olds
was 735 days (SD = 12.3; 43% female). Infants were randomly assigned to a nap or a no-nap
condition. Infants in the nap condition were required to sleep ≥ 30 min within 4 hours after
demonstration of the target actions. Infants in the no-nap condition were required to stay awake ≥ 4
hours after the demonstration of target actions. Participants were recruited via the infant and child
subject database of the Faculty of Psychology at Ruhr University Bochum. A research assistant
contacted the caregivers of healthy full-term infants in the respective age ranges who had previously
signed up for the database and informed them about the study procedures. If caregivers were
interested, study appointments were arranged to match the requirements of the nap or no-nap
condition based on caregiver-reported infant sleep schedules. All participating families received a gift
(e.g., a small toy or a picture book) and a certificate. The majority (65%) of the caregivers stated that
German was the only language spoken in the household. Fifteen percent of the infants were exposed
to at least one more language in addition to German at home. For one fifth of the infants (n = 14)
caregivers did not answer additional demographic questions. Infants from families with a higher
educational degree were overrepresented in this sample, with 53% of caregivers holding a university
degree or higher. Twenty-four additional infants were tested, but were not eligible for main analyses
because their sleep behavior was inconsistent with assigned condition (n = 7), there was no valid
actiwatch data (n = 6), they did not touch the stimuli (n = 4) , the caregiver interfered (n = 3), due to
technical error (n = 2) or illness-related cancelation of the test session (n = 2).
Sample 2. Video demonstration. As reported in Hermesch et al. (2024), the final sample for
the video experiment consisted of n = 34 infants aged 15 months and n = 35 infants aged 24 months,
also distributed among both age groups and within each age group, equally distributed among a nap
and a no-nap condition (see Hermesch et al., 2024, for a more detailed description). Moreover,
within the video study n = 36 additional participants were tested in age-matched baseline control
conditions (n = 17 infants aged 15 months and n = 19 infants aged 24 months). Recruitment and
random allocation to condition was carried out as described above.
Regarding RQ 1, the study can be described as a mixed experimental design with age (15
months, 24 months) and experimental condition (nap, no-nap, baseline) as between-subject factors
and presence of caregiver scaffolding as a within-subject factor. For the cross-experiment
comparison (RQ 2) presentation mode (live, video) and experimental condition (nap, no-nap) were
between-subject factors, whereas caregiver scaffolding was a within-subject factor.
Materials
Deferred imitation tasks
To assess declarative memory consolidation each infant completed two well-established
deferred imitation tasks (e.g., Barr et al., 2007; Barr & Hayne, 1999; Herbert & Hayne, 2000b). These
tasks were equivalent in the live and the video study. In both tasks, infants were required to
assemble a toy in three steps, one of which was a rattle toy and the other one a wooden rabbit toy.
Actigraphy
In both studies actiwatches (Micro Motionlogger, Ambulatory Monitoring Inc.) were used to
monitor sleep-wake behavior between the demonstration and the test session 24 hours later. The
wristwatch-like devices record frequency, intensity, and duration of movements. Thus, actigraphy is a
non-invasive and convenient method to objectively measure sleep behavior in naturalistic settings
(Ancoli-Israel et al., 2003). Caregivers were also asked to keep a sleep diary for the monitored period
to control for potential artifacts in movement data.
Procedure
Sample 1. Live Demonstration
Study participation in the live demonstration experiment involved two home visits scheduled
24 hours apart. During the first home visit, informed consent was obtained from the caregiver. After
the infant on the lap or to seat the infant in a highchair while the experimenter took a seat opposite
the infant. Then the experimenter demonstrated the target actions three times in succession for
both tasks one after another. For one set of stimuli, the experimenter asked the caregiver to scaffold
encoding by reading out a standardized script (e.g., ‘Look, she has made something!’; cf. Barr & Wyss,
2008). Verbal labels for the stimuli or actions were not provided in the scaffolding condition (i.e.,
empty narration). In general, caregivers were instructed not to comment any further on what the
child observed during demonstration. The order of demonstrations and the assignments of imitation
tasks to the scaffolding and no scaffolding conditions was counterbalanced across conditions. After
the demonstration session, the actiwatch was attached to the infants' ankles.
Infants’ reproduction of target actions was tested 24 hours later during the second home
placed the first set of stimuli within infants’ reach. She said, ‘Look. Now it is your turn.’ The infant
had 90s to reproduce the target actions from first touching the stimuli. The process was
subsequently carried out with the second set of stimuli. The presentation order for the stimuli was
identical in the demonstration and the test session. Throughout the test phases no verbal labels were
used for the stimuli or the actions. Both the demonstration and the test session were video recorded.
Sample 2. Video Demonstration
Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the demonstration and test phases were conducted via video
chat appointments also scheduled 24 hours apart. Instead of a live demonstration, target actions
were demonstrated by a female model on a pre-recorded video on an experimenter provided tablet.
Due to the videochat setting, experimenters instructed the caregivers to start the videos for
demonstration and to place the stimuli within the infant's reach during the test phase, respectively
(for a detailed description, see Hermesch et al., 2024).
Baseline control condition
Data collection for the baseline control condition was also conducted via video chat
appointments as part of the video study. Without prior demonstration, caregivers were instructed to
place both sets of stimuli within infants’ reach one after another and then infants had 90s to interact
with each stimulus. Subsequently, infants from the baseline control condition were also tested for
their immediate imitation of target actions as a function of their prior sleep behavior, which is not
relevant to any of the research questions addressed in this article (for details, see Hermesch et al.,
2024).
Data Coding
Movement data collected by the actiwatches were analyzed in Action-W software
(Ambulatory Monitoring Inc.; Ambulatory Monitoring, 2023) in 1-min epochs using zero-crossing
mode. Sleep-wake behavior was scored with the aid of an algorithm developed by Sadeh et al. (1994)
for adults and infants aged >1 year. Only when sleep diaries suggested that sleep scoring might be
biased due to potential artifacts (e.g., external movement during a car ride), were caregiver-reported
sleep and wake up times given preference.
Infants’ visual attention to the experimenter demonstrating the target actions was coded
frame by frame using Mangold Interact (Version 18.03.20; Mangold International, 2018) to assess if
looking time was above the preregistered criteria of 50 %.
The same coding scheme for the deferred imitation tasks was used in both the video
demonstration and the live demonstration experiments. The imitation score was coded for each
video-recorded test session and quantified the number of target actions reproduced per set of
stimuli. One point was given for each target action, regardless of order (range: 0–3 points).
Additionally, a sequence score captured if infants imitated the target actions in the demonstrated
order (range: 0–2 points) and we coded the latency to first target action (time interval between first
touching the stimuli and the first imitated target action). Thirty percent of the test sessions were
coded by a second independent coder. Interrater reliability can be interpreted as high (к = .94 on
average). We also counted the number of prescribed phrases read out aloud to check caregiver
compliance in the scaffolding condition. To be eligible for our analyses, caregivers had to read out
the required minimum of three out of six phrases. All caregivers in the final sample met this criterion.
Statistical Analyses
To analyze infants’ imitation performance from a live demonstration as a function of age,
condition and presence of scaffolding (RQ 1) and imitation performance as a function of presentation
mode, age, condition and scaffolding (RQ 2) we conducted two mixed analyses of variances
(ANOVAs) respectively. In the live study, we expected infants in the nap condition to reproduce
significantly more target actions as compared to infants in the no-nap condition (main effect of
group). Moreover, we expected infants in both experimental conditions and at both ages to
outperform their age-matched baseline control condition. We also predicted a main effect of age
with 24-month-olds performing more target actions than 15-month-olds. To reduce complexity in the
design and as comparisons were already made within each study (live, video), we decided to drop the
baseline control condition from the cross-experiment analyses. Our main predictions were to find a
main effect of presentation mode and a presentation mode x sleep condition interaction. Specifically,
we expected the beneficial effect of a post-encoding nap on memory performance to be more
pronounced when infants encoded from a live (vs. video) demonstration. Again, we expected to find
a main effect of age such that 24-month-olds would reproduce a higher number of target actions
than 15-month-olds.
Stimulus sets and target actions of imitation tasks
Stimulus set Target action 1 Target action 2 Target action 3
Rattle task Push wooden bead Shake stick to make
Place stick on jar
through diaphragm noise
attaching with Velcro
into jar
Animal task Pull handle in circular Place eyes on face Put carrot in rabbit’s
motion to raise ears attaching with jar mouth
Overview of the design within each study and the allocation of subsamples per research question
Note. In both studies, data for each cell of design was collected in 15- and 24-month-old infants.
*The scaffolding and no-scaffolding condition in the baseline control condition are not meaningfully interpretable. Average scores across both imitation tasks
were used for analyses.
Results
Descriptive Results
provides information on the timing of the study appointments and infants’ sleep from the live study.
Comparisons with the video study revealed that timing of study appointment in the no-nap condition
significantly differed between studies in both age groups (see Appendix A), but, as in the video study,
imitation performance was unrelated to test timing (ρ = .05, p = .658). Sleep duration within 4 hours
from encoding and latency to the next sleep episode within sleep conditions did not differ between
studies (Appendix A). Descriptive results on infants' imitation performance as a function of
Sleep and test timing as a function of age and sleep condition in the live study
Time of test, Sleep duration Latency to next
clock time within 4 h after sleep episode,
Age group Sleep condition
(h:min) encoding, min, min, mean (SD)
mean (SD)
Nap 10:31 (00:44) 73.29 (32.94) 79.41 (51.44)
15 months
No-nap 13:23 (02:37) 0 (0) 309.41 (56.15)
Nap 10:26 (01:00) 88.41 (33.85) 89.59 (50.19)
24 months
No-nap 15:06 (00:24) 0 (0) 300.76 (32.05)
Mean number and standard deviation of produced target actions in the video and the live study
Presentation mode
Live Video
Condition Scaffolding 15 24 15 24
months months months months
Nap Scaffolding M = 1.29 M = 2.88 M = 0.65 M = 2.18
SD = 0.92 SD = 0.33 SD = 0.79 SD = 1.13
No Scaffolding M = 1.88 M = 2.71 M = 0.88 M = 2.35
SD = 0.86 SD = 0.59 SD = 0.93 SD = 0.93
No Nap Scaffolding M = 1.06 M = 2.88 M = 0.53 M = 1.76
SD = 0.97 SD = 0.33 SD = 0.94 SD = 1.15
No Scaffolding M = 1.41 M = 2.53 M = 0.88 M = 1.76
SD = 1.12 SD = 0.80 SD = 0.99 SD = 0.97
Baseline (averaged across levels of M = 0.41 M = 0.92
Scaffolding) SD = 0.32 SD = 0.24
Research question 1: Effect of a post-encoding nap
A 2(age: 15 months, 24 months) x 3(condition: nap, no-nap, baseline control) x 2(scaffolding:
yes, no) mixed ANOVA was conducted on the number of reproduced target actions in the live study
with repeated measures on scaffolding. In the baseline control condition, there is no meaningful
interpretation of the scaffolding condition as no demonstration of target actions took place. Thus, we
assigned the average score of each baseline participant to both scaffolding conditions (i.e., yes and
no). The mixed ANOVA yielded a main effect of age (F(1,98) = 91.10, p <.001, η²g = .32), a main effect
of condition (F(1,98) = 74.43, p <.001, η²g = .43), an age x condition interaction (F(2,98) = 6.74, p =
.002, η²g = .07) and an age x scaffolding interaction (F(2,98) = 10.13, p = .002, η²g = .03). Significant
interaction effects were followed up with Tukey-corrected pairwise contrasts. Pairwise contrasts
both experimental conditions outperformed the age-matched infants in the baseline control
condition. Thus, in line with our predictions, infants in the experimental conditions exhibited
retention of target actions after 24 hours when they were demonstrated live. However, the pairwise
comparison of the nap and the no-nap condition was non-significant at both ages indicating that
contrary to our hypothesis, infants who napped soon after encoding did not reproduce a significantly
higher number of target actions as compared to infants who stayed awake. While the main effect of
age confirms our hypothesis that 24-month-olds would produce a higher number of target actions, a
of target actions in the experimental conditions had a stronger impact on the production of target
actions in 24-month-olds than in 15-month-olds. This can be interpreted as an age-related increase in
memory performance. Pairwise contrasts to follow up the age x scaffolding condition revealed that
15-month-olds reproduced significantly fewer target actions in the imitation task with caregiver
scaffolding as compared to without caregiver scaffolding (M = -0.314, p = .005). In 24-month-olds
Diff
imitation performance did not differ as a function of caregiver scaffolding (M = 0.176, p = .105).
Diff
Surprisingly, there was a disruptive effect of caregiver scaffolding in 15-month-olds.
A mixed ANOVA on the sequence of reproduced target actions mainly supported previously
reported results on the number of reproduced target actions: Again, there were significant main
effects of age (F(1,98) = 56.56, p < .001, η²g = .23) and condition (F(2,98) = 35.63, p < .001, η²g = .27)
and a significant age x condition interaction (F(2,98) = 6.40, p = .002, η²g = .06). Post-hoc pairwise
comparisons confirmed that in both experimental conditions infants did not only outperform the
age-matched baseline control group in the number of reproduced target actions, but also imitated
olds had a significantly higher sequence score and the difference between baseline and experimental
condition was descriptively more pronounced in the older age group suggesting that memory
performance increased with age.
A mixed ANOVA on the latency to first target actions revealed only a main effect of age (F(1,
52) = 15.62, p < .001, η²g = .16). Twenty-four-month-olds produced the target actions significantly
faster than 15-month-olds The sample size for this analysis was reduced since meaningful values for
this variable could only be assigned to infants who performed at least one target action in both
imitation tasks.
For correlative analyses infants were also included if their sleep behavior was not in
behavior within 4 hours after demonstration and in the subsequent night was unrelated to imitation
performance. Only a longer night's sleep was associated with a higher number of reproduced target
actions in 24-month-olds (ρ = .46, p = .008).
Pairwise comparison to follow up significant age x group interaction
Dependent variable comparison 15 months 24 months
Number of Baseline – Nap M = -1.18, p < .001 M = -1.87, p < .001
Diff Diff
reproduced target Baseline – No nap M = -0.82, p < .001 M = -1.78, p < .001
Diff Diff
actions Nap – No nap M = 0.35, p = .170 M = 0.09, p = .893
Diff Diff
Sequence of Baseline – Nap M = -0.47, p = .007 M = -1.20, p < .001
Diff Diff
reproduced target Baseline – No nap M = -0.41, p = .020 M = -0.91, p < .001
Diff Diff
action
Nap – No nap M = 0.06, p = .919 M = 0.29, p = .129
Diff Diff
Correlations between sleep behavior and imitation performance
15 months 24 months
Latency to next sleep M (SD) 186.95 (124.69) 195.18 (114.92)
episode (in min)
ρ -.18 -.35
imi
ρ .03 -.37
seq
Sleep duration within 4 M (SD) 36.45 (41.40) 42.94 (50.49)
hours after encoding (in
ρ .18 .15
imi
minutes)
ρ .06 .21
seq
Night-time sleep duration M (SD) 479.70 (65.51) 504.60 (64.61)
(in min)
ρ .02 .46, p =.008
imi
ρ -.07 .32, p = .074
seq
Wake minutes after sleep M (SD) 167.10 (66.12) 116.20 (48.84)
onset
ρ .12 .01
imi
ρ .03 -.05
seq
Sleep efficiency (in %) M (SD) 74.50 (8.58) 81.40 (7.07)
ρ -.11 .16
imi
ρ -.02 .12
seq
Longest wake episode (in M (SD) 65.94 (42.71) 57.94 (33.18)
min)
ρ .04 -.22
mi
ρ .13 -.25
seq
Research question 2: Cross-experiment comparison
Drawing on data from both experiments, a 2(presentation mode: live, video) x 2(age: 15, 24
months) x 2(condition: nap, no-nap) x 2(caregiver scaffolding: yes, no) mixed ANOVA was conducted
on the number of produced target actions at test. We found a significant effect of presentation mode
(F(1,129) = 37.28, p < .001, η²g = .14) indicating that infants reproduced more target actions when
they were demonstrated live as compared to a video demonstration. Moreover, there was a
significant main effect of condition (F(1,129) = 4.60, p = .034, η²g = .02). Although non-significant in
each individual study, when data was combined across studies infants who napped soon after
encoding reproduced significantly more target actions as compared to infants who remained awake
after encoding. Contrary to expectations, the beneficial effect of a post-encoding nap was not more
pronounced in infants who encoded the target actions from a live demonstration as indicated by the
non-significant presentation mode x group interaction (F(1,129) = .005, p = .821, η²g < .01). As
expected, there was a significant main effect of age (F(1,129) = 129.99, p < .001, η²g = .36) with a
higher imitation score in 24-month-olds. In addition, there was a significant age x scaffolding
interaction (F(1,129) = 4.88, p < .029, η²g = .02). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons indicated that 15-
month-olds reproduced significantly fewer target actions in the presence of caregiver scaffolding
(M = -0.38, p = .008). A disruptive effect of caregiver scaffolding on memory performance in 24-
Diff
month-olds was not found (M = 0.06, p = .669).
Diff
The pattern of results in the mixed ANOVA on the sequence of reproduced target actions was
similar to the target actions findings. Reproduction of target actions in the demonstrated order was
more likely from a live than from a video demonstration (main effect of presentation mode (F1,129)
= 22.99, p < .001, η²g = .09). Moreover, there was a main effect of age (F(1,129) = 4.24, p < .001, η²g =
.25), a main effect of sleep condition (F(1,129) = 4.24, p = .041, η²g = .02) and an age x sleep
condition interaction (F(1,129) = 4.98, p = .021, η²g = .02). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons indicated
that only in 24-month-olds, napping facilitated reproduction of target actions in the demonstrated
order (M = 0.37, p = .003). This is likely due to an inability to detect a difference at 15-month-olds
Diff
due to overall low sequence scores.
Cross-experiment comparison of imitation scores
Note. Panel A illustrates imitation performance in the live and the video study in 15-month-olds,
Panel B in 24-month-olds. The dashed green line represents baseline performance in the age-
matched control conditions. Circles and triangles in the background represent raw data with darker
colors representing more overlapping data points
Discussion
The present study aimed to replicate the findings of previous research on beneficial effects
of a post-encoding nap on memory consolidation in infants and young children (see Mason &
Spencer, 2021 and Seehagen et al., 2019 for review). The combined analysis of both experiments
revealed a significant beneficial effect of a post-encoding nap on memory consolidation. This finding,
while not significant in each individual sample, highlights the importance of considering cumulative
evidence to draw conclusions from multiple studies, perhaps particularly in research areas that
traditionally feature small sample sizes. Moreover, we explored the role of the presentation mode
and caregiver scaffolding in this context. Infants’ memory performance after a live demonstration
exceeded that of a video demonstration, indicating a transfer deficit in both age groups. An empty
narration provided by the caregiver to scaffold learning impeded the reproduction of target actions
in 15-month-olds, both when the live study was considered individually, and when comparing the
two experiments.
We found that a post-encoding nap of at least 30 minutes facilitated declarative memory
retrieval after 24 hours. Together with other studies investigating the same effect across different
tasks and age groups (e.g., Berger & Scher, 2017; DeMasi et al., 2021; Friedrich et al., 2015; Friedrich
et al., 2020; Hupbach et al., 2009; Horváth et al., 2017; Kurdziel et al., 2013; Simon et al., 2017;
Seehagen et al., 2015), this highlights sleep’s supportive role for early memory processes. The active
systems consolidation theory offers a neurophysiological rationale for the beneficial effect on sleep
and memory. The transfer of recently encoded memories from the hippocampus to the neocortex for
longer-term storage may have been facilitated by a nap, as was the case in the nap condition
(Diekelmann & Born, 2010). This resulted in a retrieval advantage 24 hours later.
Overall, our replication of the beneficial effect of a post-encoding nap on 15- and 24-month-
olds’ memory performance in a deferred imitation task was successful, but the effect size was small
and the effect was only significant when the data was combined across the live and the video
experiments. There are some statistical and methodical considerations to discuss when interpreting
the size and significance of this effect. In the live study we observed a ceiling effect in 24-month-olds
who reproduced 2.75 out of 3 reproduced target actions on average from a live demonstration. On
the contrary, there was a floor effect in 15-month-olds when imitating from a video demonstration
after a delay, and their memory performance did not exceed baseline levels. It comes as no surprise
that the difference between infants who napped and those who stayed awake is least pronounced in
these circumstances. In other words, the floor and ceiling effects may have obscured a potential
beneficial effect of a post-encoding nap (see also Petzka et al., 2021) resulting in non-significant
results in each individual study and curtailing the overall effect size. Overall, the pattern of results
emphasizes the value of cumulative evidence and larger sample sizes and highlights the challenge to
create memory tasks of appropriate difficulty for different age groups in infancy to prevent ceiling
and floor effects. To evaluate the true size of the effect in infants, research is needed investigating
sleep-dependent memory consolidation at different levels of task difficulty. Pending further
evidence, our pattern of results fits with Cordi and Rasch's (2021) observation that sleep benefits
memory performance, but effect sizes might be small in magnitude and based on certain boundary
conditions.
Given the absence of a presentation mode x sleep condition interaction we also conclude
that memories of information presented on screen and live benefit from post-encoding sleep. to a
similar extent. However, this result contradicts our hypothesis that screen-based memories may not
be tagged as relevant and thus benefit to a lesser extent from sleep-dependent memory
consolidation. This hypothesis was prompted by the idea that sleep selectively strengthens memories
tagged as relevant (Stickgold & Walker, 2013) and that infants may fail to perceive screen content as
a relevant information to remember (Troseth et al., 2006). However, our results do not provide
evidence for the presentation mode as a relevance tag determining on the consolidation the recently
encoded target actions during sleep. In addition, embedding screen content in a social interaction as
operationalized by caregiver scaffolding did not interact with infants’ sleep status and thus did not
emerge as a relevance cue for sleep-dependent memory consolidation either. As discussed in
Hermesch et al. (2024) the difference between both scaffolding conditions might have been too
small in terms of the social context of viewing to elicit selectivity in sleep dependent memory
consolidation of the presented content. Potentially, the presence of the caregiver and the co-viewing
of the video demonstrations constituted a context that signaled “relevance”, regardless of caregiver
vocalizations. This explanation can be extended to the entire comparison of the video and the live
study. In general, watching the demonstration video was embedded in an online study appointment,
thus a minimum of social interaction could not be avoided. In everyday life, a relevant proportion of
early media exposure happens outside of any direct caregiver involvement (Ewin et al., 2021, Levine
et al., 2019). The question remains open if infants’ solitary screen viewing in a no-scaffolding
condition would lead to the same results. Future research could include a solo viewing condition to
test this hypothesis. Provided that sleep-dependent memory consolidation is a selective process in
infants (for a critical discussion about the robustness of the effect in adults see Cordi and Rasch,
2021), possible relevance tags that apply to infants were not disentangled in the current study
(Hermesch et al., 2024; Konrad et al., 2019).
Our cross-experiment comparison revealed a significant effect of presentation mode, with
live demonstrations leading to better memory performance than screen-based demonstrations in the
second year of life. Whereas 15-month-olds did not exhibit retention of target actions after 24 hours
from a video demonstration, they did from a live presentation, irrespective of sleep status. Imitation
performance of 24-month-olds approached ceiling. From additional analyses with infants in the
baseline control condition reported in Hermesch et al. (2024) it was evident that 15-month-olds
showed immediate imitation of target actions above baseline levels from the same video
demonstration, indicating that they were able to encode the target actions. However, screen-based
memories were less stable and could not be retrieved after a 24-hour delay. Several studies have
documented poorer memory retrieval of televised target actions in deferred imitation tasks (e.g.,
Barr & Hayne, 1999; Barr et al., 2007; Barr & Wyss, 2008). It is also possible that, in addition to a
retrieval and transfer challenge, encoding from a video demonstration results in a poorer memory
trace which degrades more quickly over time (Barr & Kirkorian, 2023). With increasing age, memory
processes in infants increase in flexibility (Hayne, 2004) and infants are more likely to master the
transfer from cues encoded from a 2D-screen to later in-vivo situations (Barr, 2013, Strouse &
Samson, 2021). This is in line with our result that 15-month-olds failed in the critical comparison with
the baseline control condition to infer memory retrieval in the video study, while 24-month-olds
passed it. But even at the age of 24 months, memory performance from a video demonstration was
significantly poorer as compared to a live demonstration. In sum, retrieving target actions from a
video demonstration after a delay was cognitively more demanding due to fewer and more divergent
cues as compared to a live demonstration, resulting in poorer memory performance of screen-based
target actions in both age groups.
Another factor that unexpectedly added to the cognitive demands within the memory
processes at least in younger infants was the presence of caregiver scaffolding. In the video study we
expected caregiver scaffolding to facilitate sleep-dependent memory consolidation and later memory
retrieval by highlighting the relevance of the content. Contrary to our expectations there was no
significant effect of caregiver scaffolding, instead there was a descriptive trend towards a poorer
performance of 15-month-olds in the scaffolding condition. Even more unexpected was the pattern
of results in the live study. We found that caregiver scaffolding significantly hindered memory
performance in 15-month-olds when only looking at the live data, and across both experiments. In
our manipulation, scaffolding was restricted to an empty narration, thus it did not contain any
valuable information that helps to understand how to assemble the toys. We chose empty narration
to investigate the function of caregiver scaffolding without other confounding factors such as
additional verbal cues. While the facilitative effect of scaffolding in general has been well
documented across studies (Clegg & Legare, 2017; Hayne & Herbert, 2004; Herbert, 2011; Simcock et
al., 2011), there seems to be a consensus that an empty narration does not facilitate learning to the
same extent as a narration that provides additional valuable information, for example by labeling and
describing the objects and actions presented (Barr & Wyss, 2008; Hayne et al., 1997; Hayne &
Herbert, 2004; Seehagen & Herbert, 2010; Taylor et al., 2016). In a study with 12-month-olds, Taylor
et al. (2016) compared the effect of different experimenter-provided verbal labels in a generalization
task. One aim of their study was to disentangle whether scaffolding supports infants’ performance
simply by guiding their attention or rather through the provision of meaningful verbal labels enabling
infants to categorize the objects and thereby facilitate flexible memory retrieval. The monolingual
infants growing up in an English-speaking environment received verbal labels in English, Chinese or
with empty narration together with a demonstration of target actions. Chinese labels and empty
language did not facilitate flexible memory retrieval above baseline levels, indicating that attentional
processes alone cannot account for the facilitative effect of narration (Taylor et al., 2016). The
authors suggested that when infants cannot meaningfully relate the verbal input to the
demonstration (e.g., because it is in a foreign language) might hinder encoding, as it diverts
attention. Zack et al. (2013) described that when meaningful and nonsense verbal input during
demonstration was too complex for 15-month-olds, the performance in a 2D-3D transfer task was
constrained. The authors argued that at this age, the competing cognitive demands of
simultaneously processing verbal input while managing the transfer of information across
dimensions exceed attentional capacities. This finding may be partially explained by accounting for
the cognitive load that was imposed during encoding in both the video and live condition due to the
number of competing demands on attention in scaffolding condition. More consideration of
cognitive load constraints when learning from media is necessary to increase learning opportunities
during media activities (see Barr & Kirkorian, 2023 for additional information). We conclude that at
this developmental stage caregiver scaffolding adds additional cognitive load to the stream of
incoming information from which infants have to select which pieces are important. If scaffolding
does not contain any relevant or too complex verbal information, it might to present an obstacle to
encoding.
As discussed, a major limitation of the present study is that we were not able to include a
video condition that resembles infants’ solitary digital media use without any caregiver involvement.
In Hermesch et al. (2024) we outlined that laboratory settings could offer the opportunity to
implement more stringent manipulations in terms of a no interaction video control condition.
Moreover, our interpretations on the effects of scaffolding are limited to a standardized empty
narration provided by the caregiver. In a recent meta-analysis, Taylor et al. (2024) identified the need
for more varying operationalizations of co-using and scaffolding early digital media use to
disentangle how and what supports infants’ and young children’s learning. With respect to sleep-
mediated memory effects, studies with infants should be carefully designed with respect to task
difficulty perhaps testing with more items to avoid ceiling and floor effects. In general, more research
is needed that systematically addresses the role of task difficulty for sleep-dependent memory
consolidation in infants. Lastly, the comparably short estimated night-time sleep duration based on
our actigraphy data questions the validity of actigraphic sleep assessment in samples with a high
prevalence of co-sleeping. This should not limit the interpretability of our results on post-encoding
day-time naps, where co-sleeping is typically less common and actigraphy data and caregiver reports
show a high level of agreement. However, it poses a challenge to future studies that aim to
disentangle the unique contributions of a nap soon following encoding and the subsequent night-
time sleep (Seehagen et al., 2019) using established ambulatory sleep assessment methods.
Conclusion
It was only in the last decade that research has begun to better understand the role of sleep
in early cognitive processes. Over the same period, the prevalence of digital devices in the lives of
infants and young children has also increased enormously. The present study sheds light on how
sleep strengthens memories encoded from social interactions but also from screen devices. From a
theoretical and applied perspective, it is essential to better understand how learning from digital
media can be boosted in early childhood and how digital memories are processed during sleep.