OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 1
Attraction to the Inanimate: An Exploration of Objectophilia and Fictophilia Through a
Psychological Lens
Adrienne M. Doran-Stout
Department of Psychology, Colorado State University
Committee Chair: Rachel E. Brenner, PhD
Committee Member: Noah Emery, PhD
May 10, 2022
Author Note
I have no known conflict of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Adrienne M. Doran-Stout
Email: amdoranstout5@gmail.com
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 2
Abstract
This paper explores objectophilia, the sexual and/or romantic attraction to objects, and
fictophilia, the sexual and/or romantic attraction to fictional characters. Fictophilia and
objectophilia face much stigma and often raise concerns about the well-being and mental health
of objectophiles and fictophiles. Using existing sources on these topics, including research
papers, books, websites, films, and other media, this paper seeks to build an understanding of
objectophilia and fictophilia with a focus on the question of whether or not they should be
defined as mental disorders. Based on the current body of literature and other sources including
personal accounts of fictophiles and objectophiles, it seems that it would be more accurate and
beneficial to define them as sexual/romantic orientations rather than disorders.
Keywords: objectophilia, objectum sexuality, fictophilia, fictosexuality, fictoromance
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 3
Attraction to the Inanimate: An Exploration of Objectophilia and Fictophilia Through a
Psychological Lens
Objectophilia is the romantic, sexual, and/or emotional attraction to objects (Marsh,
2010). It is also often referred to as objectum sexuality (Marsh, 2010). Fictophilia is the
romantic, sexual, and/or emotional attraction to fictional characters (Karhulahti & Välisalo,
2021). Although exact prevalence rates are not known, both objectophilia and fictophilia appear
to be relatively uncommon (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Marsh, 2010). Both fictophilia and
objectophilia are forms of attraction to subjects traditionally categorized as inanimate. Those
who experience fictophilia or objectophilia tend to see their relationships as not purely sexual,
but as romantic, intimate, and emotionally involved as well as often long-term and committed
(Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Marsh, 2010); however, there are some whose experiences are
purely sexual (e.g., fictiosexual) or purely romantic (e.g., fictoromantic; Karhulahti & Välisalo,
2021). The terms objectophilia and fictophilia will be used in this paper because they refer to the
umbrella of romantic, sexual, and/or emotional attraction. These topics are little known and less
researched yet are fascinating psychological phenomena.
Fictophilia and objectophilia are important to discuss because it is largely unknown how
these attractions and relationships may affect wellbeing, social relationships, and other forms of
functioning of those who experience them. In addition, objectophiles and fictophiles face stigma
due to the supposition that objectophilia and fictophilia are mental disorders or part of a mental
disorder (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Marsh, 2010). Reviewing the literature could help to
better understand fictophilia and objectophilia, and to consider whether they should be
considered mental disorders, sexual/romantic orientation, some combination of the two, or
something else altogether. Exploring these topics from a non-judgmental, empirical standpoint
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 4
may also provide clarity for those new to these topics as well as ameliorate some of the bias that
people with objectophilia and fictophilia face. As such, in this thesis I will discuss the history
and popular conceptions of fictophilia and objectophilia; explore the psychological factors which
may be correlated with these phenomena or contribute to their development; consider the
application of parasocial relationship theory to these experiences; explore potential adaptive and
maladaptive pieces; and consider the extent to which definitions of mental disorders as applied to
fictophilia and objectophilia may be appropriate or inappropriate. Potential beneficial avenues
for future research will also be explored. Due to the current lack of research on these topics, this
thesis will also utilize online communities and media as well as empirical research and literature
on parasocial relationships.
Objectophilia
Historical Representation
The term objectophilia describes a range of experiences involving emotional, romantic,
and/or sexual attraction to objects (Marsh, 2010). One term which has become a common way
for objectophiles to refer to their own identities is “objectum sexuality,” according to Marsh
(2010), this term was originally created by Eija-Ritta Eklof-Berliner-Mauer, one of the first
objectophiles to enter the public eye when she married the Berlin Wall in 1979. Marsh states that
the first website focusing on objectophilia was created by Eklof-Berliner-Mauer in 1996 with a
subsequent discussion forum in 1999. In 2002, a network named Objektophilie was founded by
Oliver Arndt. Erika Eiffel, known for her marriage to the Eiffel Tower in 2007, created
Objectùm-Sexuality Internationale, a website and international discussion forum dedicated to
connecting objectophiles and educating people about objectophilia. Despite establishing itself as
an identity through the internet, little academic research has explored objectophilia to date, and
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 5
media coverage on the topic has tended to focus on sensationalizing rather than educating
(Marsh, 2010).
Though objectophilia has gained attention through the internet, objectophilia is not a
purely modern phenomenon. Marsh (2010) cites a few examples of early cultural accounts or
representations of objectophilia. One is the Greek myth of Pygmalion, in which a man,
Pygmalion, falls in love with a statue, Galatea. This love seems to be more than sexual, as in
many accounts of the myth Pygmalion prays for the statue to become his wife. Another example
given by Marsh is Quasimodo’s love of cathedral bells in The Hunchback of Notre Dame.
Quasimodo is described as loving, caressing, and talking to the bells and his relationship with
them is likened to Romeo and Juliet, implying that there is an aspect of romance and
communication between Quasimodo and the bells. Thus, the experience of objectophilia appears
to have been a facet of human behavior long before it became more widely known through the
internet.
Characteristics
Marsh (2010) conducted a primarily qualitative study about objectophilia consisting of an
online survey which collected many open-ended answers and a few multiple-choice answers. To
date, this is the only study that samples adult objectophiles and explores how they experience
objectophilia.1 The participants consisted of 22 members of Objectùm-Sexuality Internationale,
an internet group of objectophiles which at the time of this survey consisted of about 40
1 Few case studies on objectophilia or similar experiences exist. I found one other study that
samples objectophiles (i.e., Simner et al., 2019), but it focuses on the potential connections of
objectophilia with autism spectrum disorder and synesthesia rather than the experience of
objectophilia itself.
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 6
members. Responses to Marsh’s (2010) survey revealed diversity of experiences within
objectophilia. This survey found that some objectophiles experience objects as having
personalities, souls, energy, and/or other traits of living beings, though others do not. The
perception of reciprocal communication with objects also varied in Marsh’s (2010) survey, with
some individuals experiencing two-way communication and reciprocation, some feeling that the
communication only goes from human to object, and some experiencing no communication at
all. Some objectophiles in this study reported feeling that they can sense the gender of objects,
and a portion within this group indicated having gender preferences, while others did not report
being able to sense gender at all. Most respondents to Marsh’s survey reported both sexual and
emotional attraction, while one reported no sexual attraction, but a strong emotional connection.
Marsh (2010) found that opinions on having multiple relationships also varied among
objectophiles, with 23.8% of respondents reporting a preference towards monogamy and 19.0%
reporting a preference towards polyamory or non-monogamy. While many objectophiles were
found by Marsh (2010) to be interested in romantic and/or sexual relationships solely with
objects, some also reported being interested in having this type of relationships with a human
being, and some even reported that they maintain one or more of these relationships with humans
along with their relationships with objects.
Psychological Correlates With Objectophilia
Research has shown that objectophilia is associated with autism spectrum disorder. In a
study which looked into the correlation between autism spectrum disorder and objectophilia,
Simner et.al. (2019) compared formal diagnoses between 34 self-identified objectophiles and 88
individuals who did not identify as objectophiles. Participants indicated whether they had
previously been formally diagnosed with a developmental disorder given the options of autism,
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 7
Asperger syndrome, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, other, or none.
Results indicated that diagnosed autism was over 30 times more prevalent among objectophiles.2
Participants of Simner et.al.’s (2019) study also completed the Autism Spectrum Quotient, which
is an empirically tested self-administered questionnaire used to measure autism-spectrum
associated traits in an individual (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001). In addition to higher rates of
diagnosed autism in the objectophile group, Simner et al. (2019) also found higher levels of
autism-spectrum associated traits among objectum-sexuals based on the Autism Spectrum
Quotient. This connection was supported by Marsh’s (2010) study as well, in which
approximately 47.6% of the participants identified as having autism spectrum disorder and
28.6% had official diagnoses. In comparison, a 2021 literature review estimated the prevalence
of autism spectrum disorder among children within the U.S. and Europe, the locations of most of
Marsh’s (2010) participants, to range from 0.38% to 1.85% (Bougeard, 2021). A limitation of
this comparison is that the literature review only included children from ages 2-17; however, the
difference in rates supports Simner et al.’s (2019) findings.
Currently it is unknown exactly how and why objectophilia and autism spectrum disorder
are linked. Simner et al. (2019) theorized that the social deficits characteristic of autism spectrum
disorder may contribute to the development of objectophilia. However, not all objectophiles have
autism spectrum disorder and not all of those with autism spectrum disorder are objectophiles, so
it is not the only possible contributor to the development of objectophilia. This study was also
cross-sectional, so causality cannot be inferred, though there does appear to be a correlation
2 Simner et al. (2019) stated “…diagnosed autism was 30 times more prevalent in objectophiles
than otherwise expected” (p. 6). It is unclear whether this was relative to the non-objectophile
subsample or general population prevalence rates.
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 8
between autism spectrum disorder and objectophilia which could be one beneficial area for
future research.
Simner et al. (2019) found associations between synesthesia and objectophilia.
Synesthesia is a condition in which one sense being stimulated causes automatic stimulation of
another sense, for example seeing colors when viewing numbers or experiencing units of time as
having specific spatial locations (American Psychological Association, n.d.-a). The three types
of synesthesia included in this study were object-personification, grapheme-personification, and
grapheme-color synesthesia. Object-personification synesthesia is a form of synesthesia in which
an individual experiences inanimate objects as being personified, personification referring to the
attribution of human-like traits such as gender, personality, or emotions, to something which is
non-human (Smilek et al., 2007). For example, someone with object personification synesthesia
may perceive a piece of furniture as being 25 years old, male, carefree, popular, and even as
having physical traits such as facial hair (Smilek et al., 2007). With grapheme-personification
synesthesia, individuals experience numbers as being personified (Amin et al., 2011).
Grapheme-color synesthesia is when an individual sees specific colors when viewing words,
letters, or numbers (American Psychological Association, n.d.-a). Simner et al. (2019) tested the
prevalence of these three specific types of synesthesia in objectophiles (n = 34) compared to a
control group (n = 88) using the MULTISENSE Test for Object-personification synesthesia
(Hughes et al., 2018) and separate previously recognized and validated tests for
grapheme-personification synesthesia and grapheme-color synesthesia. Rates of all three of these
types of synesthesia were higher among the objectophilia group relative to the control group.
Based on the high rates of object-personification synesthesia within the objectophile
group and their consistent accounts of the personality profile of their favorite object found in
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 9
Simmer et al.’s (2019) study, the proposal that object-personification synesthesia may contribute
to why many objectophiles feel that objects have personalities, souls, energy, and/or other traits
of living beings was supported. No studies have yet examined the prevalence of objectophilia
among those with object-personification synesthesia, one area of future research could look into
this and explore whether individuals with object-personification synesthesia may be at a higher
likelihood of objectophilia. One study found that amongst a sample of 248 individuals with
synesthesia, approximately 27% reported personifying objects (Amin et al., 2011), so it does not
seem to be an especially uncommon form of synesthesia. Therefore, it seems unlikely that all of
those with object-personification synesthesia would also be objectophiles. Furthermore, Marsh’s
(2010) study found that not all objectophiles feel that objects are animate, so
object-personification synesthesia is not a requirement for objectophilia.
One factor to consider is that synesthesia and autism spectrum disorder have been found
to be correlated with one another (Baron-Cohen et al., 2013; Neufeld et al., 2013). This may
contribute to the prevalence rates of both autism spectrum disorder and synesthesia being higher
among objectophiles and complicate the ability to conclude if both, one, or neither may
contribute to the development of objectophilia. The relationship of objectophilia with autism and
synesthesia is fascinating and would be an interesting topic for further research, but these factors
do not provide a complete explanation of objectophilia. Rather, objectophilia is a separate
identity which encapsulates a range of experiences.
In Marsh’s (2010) study she notes that some have theorized that objectophilia may be
connected to sexual trauma, which might turn people away from relationships with other
humans. However, there have been no large-scale studies on the topic. In Marsh’s (2010) study,
three out of 21 individuals, 14.3%, reported having experienced sexual trauma or coercion. This
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 10
number is lower than the general population prevalence rate of 43.6% of women and 24.8% of
men who have experienced contact sexual violence in their lifetimes, according to data collected
in 2015 (Smith et al, 2018). This contradicts the assertion that objectophilia and sexual trauma
may be linked. However, this apparent discrepancy could be affected by the tendency of
individuals to not report experiences of sexual violence, with the U.S. Department of Justice
finding that less than half of rapes and sexual assaults on women are reported to police
(Rennison, 2002). Furthermore, Marsh’s (2010) study had a very small sample size so it would
be difficult to make any significant inferences. Marsh (2010) did conclude that there was no
substantial evidence to imply that sexual trauma is a cause of objectophila, though she suggested
it might strengthen preexisting feelings against human sexual relationships. In the documentary
Married to the Eiffel Tower (Piotrowska, 2008) it was implied that for some, trauma of a sexual
nature and trauma in general may be the cause of objectophilia. Erika Eiffel did claim in this
documentary that her experiences of childhood trauma led her to identify with the Berlin Wall,
strengthening their relationship. She also states that even if her trauma has led to her objectum
sexuality, she would not change a thing because she is happy with who she is now. Overall, there
is not sufficient evidence for the theory that trauma causes objectum sexuality, but it seems that it
may contribute in some cases. This potential connection would be a good area for future
research.
Marsh’s (2010) study collected demographics on her sample of objectophiles. Four of the
22 participants were born in the United States, two in Canada, and the rest in Europe. This shows
that objectophilia is an international phenomenon, though the participants of this study were all
living in Western countries. Measuring the full scope of where objectophiles primarily live is
limited in this study, as only English speakers were asked to participate. Furthermore, the term
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 11
objectum-sexual, which was used in this study, and many of the communities that use this term
originated in Europe, as did many famous objectophiles who have gained media attention. It was
not discussed in this study if other terms for objectophilia and different communities exist
elsewhere in the world, which would be a good area for future exploration.
The participants of this survey included 15 cis women, two cis men, three trans men, and
one who self-identified as a “pre-op trans-neuter.” Marsh notes that most of those who identify as
objectum sexual are women, whereas the term mechasexual, which Marsh uses to describe
attraction to cars, seems to be used almost exclusively by men. When asked about relationship
gender preference in a multiple-choice question with multiple selections allowed, five
participants identified as heterosexual, three as gay/lesbian, five as bisexual, two as pansexual,
and five as asexual. This shows a wide variety of sexual identities within the objectophile
community, and less variety in gender identities. The participants of Marsh’s (2010) survey
included a higher percentage of LGBTQ+ individuals than are present in the general population
in both gender and relationship gender preference. Global averages estimated in 2021 by
surveying a total of 19,069 adults online across 27 countries reported an average of 9% of
individuals identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, pansexual, or asexual (Ipsos, 2021) whereas
Marsh’s (2010) survey found 75% of participants identified in one of these ways. Based on this
same 2021 survey, the estimated global average of adults who identified as transgender,
nonbinary, or other rather than “male” or “female” was around 1% (Ipsos, 2021), compared to
28.6% of Marsh’s (2010) participants. There are limitations in this comparison, including exactly
which countries were surveyed, the year the surveys were done, and that participants may have
felt more comfortable sharing their identities in the Marsh (2010) survey. One potential area of
future research is to explore the overlap between LGBTQ+ identities and objectophilia.
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 12
Another finding of Marsh’s (2010) study was that over half the participants, 12
individuals, reported knowing about their attraction to objects since childhood. Four reported
knowing for more than 10 years, four from one to five years, and one for less than one year.
These findings support the idea that some individuals may be born with objectophilia or a
predisposition for objectophilia. This counters ideas that objectophilia is something which is
developed due to longstanding issues with human relationships, trauma, exposure to the concept
through the internet and media, or other external factors.
Fictophilia
Historical and Cultural Representations
Fictophilia is a term which encompasses a range of experiences involving romantic
and/or sexual attraction to one or more fictional characters (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021). The
idea of such relationships has existed for at least several decades. In 1956, discussion of this
attraction first appeared in the Western Hemisphere in a sociological article published in a
psychiatry journal by Donald Horton and Richard Wohl. Specifically, Horton and Wohl (1956)
used the term parasocial relationships to denote the one-sided feeling of personal connection
definition is still used as a basis for describing parasocial relationships when the idea is discussed
in studies and articles. While the original account focused on radio and television personalities
characters, celebrities, social media influencers, and more (Jarzyna, 2021). Fictophilia has been
referred to as a specific subset of parasocial relationships, differentiated from other parasocial
relationships by being more intense and long-term than a typical parasocial relationship as well
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 13
as being strictly with fictional characters rather than public figures or celebrities (Karhulahti &
Välisalo, 2021).
The idea of relationships with fictional characters also has significant history in Japan.
The modern conceptualization of fictophilia-like attraction in Japan is often referred to as “otaku
sexuality,” an idea explored in Saito Tamaki’s work, Beautiful Fighting Girl (2000/2011).
Otaku-sexuality relates to otaku culture, a subculture which arose in the 1970s in Japan and is
mainly built around the consumption of forms of media such as anime, video games, science
fiction, and other related interests (Azuma, 2009). This is a subculture with many aspects and
nuances, as well as much controversy. While not all otakus have romantic or sexual feelings
towards fictional characters, it is a common part of otaku culture, hence the term otaku-sexuality
being used to refer to attraction to fictional characters. Some examples of this that have garnered
news coverage include Sal 9000’s marriage to the videogame character Nene Anegasaki in 2009
(Lah, 2009) and Akihiko Kondo’s marriage to the character Hatsune Miku in 2018 (Jozuka,
2019).
In recent years fictophilia has gained attention, primarily through internet communities.
Different communities of those who experience fictophilia have connected individuals with
similar experiences. For example, on Tumblr there is a loose community of people who
commonly refer to themselves as “self shippers,'' “the f/o community”, “fictophiles”,
“fictosexuals”, or “fictoromantics”, who take part in relationships with fictional characters
which active members of the community engage in committed relationships with fictional
characters (r/Waifuism, n.d.). This is a prominent community of fictophiles, the subreddit having
been created in 2014 and approximately 36.7k accounts having joined the subreddit to date. In
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 14
reading online conversations and posts within and regarding these communities, I have observed
that while these communities often face criticism from the outside, members of these
communities tend to be very supportive and accepting of one another. The existence of
communities such as these also counter possible concerns that fictophilia may lead to social
isolation, by exemplifying how this identity has brought people together.
Characteristics
In reading online community conversations and media on r/Waifuism and Tumblr, I
observed differing rules and norms as well as individual differences between members, showing
that the fictiophilia experience is multifaceted and varied (r/Waifuism, n.d.;
and often accepted on Tumblr, r/Waifuism requires strict monogamy in order to join. Another
variation is the degree to which (or whether at all) individuals report imagining or experiencing
their fictional partner to be with them in this reality and/or themselves in their fictional partner’s
reality. People also appear to vary in how they express their love such as drawing pictures or
writing stories of their fictional partner, possibly with them; buying varying amounts of items
related to their fictional partner; taking their fictional partner on dates, often imagined but
potentially experienced as real to some; making or buying gifts for their fictional partner; and
more. Some people also communicate with their fictional partners to varying degrees. Common
methods of communication seem to be through imaginary conversations, talking out loud or in
one’s head to a representation (such as a picture) of their fictional partner, or through writing.
Some individuals seem to have an easier time perceiving or imagining responses from their
fictional partner than others.
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 15
Reciprocation of love also seems to be felt by some, but not all fictophiles. Karhulahti
and Välisalo (2021) concluded from their analysis of online discussions about fictiophilia that
fictophiles typically recognize that their relationship with a fictional character is by nature
one-sided. This study did not specify which particular forums it sampled and does not mention
any forums or communities dedicated to fictophilia. Comments from fictophiles and
non-fictophiles were used and it is stated that the discussions examined by this study were
generally initiated by fictophiles who wanted to discuss concerns about their attraction or seek
community, implying that they did not belong to a fictophile community and may have been
newly discovering their fictophilia. Alternatively, individuals in online fictophile communities
often report feeling in some way loved by their fictional partner. For example, in a discussion on
r/Waifusim where one user asks, “how do you feel loved by your S/O [significant other]?3,”
common themes of the discussion include general feelings of being loved, sensing one’s S/O’s
presence, being comforted by one’s S/O, and coincidences and “signs” that remind them of their
S/O (Megami606Sama, 2021). A few users openly acknowledge feeling loved and happy in their
relationship while still understanding that their S/O is fully fictional, with one user saying, “of
course it's make-believe in the end, but coincidences like these make me incredibly happy, and
show me that we are truly meant only for one another” (n0pl4c3, 2021). This seems to be a lived
example of the theoretical framework for successfully living with fictophilia discussed by
Karhulahti and Välisalo (2021) and heavily drawing from Saito’s (2000/2011) work, in which it
is proposed that fictophilia can be lived with successfully if one can be simultaneously aware
that the character is a cultural product and still able to freely express their feelings for the
character. This feeling of reciprocated love does not seem to be unique to r/Waifuism. Another
3 S/O in this case is referring exclusively to fictional significant others.
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 16
example exists in the abundance of posts which urge individuals to remember that they are loved
by their fictional partner in the self shipping community on Tumblr (e.g. avery-shipping, 2021),
though on Tumblr it seems to be more common to clearly acknowledge that experiences with
one’s fictional partner are imagined (e.g., selfship-sanctuaries, 2022). The commonality of
fictophiles being aware of this reciprocation as consciously imagined compared to experience as
reality is yet to be researched, and it seems there may also be a variety of experiences between
these two options.
Psychological Correlates With Fictophilia
Karhulahti and Välisalo (2021) conducted a qualitative study which systematically
reviewed and analyzed online discussions, posted between 2009 and 2018, relating to fictophilia.
In this study, the researchers conducted a thematic analysis of 71 online discussions, consisting
of a total of 1667 forum messages, to identify the key themes related to fictophilia. The resulting
information from the online discussions was discussed in a psychological and social context. One
of the themes which was identified in these discussions due to being a frequently discussed topic
was the potential link between asexuality and fictophilia. Asexuality denotes a significantly
diminished or complete lack of sexual desire, arousability, and excitation (Prause & Graham,
2007). Many discussions in Karhulahti & Välisalo’s (2021) study discussed whether asexuality
may relate to or include fictophilia, based on the idea that many fictophiles may not feel
attraction to real-life humans. Though this cannot be concluded to apply to all fictophiles, the
finding that connections between asexuality and fictophilia was a common topic of discussion
indicate that these connections may have significance. One caveat is that applying the label of
asexuality would depend on whether one categorizes the attraction to fictional characters
differently from attraction to ‘real people.’ Some fictophiles did describe their attraction as being
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 17
different from or beyond sexual attraction, and purely in romantic terms, which would imply
asexuality regardless of this categorization (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021). It has also been found
that asexual women are significantly more likely than non-asexual women to have sexual
fantasies involving fictional characters (Yule et al., 2017). Further studies exploring how
commonly fictophiles identify as asexual and how commonly asexuals identify as fictophiles
could provide some insight.
This connection between asexuality and fictophilia could be significant, as both are faced
with outside individuals believing that the lack of interest in sexual interaction with other ‘real
people’ is cause for concern (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Prause & Graham, 2007). Marsh
(2010) also found a relatively high number of asexual identified objectophiles in her study,
which could indicate a link between asexuality and objectophilia. The growing recognition of
asexuality as a sexuality rather than a disorder and therefore the idea that attraction to other ‘real
people’ is not necessary to leading a full life could be extended to both fictophilia and
objectophilia. Future research is needed to determine whether there is a correlation of asexuality
with fictophilia and/or objectophilia.
Parasocial Relationships
Due to the lack of academic literature directly focused on fictophilia and objectophilia, I
sought to find other research that may be applicable to understanding these phenomena. I
propose that the idea of parasocial relationships may have some promising applications. A
that is felt by an audience member (Horton and Wohl, 1956). This relationship can vary; for
example, it may be a feeling of friendship with a television show host (Horton and Wohl, 1956)
or it could be romantic attraction to a fictional character (Adam & Sizemore, 2013). The central
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 18
characteristic of a parasocial relationship is that it is by nature non-reciprocal (Horton and Wohl,
1956).
Although platonic parasocial relationships have been researched more often, romantic
parasocial relationships, or parasocial romances, have also been studied (Adam & Sizemore,
2013). As mentioned earlier in this thesis, it has been proposed that fictophilia could be classified
as a type of parasocial relationship, as it is by definition a relationship between a (fictional)
(2021) describe fictophilia as “an intense long-term parasocial love or desire relationship” (para.
14). The frame of parasocial relationships has not yet been applied to objectophilia, but some
aspects may be applicable. Though objectophilia is not a one-sided relationship with a media
one-sided in that the objectophile could communicate with an object but the object could not
understand or communicate back4. There are also differences that parasocial relationships,
fictophilic relationships, and objectophilic relationships all have compared to real-life human
relationships such as barriers to physically accessing one’s partner, differences in intimacy, and
differences in communication. Research conducted on parasocial romances may be applicable to
objectophilia and fictophilia because of these similarities.
It is also important to note that the concept of parasocial relationships was created to refer
to a common human experience and not to be considered intrinsically pathological (Horton &
Wohl, 1956). More contemporary literature also suggests that parasocial interaction should be
considered a facet of ordinary social interaction (Giles, 2002). Giles (2002) supports this idea
4Some objectophiles have reported experiencing psychic or spiritual communication from the
object of their affection (Marsh, 2010).
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 19
with past research which indicates similar psychological processes in parasocial and real-life
interaction (e.g., personal constructs and uncertainty reduction; Perse & Rubin, 1989) and a
paper by Horton and Strauss (1957), which suggests there can be a gray area between parasocial
interaction and real-life interaction in situations such as live audience participation. Giles (2002)
expands on these ideas, proposing that there may be a continuum of social interaction ranging
from full face-to-face interaction to parasocial interaction with a fictional character. However,
scholars have suggested that parasocial relationships have the potential to become pathological if
they interfere with normal social functioning or involve delusion (Hartmann, 2017; Horton &
Wohl, 1956). This does not apply to all parasocial relationships, but it is a possible harmful
outcome, and whether these dysfunctional qualities may be common in objectophilia and
fictophilia should be considered.
Although objectophilia and fictophilia share similarities with parasocial relationships, the
concepts are not synonymous. While parasocial relationships are by definition one-sided, many
objectophiles do feel as if the object they are in a relationship with returns their feelings of love,
and some objectophiles even identify the specific traits in themselves that their beloved object
finds attractive (Marsh, 2010). This may be due to spiritual beliefs, such as animism, or an
alternative way of perceiving the world, such as in object-personification synesthesia (Marsh,
2010). Karhulahti and Välisalo (2021) identified a recurring feature of fictiophilia to be the
recognition of their desired character as fictional and the relationship as one-sided, but this
cannot be concluded to apply to every fictophile. My observations of online communities
indicated that some individuals do feel reciprocation from their desired fictional character in
commonality and extent to which fictophiles experience reciprocity from the fictional characters
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 20
they are attracted to would be one beneficial area for future research. The main aspects of
fictophilia which differentiate it from more typical romantic parasocial relationships include its
longer duration and greater intensity as well as being exclusively with fictional characters
(Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021). In addition, parasocial romances tend to entail more passive
romantic attractions than committed relationships, whereas fictophilia and objectophilia more
often take the form of a committed romantic relationship. Despite these differences, I think it will
be helpful to consider the extant research on parasocial relationships and romances and its
applicability to fictophilia and/or objectophilia.
Mental Disorder Considerations
In order to discuss whether OS and objectophilia should be considered mental disorders
it is important to first define what a mental disorder is. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (5th ed.; DSM–5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) defines a mental
disorder as:
…a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s
cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects a dysfunction in the
psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental functioning.
Mental disorders are usually associated with significant distress or disability in social,
occupational, or other important activities. An expectable or culturally approved response
to a common stressor or loss, such as the death of a loved one, is not a mental disorder.
Socially deviant behavior (e.g., political, religious, or sexual) and conflicts that are
primarily between the individual and society are not mental disorders unless the deviance
or conflict results from a dysfunction in the individual, as described above. (p. 20)
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 21
According to this definition, a mental disorder involves significant issues in cognition, emotion,
or behavior. Mental disorders are also associated with significant distress and/or difficulty in
important activities. Of note, according to this definition, a deviation from the socially accepted
norm is not considered a mental disorder unless it results from a psychological, biological, or
developmental dysfunction in the individual’s mental functioning. This latter piece cannot be
determined at this point in the empirical literature with regard to objectophilia and fictophilia;
however, there is enough information in the extant literature to begin to explore objectophilia and
fictophilia within the frame of other mental disorder criteria, including dysfunction of cognition,
emotion, or behavior as well as distress or interference with important activities. Therefore, for
the purpose of this thesis, these guidelines will be used to determine the fit of objectophilia
and/or fictophilia with a diagnosis of a mental disorder as indicated in the DSM-5.
History of Overpathologizing
In exploring the fit or lack thereof between these phenomena and potential disorders as
outlined in the DSM, it is important to underscore the DSM’s history of pathologizing sexual
preferences that are not harmful but happen to deviate from the norm. The DSM included
“homosexuality” as a diagnosable mental illness from 1950 to 1973 (Baughey-Gill, 2011), and it
was added back in a slightly different form from 1980 to 1987 (Fischer, 2012). The exact
classification of homosexuality as a mental illness has changed between versions of the DSM. In
the first DSM it was classified as a “sociopathic personality disturbance” and used as an example
of a “sexual deviation” along with rape and pedophilia (American Psychological Association,
1952). In the DSM-II, sexual deviations became their own category and included homosexuality
(American Psychological Association, 1987). In 1973 homosexuality was removed as a specific
diagnosis from the DSM-II and a more general label of “sexual orientation disturbance” was
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 22
used for those who experience distress due to or the desire to change their sexual orientation
(Baughey-Gill, 2011). However, in the DSM-III “ego dystonic homosexuality” replaced sexual
orientation disturbance to specify that it only applied to same sex attraction, this diagnosis was
not removed until the DSM-III-R in 1987 (American Psychological Association, 1980; American
Psychological Association, 1987). While the American Psychological Association board
removed this diagnosis and has since expressed firm opposition to this categorization and to
discrimination against same-sex attracted individuals (Conger, 1975), to this day the term
homosexual carries a stigma.
Another example where the DSM has evolved is asexuality. In the past, a lack of sexual
desire has been included in the DSM-III and DSM-IV-TR in slightly different forms. The
DSM-III included “inhibited sexual desire disorder,” defined as a significant and lasting lack of
sexual desire and noted that typically this diagnosis would not be made if it does not cause
distress in an individual or their partner (American Psychological Association, 1980). However,
distress was not required for a diagnosis. This was renamed “hypoactive sexual desire disorder”
in the DSM-IV-TR, defined as relatively little or no desire for or fantasies about sexual activity,
and requiring distress or interpersonal difficulties caused by these symptoms in order to be
diagnosed (American Psychological Association, 2000). In the current DSM-5 Female Sexual
Interest/Arousal Disorder and Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder describe a lack of sexual
desire in women and men respectively, and now to be diagnosed require significant distress
specifically in the individual who experiences the symptoms (American Psychological
Association, 2013). Even with the requirement of significant distress this diagnosis may still be
problematic, considering the fact that this same caveat was added to diagnoses of homosexuality
before it was entirely removed and the categorization was denounced (Fischer, 2012). While
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 23
some individuals may experience genuine distress due to lack of sexual interest, it is interesting
to consider how this distress may be made more common and more severe due to the norms of
society which consider a lack of sexual desire to be a defect. Indeed, asexual individuals face
considerable stigma and are often dehumanized due to the misconception that sexuality is an
essential piece of human nature (Maclnnis & Hodson, 2012).
Paraphilic Disorder
One potential framing of fictophilia and objectophilia could be to consider them
paraphilias, and potentially paraphilic disorders—though paraphilias do not necessarily
constitute a paraphilic disorder. A paraphilia is defined as “any intense and persistent sexual
interest other than sexual interest in genital stimulation or preparatory fondling with
phenotypically normal, physically mature, consenting human partners” (American Psychological
Association, 2013, p. 685). Many instances of objectophilia and fictophilia would fit into the
definition of a paraphilia, as they involve sexual interest in objects or fictional characters rather
than human partners (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Marsh, 2010). However, it is important to
make the distinction that while a paraphilia is defined solely in sexual terms, fictophilia and
objectophilia most often involve romantic attraction as well, and for some fictophiles and
objectophiles there is no sexual attraction involved (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Marsh, 2010).
It should also be noted that many objectophiles reject the idea of objectophilia being
classified as a fetish. A fetish is a type of paraphilia which involves attraction to nonliving
objects or specific nongenitial body parts (American Psychological Association, 2013). The
website Objectùm-Sexuality Internationale (2015) states that objectum-sexuality is an
orientation, not a fetish. In a study conducted by Amy Marsh in 2010, a few of the objectum
sexuals who she interviewed rejected claims that objectophilia was a fetish, with one saying “we
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 24
are not freaks, nor are we fetishists. Our lovers are living beings that communicate and love us
back” (Marsh 2010).
Not all instances of paraphilia will constitute a paraphilic disorder. For example, an
individual who has sexual interest in practicing safe bondage between two consenting adults and
does not experience any emotional or functional difficulties as a result of this attraction would
have a paraphilia but not a paraphilic disorder. A paraphilic disorder is defined in the DSM-5 as
“a paraphilia that is currently causing distress or impairment to the individual or a paraphilia
whose satisfaction has entailed personal harm, or risk of harm, to others” (American
Psychological Association, 2013, p. 685-686). Referring to the bondage example, if this same
individual becomes so preoccupied with bondage that it begins to interfere with daily
functioning, then it could constitute a paraphilic disorder. Using this framework, the factors of
both personal distress or impairment as well as potential harm to others would determine whether
fictophilia and objectophilia should be categorized as disorders.
It is also important to consider the possible flaws in the classification of a paraphilic
disorder. One study measuring stigma against various mental disorders found several paraphilic
disorders to be among the most stigmatized mental disorders (Feldman & Crandall, 2007).
Another study found that for those with paraphilias, anticipated stigma is a common experience
and can become a barrier to health care (Waldura et al., 2016). It is possible that this social
stigma may lead to some or all of the distress associated with the disorder. Internalized stigma,
an individual’s belief that the negative stereotypes about a group they are part of are true and that
they are alienated from those outside their group, has been found to correlate with increased
depression symptoms and decreased self-esteem, decreased feelings of empowerment, and a
decreased tendency to be recovery oriented (Ritsher et al., 2003). It should be considered that in
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 25
some cases the potential of these negative outcomes may outweigh any positives that could come
from classifying something as a disorder.
Delusional Disorder
Delusional disorder is another disorder defined in the DSM-5 that has potential
application to the categorization of objectophilia. A delusion is defined as a belief that does not
change despite evidence to the contrary (American Psychological Association, 2013). Delusional
disorder is characterized by one or more delusions that last for one month or longer and cannot
be attributed to another factor such as schizophrenia, obsessive compulsive disorder, use of a
substance, or other alternatives (American Psychological Association, 2013). The DSM-5 states
that significant impairment and/or distress may occur due to delusional disorder, but this is not
necessary to make a diagnosis (American Psychological Association, 2013).
With objectophilia, many objectophiles experience objects as having consciousness,
personalities, and the ability to reciprocate affection (Marsh, 2010). This could potentially be
viewed as delusional and, if it is in fact a delusion, would seem to fit the criteria for delusional
disorder in many cases. However, there are two main alternative explanations that challenge the
delusion classification. One is that of animism, the belief in the sentience of other beings which
may include animals, plants, the environment, and sometimes technology and/or objects
(Swancutt, 2019). Objectùm-Sexuality Internationale (2015) notes that animism seems to be the
most common reason for those without a psychological condition to connect strongly to objects.
Since animism is a religious belief, it would not be considered a delusion or something that
needs to be treated. The DSM-5 states that cultural and religious beliefs should be considered
when determining if something is a delusion, and that socially deviant behavior is not to be
considered a disorder if it is solely due to religious beliefs (American Psychological Association,
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 26
2013). The second potential explanation is object-personification synesthesia (Marsh, 2010). As
a reminder, those with object-personification synesthesia experience inanimate objects as having
traits such as personalities, genders, emotions, and other traits that are typically attributed to
humans (Smilek et al., 2007). This describes similar experiences to what individuals with
objectophilia report in regard to feeling that objects are sentient living beings (Marsh, 2010).
Synesthesia is not considered to be a delusion, a disorder, or a mental illness according to the
DSM-5 (American Psychological Association, 2013). Personification in synesthesia is not
uncommon and exists in different forms such as grapheme personification in which individuals
experience letters and numbers as having specific human associated traits (e.g., ‘X’ is feminine,
‘7’ is cocky; Amin et al., 2011). Therefore, it can be argued that someone with objectophilia
experiencing objects as having personalities and being attracted to those personified objects
and/or personalities is not grounds on which to define objectophilia as a disorder.
Most cases of fictophilia do not appear to fit a delusion framework or delusional disorder,
which requires belief in something that does not align with reality. In Karhulahti and Välisalo’s
(2021) analysis of online discussions relating to fictophilia, it was observed that these
discussions involved few indications of fictophiles who did not recognize fictional characters as
being fictional and unable to reciprocate feelings (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021). However, this
does imply that there may be some cases of fictophiles who do hold beliefs that could be
considered delusional. This appears to be the minority based on the existing data, and individual
evaluations would be needed to diagnose delusional disorder. Further research should be done on
this topic, exploring the prevalence of delusions in fictophilia and the potential explanations for
these beliefs, as the previous research has been limited.
Mental Health Stigma
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 27
The argument can be made that pathologizing functional experiences that happen to fall
outside the societal norm may increase stigma and personal distress by defining them as a
problem, such as the DSM-III’s inappropriate introduction of homosexuality as a diagnosis. Dr.
Patrick Corrigan, a distinguished professor and Associate Dean for Research in the Institute of
Psychology at the Illinois Institute of Technology and the editor of the American Psychological
Association’s flagship stigma journal, Stigma and Health, discusses how diagnostic classification
can intensify stigma against a mental illness (Corrigan, 2007). His research highlights how
diagnostic classification may enforce stereotypes about a group of individuals, as a diagnostic
label signifies that someone fits a list of criteria. Furthermore, this labelling enforces the idea that
people with a diagnosis of mental disorder are a group which is separate from the general
population (Link & Phelan, 2001). According to Modified Labeling Theory (Link et al., 1989),
the label of “mental illness” itself likely contributes to stigma as well. This was supported by a
systematic literature review which concluded that there is widespread stigma of mental illness in
the United States (Parcesepe & Cabassa 2013). Corrigan (2007) explains how stigma causes
difficulties to those with mental illness, including blocked opportunities, avoidance of treatment,
and negative self-stigma. As previously discussed, internalizing this stigma has also been found
to correlate with many negative outcomes including depression, poor self-esteem, decreased
feelings of empowerment, and a decreased tendency to be recovery oriented (Ritsher et al.,
2003). While considering whether to pathologize fictophilia and objectophilia, it is important to
consider past cases in which sexual preferences have been wrongly defined as mental disorders
as well as the potential negative mental health consequences of pathologizing fictophilia and
objectophilia as a mental illness.
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 28
To be classified as a mental disorder, the difficulties associated with the symptoms or
phenomena must arise from a dysfunction of the individual (American Psychological
Association, 2013); yet the distress related to objectophilia and fictophilia is due in part to the
social stigma surrounding them. Marsh (2010) identified a lack of societal acceptance as the
biggest problem that objectophiles face and many objectophiles in her study expressed that they
wished for more acceptance. Similarly, Karhulahti and Välisalo (2021) observed that many
fictophiles express that they feel unable to talk to people in real life about fictophilia due to the
stigma. In this study this stigma was observed in that some outside observers expressed that they
feel fictophilia is ‘abnormal’ or part of a mental illness. This stigma often causes objectophiles
and fictophiles to feel ashamed and isolated and sometimes to internalize the feeling that there is
something wrong with them (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Marsh, 2010). Along with the
negative impacts of external stigma, internalized stigma such as this can have many negative
impacts on those who experience it (Corrigan, 2007; Ritsher et al., 2003).
Media coverage of fictophilia and objectophilia has played a key role in creating the
narrative surrounding these identities, in both fictionalized and nonfiction accounts, which can be
stigmatizing and misleading. The most extensive nonfiction account of objectophilia in the
media is in the documentary Married to the Eiffel Tower (Piotrowska, 2008), which has been
denounced on the homepage of Objectùm-Sexuality Internationale (2015), a website run by
objectophiles about objectophilia, for sensationalizing the topic and focusing too much on sexual
aspects. Objectophilia has also been sensationalized and sexualized in popular media, such as in
the My Strange Addiction episode “Dating My Car/Baby Powder Addiction” (Bolicki, 2012).
Fictionalized portrayals have included films such as Lars and the Real Girl (Gillespie, 2010) and
the 30 Rock episode “Klaus and Greta” (Carlock et al., 2010). “Klaus and Greta” may also apply
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 29
to fictophilia as it portrays a body pillow depicting a fictional character, an item commonly seen
in fictiophilia communities, particularly in r/Waifuism (e.g., LordBenetton, 2020). In both these
examples, and common to media portrayals of objectophilia and fictophilia, the relationship is
either portrayed as a mental problem or a comedy device, and something that primarily people
with social difficulties take part in. Having one’s relationship portrayed as a joke or a problem,
being made to feel ashamed to talk about one’s experience, being identified as an out group by
others, and being rejected due to individual differences are negative experiences which may
potentially decrease well-being and may contribute to the negative impacts associated with
internalized stigma (Corrigan, 2007; Ritsher et al., 2003).
Potential Adverse Impacts of Objectophilia and Fictophilia
In determining whether fictophilia and objectophilia should be considered disorders it is
most important to address whether they cause significant distress or impact functioning. In her
qualitative study, Marsh (2010) asked 21 individuals with objectophilia to describe some of the
detriments of objectophilia. The most commonly reported problem was lack of societal
acceptance, followed by human abuse of their objects of attraction and the inability to be
publicly affectionate with these objects. Human abuse of objects is an issue that is unique to
objectophilia and may contribute to distress. The most common issue of a lack of acceptance is
not an issue of objectophilia itself. The inability to be publicly affectionate seems connected to
this lack of acceptance, though it may also be related to a lack of privacy which would be more
unique to objectophilia.
Many of the potential benefits and detriments of fictophilia were explored in Karhulahti
& Välisalo’s (2021) qualitative study. Analysis of online discussions relating to fictophilia
identified one potential issue that these researchers called the “fictophilic paradox” in which a
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 30
fictophile is fully aware that their desired character is fictional, and yet their feelings are real.
This acknowledgment often causes distress due to the feeling that having real interaction with the
character is impossible. It also may cause an internal contradiction which can be difficult to
reconcile. Karhulahti and Välisalo’s (2021) study also found that many fictophiles expressed
concern about whether their attraction to fictional characters was ‘normal’ or ‘healthy’. This
concern may be related to social norms and stigma, as the study noted that many individuals in
these online discussions expressed a fear of being stigmatized as ‘not normal’ or ‘mentally ill’
due to their attraction to fictional characters.
One shared issue of objectophilia and fictophilia is that of access to their beloved object
or character. Proximity was identified in Marsh’s (2010) study as another problem of
objectophilia, as many individuals fall in love with structures and buildings that are physically
distant from their home and potentially difficult to access, as well as often difficult to have
privacy with. For those with fictophilia, this issue is that because of their partner being fictional
there is an inability for true physical interaction, as recognized in the fictophilic paradox
(Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021). The issue of physical inaccessibility to a partner is not unique to
objectophilia and fictophilia, but there are often unique complications in these contexts which
may lead to more distress.
Challenges experienced by those with parasocial relationships may also apply to
fictophilia and objectophilia. Interference with real-life relationships is one factor to consider.
Tukachinsky and Dorros (2018) conducted a study on this topic in which they collected
self-report concurrent data from 153 adolescents ages 13-17 regarding their experiences with
parasocial romance and their romantic beliefs as well as retrospective data from 274 college
students ages 18-22 reflecting on the intensity of their parasocial romances growing up, their
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 31
romantic beliefs, and aspects of their current romantic relationship if they were involved in one.
In both samples, involvement in a parasocial romance correlated with more idealized and
unrealistic romantic beliefs. Such idealized and unrealistic beliefs have been found in previous
research to negatively impact functioning in romantic relationships (Eidelson & Epstein, 1982).
Results from Tukachinsky and Dorros (2018) also indicated that greater intensity of emotional
involvement in a parasocial romantic relationship during adolescence was associated with lower
relationship satisfaction and less favorable views of a current real-life human romantic partner in
college students.
This may apply to fictophilia and/or objectophilia in that the relationship formed with a
fictional character or an object may similarly lead to idealized and unrealistic romantic beliefs.
This could cause potential problems if someone who has previously had relationships with an
object or fictional character wishes to pursue a relationship with a real-life human. However,
many individuals with objectophilia or fictophilia are only interested in relationships with objects
or fictional characters (Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021; Marsh, 2010). In those instances, any
negative effects of parasocial relationships in relation to romantic relationships with other
real-life humans would be irrelevant. Research is needed to determine whether these parasocial
relationship findings extend to fictiophilia and objectophilia.
In a study by Adam and Sizemore (2013), the costs and benefits of parasocial romances
were compared to those of real-life relationships. In this study, 82 undergraduate college students
identified a favorite media character who they found physically attractive. The Multiple
Parasocial Relationship Scale (Tukachinsky, 2011) was then used to determine the strength of the
parasocial romance with each participant’s identified media character. Using this scale, Adam
and Sizemore (2013) determined that the participants were all experiencing some level of
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 32
parasocial romance. Participants then responded to statements of perceived benefits and costs of
romantic relationships regarding their current or last real-life romantic partner and separately
benefits of real-life relationships and parasocial relationships such as increased happiness,
decreased loneliness, and feeling better after interacting with the person or character; however,
the level of these reported benefits were significantly lower for parasocial romances compared to
real life relationships. This may imply that parasocial romances, and possibly similar
relationships such as objectophilia and fictophilia relationships, may provide similar benefits and
types of fulfillment to real life relationships, but the level of that benefit and fulfillment may be
lower overall than real life relationships. However, it should be noted that the strength of the
parasocial romances in this study varied and it is uncertain if any participants held the type of
committed and emotionally involved relationship typical in fictophilia and objectophilia.
One area in which people express concern about objectophilia and fictophilia is the
assumption that they originate from loneliness and an inability to connect with others. People
often theorize that trauma causes objectophiles to turn away from human relationships and this is
why they form relationships with objects (Marsh, 2010). Simner et. al. (2019) asserts that a
difficulty with human relationships may contribute to the development of objectophilia. Online
comments express similar ideas about fictophilia. For example, one individual says in regard to
r/Waifuism, “I know they can say they are happy but these are obviously very lonely people who
need an outlet like this because of it” (data_dawg, 2020). However, evidence does exist to dispel
these concerns. In Marsh’s (2010) study eight objectophiles said they had previous sexual
relationships with humans and two had current sexual relationships with humans along with their
object partner. Several individuals on r/Waifuism also discuss having had past relationships with
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 33
humans, and many say they have chosen to date fictional characters not out of desperation but
from personal preference (e.g., throwra-truckdriver, 2021). In Karhulahti and Välisalo’s (2021)
study one individual states that “I think I am actually more attracted to any of my fictional
objects of affection than my very real, very nice boyfriend” (“Fictophilic Stigma” section, para.
2), expressing that her preference for fictional characters is not due to an inability to find a
real-life partner. While difficulty with human relationships could be a reason that some may
choose to have relationships with fictional characters or objects, it seems that many individuals
have a preference towards objects or fictional characters even when other options are available to
them.
Potential Adaptive Impacts of Objectophilia and Fictophilia
The literature suggests several ways in which objectophilia and fictophilia have the
potential to benefit well-being. One potential benefit could be the aspect of romantic
relationships, which many objectophiles have with objects and many fictophiles have with
fictional characters (Marsh, 2010; Karhulahti & Välisalo, 2021). Having romantic relationships
in general has been found to correlate positively with well-being (Dush & Amato, 2005). Many
particular aspects of romantic relationships have been identified as benefits including
companionship, happiness, loving and feeling loved, and intimacy (Sedikides et al., 1994). Many
of these same aspects have been identified in objectophilia and fictophilia relationships,
commonly discussed by objectophiles in Marsh’s (2010) study and by fictophiles in online
Marsh’s (2010) study indicates the presence of these benefits of romantic relationships in
objectophilia in specific reports from objectophiles such as: “we’re always there for each other &
I feel that I can tell him all my problems without being judged by others & he’s never let me
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 34
down” (“Most Successful Long-Term Relationship with an Object” section, para. 1) and “we
shared a connection, and bond that was absolutely airtight. I loved my partner so much, and he
helped me through a lot of difficult times” (“Most Successful Long-Term Relationship with an
Object” section, para. 10). Intimacy was also identified as a benefit fulfilled by objectophilia
relationships. In Marsh’s (2010) study, respondents in relationships with objects were asked to
describe intimacy with their lover and all but two of the individuals who responded seemed to be
happy with their intimacy. Many positive aspects of objectophilia were identified in Marsh’s
2010 study and only one out of the 21 objectophiles who participated in the study reported being
unhappy with being an objectophile.
There are also many accounts of the benefits of romantic relationships being present in
fictophilia in Karhulahti & Välisalo’s (2021) study on fictophilia and in online discussions
their fictional partner “inherently does the things for me that any 3D person wants to do for
someone they love: he comforts me, encourages me, inspires me, makes me smile. To me, that in
itself is an expression of love” (JordannaMorgan, 2021). A comment from a fictophile in
Karhulahti & Välisalo’s (2021) study refers to their beloved fictional character, saying that “she
is like a support for me, whenever I feel down or stressed out, a picture of her will always make
me happy.”
Improved self-esteem is another potential benefit of objectophilia and fictophilia. In
Marsh’s (2010) study many individuals listed traits that the objects they have relationships with
like about them. Fictophiles in internet communities have also discussed how thinking about why
their fictional partner would love them has helped them recognize positive traits in themselves.
One r/Waifuism user states that “I spent lots of time thinking of why someone would love me. It
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 35
was a good thing for me to introspect and see what needed improving, and helped me understand
those parts that were already good” (BokkoTheBunny, 2021). One Tumblr user states that “Self
shipping is…a beautiful and sweet kind of coping mechanism; we highlight what we think makes
us lovable or we discover more…Its also a form of self love too” (ignorethisbrontosaurus, 2021).
As self-esteem is defined as a measure of how positive one’s perception of their own traits and
the ways in which others view them is, this recognition of positive traits of oneself and the
feeling that these positive traits are valued by the object or character could potentially contribute
to higher self-esteem (American Psychological Association, n.d.-b). If self-esteem can be raised
by objectophilia and fictophilia, this would be a benefit as self-esteem has been found to improve
well-being (Orth & Robins, 2014).
Some personal accounts also indicate that relationships with objects and fictional
characters can help individuals to persevere through challenges in their lives. In the documentary
Married to the Eiffel Tower (Piotrowska, 2008), one individual states that her relationship with
the twin towers has helped her through challenging times and prevented her from committing
suicide. Marsh’s 2010 study also included quotes from multiple individuals about how their
relationship with an object had helped them through difficult times. Similar accounts are
One user on r/Waifuism recounts a time when their fictional partner helped them, saying that “I
was lying awake unable to sleep due to a lot of stressful exams coming up, when suddenly I felt
encompassed by her warmth, and despite still being unable to sleep, just felt absolutely content
with everything and myself lying in my bed, simply feeling how much I love her, and at this
point also experiencing the feeling of her love to me” (n0pl4c3 2021).
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 36
Parasocial relationships have also been found to have several benefits which may apply
to objectophilia and fictophilia. In Adam and Sizemore’s (2013) study comparing the costs and
benefits of parasocial romances to those of real-life relationships it was found that, on average,
the perceived costs of parasocial romances were significantly lower than the perceived costs of
real-life relationships. This study also found that although on average parasocial relationships
had lower perceived benefits, parasocial romances had a higher average perceived benefit to cost
ratio than real-life relationships and stronger parasocial romances correlated with stronger
perceived benefits relative to costs. Thus, it is possible that the stronger relationships typical of
fictophilia and objectophilia might also have stronger benefits on average and be more similar to
real life romantic relationships in terms of perceived benefits than the average parasocial
romance included in this study as well as having an even higher perceived benefit to cost ratio.
This is another avenue that future research could explore.
Other research on parasocial relationships has also found benefits which could apply to
objectophilia and/or fictophilia. One study by Greenwood et al. (2009) surveyed 301
undergraduate college students on multiple factors, including parasocial interaction and
experiences of solitude. The results of this survey suggest that connecting with characters can
help to fill the need for connection, protect from negative experiences of solitude, and fuel
creativity and self-discovery. Additionally, a study which surveyed 701 undergraduate college
students on parasocial relationships in favored television shows found that some types of media
consumption can create feelings of belonging and are helpful in lessening feelings of loneliness,
drops in self-esteem and mood, and feelings of rejection (Derrick et al., 2009). Research
involving three separate self-report survey studies of undergraduate students found that
parasocial relationships might be especially helpful in benefiting individuals with
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 37
low-self-esteem, even filling needs that real-life relationships do not fill for these individuals
(Derrick et al., 2008).
Should Objectophilia and Fictophilia be Pathologized?
After considering many aspects of objectophilia and fictophilia and their benefits and
detriments, the data does not appear to support categorizing objectophilia and fictophilia as
disorders or mental illnesses. Based on the current small body of research, there does not seem to
be significant distress or impairment of functioning caused by objectophilia and fictophilia that
does not primarily stem from social stigma. There also does not seem to be any evidence that
objectophilia or fictophilia cause harm or risk of harm to others. Furthermore, conceptualizing
objectophilia or fictophilia as a delusional disorder or paraphilic disorder does not seem to be
supported by the literature thus far, though there is potential for a small, outlier subset of these
populations to meet these criteria. For those fictophiles and potentially objectophiles who do
potentially meet the criteria for delusional disorder, whether their beliefs negatively impact their
safety, wellbeing, and/or functioning in any way should be considered.
Related to well-being, there seems to be potential benefit to holding objectophilic or
fictophilic attractions. These attractions seem to help many individuals who experience them to
identify positives in themselves and to cope with challenges. Objectophilic and fictophilic
relationships also seem to share many benefits with other romantic relationships, such as
providing intimacy and increasing happiness. The personal opinions of objectophiles and
fictophiles should also be considered when deciding whether to pathologize objectophilia and
fictophilia. Views expressed in Marsh’s (2010) study and on the website Objectùm-Sexuality
Internationale (2015) show that the majority of objectophiles do not wish to be cured, but rather
to be understood and accepted. Though difficult to quantify, this also seems to be the general
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 38
sentiment of fictophiles in the reddit community r/Waifuism and on Tumblr within the self
Marsh (2010) states that based on the depth and variety of thoughts and emotions of
objectophiles reported in her study, objectophilia seems to generally fit definitions of sexual
orientation. With the similarly deep and varied experiences of attraction between objectophilia
and fictophilia this could apply to both. An article on the American Psychological Association’s
website defines sexual orientation as “an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic and/or sexual
attractions to men, women or both sexes” as well as one’s “sense of identity based on those
attractions, related behaviors and membership in a community of others who share those
attractions” (American Psychological Association, 2008). If the reference to genders/sexes was
removed from the definition, it would seem to fit both objectophilia and fictophilia. As many
people with objectophilia and fictophilia also have gender preferences, perhaps there could be a
separate type of orientation to describe these experiences.
Whether or not objectophilia and fictophilia should be categorized as disorders, it seems
that it would be beneficial to work towards destigmatizing these topics. If fictophilia and
objectophilia were more normalized and accepted, the factor of internal distress due to fictophilia
and objectophilia may be significantly reduced. Those who do experience genuine distress due to
their own fictophilia or objectophilia would likely find it easier to seek help if fictophilia and
objectophilia were destigmatized. Furthermore, these attractions may provide valuable insight. In
Jennifer Terry’s work, Loving Objects (2010) she discusses how objectophilia as an orientation
may help to reflect on the diverse experience of human love and sexuality itself. Saito
(2000/2011) makes a similar point in emphasizing how many of those who experience a deep
attraction to fictional characters may be more insightful than most about their own attraction and
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 39
the very nature of fiction and reality. Based on the existing literature, current body of research,
and the views of objectophiles and fictophiles themselves, it seems that categorizing
objectophilia and fictophilia as sexual/romantic orientations, and to foster more understanding
and acceptance of these orientations, would be more beneficial and more accurate than to call
them mental disorders. Acceptance and recognition of the diversity of the human experiences of
love and understandings of reality encapsulated within objectophilia and fictophilia may broaden
our understanding of the world as a whole.
Directions for Future Research
There is certainly room for more research on these topics. Collecting quantitative data
could help to better understand these identities and to combat the prevailing narrative that has
been spread through the media. Surveys could utilize scales to quantify aspects such as strength
of attraction, level of perceived reciprocation, level of perceived stigma and the impact this
stigma has, loneliness compared to single individuals and individuals in relationships with other
humans, and overall impact on functioning and wellbeing. Delusionality could also be measured
along with the level to which these delusions impact functioning and wellbeing. The pros and
cons of objectophilia and fictophilia relationships could be measured in a similar way to how
Adam and Sizemore, B. (2013) measured benefits and detriments of relationships. It would be
helpful to explore the possible relationships between these different aspects as well, such as if
perceived level of reciprocation correlates with lower levels of loneliness. Research on whether
fictophilia and objectophilia cause dysfunction in important areas of functioning would also be a
beneficial area to research.
Another area for future research would be further study of the correlates with
objectophilia and fictophilia. Research could examine the extent to which fictophilia may be
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 40
linked with autism and/or synesthesia and why. The connections between LGBTQ+ identities
and fictophilia/objectophilia could also be researched further. Particularly, the link between
asexuality and fictophilia, as well as the potential link between objectophilia and asexuality,
could be studied. It would also be beneficial to research whether certain types of traumas
contribute to the development of objectophilia or fictophilia. Another area for future research
could be to look at whether fictophilia and objectophilia exist globally and cross culturally and to
what extent, as well as how the experiences, expressions, conceptions, and definitions of
fictophilia and objectophilia may vary across cultures and regions.
Conclusion
Objectophilia and fictophilia are fascinating phenomena which are often misunderstood.
Attitudes towards objectophilia and fictophilia are often negative and frequently express the
opinion that objectophilia and fictophilia are part of a mental disorder or should be classified as
such themselves. The current research and literature on these topics does not seem to indicate
that this classification is necessary. In fact, there may be beneficial aspects to experiencing these
forms of attraction. Many objectophiles and fictophiles have expressed a desire to be accepted by
society, which may be impeded by classification as a mental disorder. More research is needed to
determine the psychological experiences of objectophilia and fictophilia and how it affects the
lived experience of those with these attractions.
OBJECTOPHILIA AND FICTOPHILIA 41