Intelligence, financial literacy, cognitive reflection, and grandiose narcissism:
Explaining susceptibility to financial scams?*
Sebastian Roth
January 2, 2025
Abstract
With financial scams representing a growing economic burden globally, it is becoming increasingly
important to understand why certain individuals are more vulnerable to them. Prior research has sug-
gested intelligence, cognitive reflection, financial literacy, and grandiose narcissism to predict sus-
ceptibility to financial scams. However, it remains to be determined whether these factors uniquely
predict scam-susceptibility, and whether cognitive reflection and/or financial literacy (grandiose nar-
cissism) mediate (suppresses) any of the hypothesised associations. University students (N = 489)
completed a 12-item scam-susceptibility assessment, several intelligence tests, a cognitive reflec-
tion test, a financial literacy test, and the narcissistic admiration and rivalry questionnaire. Nega-
tive correlations between all three cognitive factors and susceptibility to financial scams were ob-
served. However, based on a structural equation model, only financial literacy uniquely predicted
scam-susceptibility, controlling for the other factors, implying a mediating effect. This suggests that
financial education programs may be beneficial for young adults in reducing scam-susceptibility.
Keywords: Scam susceptibility; Intelligence; Financial literacy; Cognitive reflection; Grandiose
narcissism
*Acknowledgements: I would like to thank the conference participants at the UWA Psychology Honours Conference 2024,
as well as Gilles Gignac for his very helpful comments and discussions. The findings and views reported in this paper, as well as
any mistakes or errors, are those of the author, and should not be attributed to the University of Western Australia. Declarations
of interest: none.
University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley 6009, WA, Australia; Email: sebas-
tian.roth@research.uwa.edu.au
1 Introduction
Financial scams, defined as intentional acts designed to deceive victims for illegal monetary gain (Titus
et al., 1995), are a growing global burden. In fact, the scale of this problem is staggering: in the United
States alone, the cost of fraud surged by 30 percent in 2022 to reach $8.8 billion – an amount exceeding
the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of some countries, including Monaco which (ironically) is a known
money-laundering hub (FTC, 2023). Importantly, this trend is not isolated to America. Australia, for
instance, experienced an even more dramatic rise, with estimated losses from financial scams totalling
$3.1 billion in 2022, an 80 percent increase (ACCC, 2023). The rapid proliferation of financial scams is
likely to persist over the near-term, as it has been closely tied to technological advancements (Shete et al.,
2024). Indeed, as daily activities increasingly shift online, individuals are being exposed to a growing
array of sophisticated fraudulent schemes (Wood et al., 2022).
Importantly, financial scams are not limited to older adults; Generation Z (individuals under 25) is
now the fastest-growing group reporting such fraud (ACCC, 2020). While older individuals typically
experience greater financial losses when victimised (FTC, 2022), this shift raises questions about the
factors influencing scam-susceptibility among younger demographics. Indeed, although prior research
has identified demographic and psychological factors related to such vulnerability(Alves and Wilson,
2008; Han et al., 2016; James et al., 2014), less is known about the cognitive and personality traits that
contribute to scam-susceptibility in younger individuals. This is an important consideration, as under-
standing these factors could inform targeted prevention strategies and educational programs, potentially
reducing the growing impact of financial scams on younger generations. Consequently, this paper aims
to investigate several theoretically plausible variables as predictors of university students’ susceptibility
to financial scams.
1.1 Individual differences in the susceptibility to financial scams
First, it should be noted that non-trait variables are known to impact scam-susceptibility. For example,
various psychological states and life circumstances have been suggested to influence a person’s suscepti-
bility to financial scams, including financial pressure, loneliness, and recent (predominantly negative) life
events (Button et al., 2014; Sur et al., 2022). Thus, a person’s vulnerability to fraud may not necessarily
be static but could instead fluctuate based on their current life situation.
Beyond these situational factors, research has identified several individual differences that may
help explain scam-susceptibility, including cognitive ability (Han et al., 2016), emotional intelligence
(Mueller et al., 2020), age (James et al., 2014), and particular personality traits (Coluccia et al., 2020).
For instance, van de Weijer and Leukfeldt (2017) found that individuals with low conscientiousness and
neuroticism, coupled with high openness to experience, are more likely to fall victim to cyber-enabled
crimes. Similarly, a study of 151 older adults by Judges et al. (2017) revealed that fraud victims tend
to exhibit both lower conscientiousness and honesty-humility compared to non-victims. Additionally,
experimental research has shown that both positive and negative emotional arousal can increase fraud
susceptibility (Kircanski et al., 2018), with older adults more likely to intend to purchase falsely adver-
tised items.
While most of the above-mentioned determinants of scam-susceptibility have been empirically de-
termined, their relative importance, interactions (including with each other), and underlying mechanisms
are less understood. Moreover, the development and use of effective scam-susceptibility measures re-
mains a key challenge, as most studies have usually had to rely on indicators exhibiting low validity and
reliability (Sur et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022). The focus in this paper, however, will be on examining
several cognitive determinants of susceptibility to financial scams.
1.2 Intelligence
Intelligence is a multifaceted construct defined as the general ability to learn, adapt, and respond to
individual experiences (Sternberg, 2012). It encompasses various competencies, including intellectual,
emotional, and social domains (Rockstuhl et al., 2011). Cognitive intelligence specifically refers to the
ability to acquire and apply knowledge (Mun˜oz-Murillo et al., 2020), facilitating learning skills (Watkins
et al., 2007) and complex knowledge acquisition (Schneider, 2013). Importantly, research has consis-
tently shown that intelligence predicts important financial outcomes, such as higher income (Zagorsky,
2007), rational economic decision-making (Rustichini, 2015), and greater lifetime earnings (Gensowski,
2018). Additionally, studies have indicated intelligence to positively correlate with financial decision-
making through enhanced mathematical skills (Skagerlund et al., 2018), improved language abilities
(Stanovich et al., 2016) and increased information processing efficiency (Dong et al., 2011).
Regarding financial scams, higher intelligence could theoretically reduce vulnerability through better
problem-solving skills, critical thinking, and quick processing of complex information (Otero et al.,
2022). This would align with theories suggesting victims may lack the capacity to recognise scam cues
even upon close examination (Langenderfer and Shimp, 2001), suggesting that higher intelligence could
improve their perceptiveness. Furthermore, greater intelligence often correlates with improved financial
decision-making skills (Agarwal and Mazumder, 2013), thereby possibly acting as a protective factor
against scams.
Nevertheless, the empirical evidence on this relationship has been mixed. Some studies have found
that higher intelligence enhances comprehension of potentially fraudulent behaviour, thereby reducing
scam-susceptibility (Han et al., 2016). Relatedly, Pinsker and McFarland (2010) revealed a significant
negative relationship between intelligence and scam-vulnerability (r = −.54). However, other research
has suggested that highly intelligent individuals may struggle to detect social cues indicating untrustwor-
thiness or may overthink situations, causing them to miss obvious ‘red flags’ (Charlton, 2009; Teunisse
et al., 2020).
Overall, there are few studies that have directly examined the correlation between intelligence and
susceptibility to financial scams, highlighting a significant gap in the literature. Of the studies that do
exist, however, many have relied on narrow measures of intelligence, often using only a single subtest
(e.g., Teunisse et al., 2020), which may oversimplify this likely complex relationship. Furthermore, there
remains a critical need to explore this relationship across different age groups. Indeed, most existing
studies have focused on older adults, often due to the well-established decline in fluid intelligence after
age 30 (Salthouse, 2009). Yet, given that young adults are also increasingly falling victim to financial
scams (ACCC, 2020), it remains to be determined the extent to which intelligence predicts susceptibility
in younger populations including those in university settings.
1.3 Cognitive reflection
While intelligence may associate with susceptibility to financial scams, this relationship could be me-
diated by factors more immediately-relevant to scam-vulnerability, like cognitive reflection – defined as
the ability to resist responding instinctively (Frederick, 2005). Correspondingly, intelligence has been
consistently associated with higher levels of cognitive reflection (Otero et al., 2022). For example, in-
dividuals with greater cognitive abilities tend to perform better on the Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT),
which assesses analytical thinking over intuitive responses (Frederick, 2005). This relationship likely
stems from more intelligent individuals possessing greater cognitive resources for deliberate processing.
This would align with Frederick (2005), who found that those with high CRT scores are also generally
more patient in decision-making. Furthermore, research has also demonstrated that the CRT predicts
performance on tasks involving heuristics and biases even better than more traditional cognitive ability
measures (Toplak et al., 2011). Notably, this suggests that cognitive reflection (at least as captured by
the CRT) is a distinct construct from other ability measures, capturing a propensity to engage in deeper
analytical thought, a characteristic that may reduce the likelihood of falling victim to financial scams or
other deceptive practices.
Beyond the CRT, the intelligence-cognitive reflection link has also been supported by more recent
research on strategic thinking. For instance, Gill and Prowse (2016) found that fluid intelligence strongly
predicts strategic sophistication, particularly in game theory scenarios where recognising optimal strate-
gies often involves suppressing intuitive but incorrect responses in favour of more deliberative solutions
– a process akin to that of cognitive reflection. Thus, it is possible that higher intelligence may equip
individuals with the cognitive resources necessary to engage in deeper analysis when required, which in
turn could be crucial for financial decision-making and scam detection.
Finally, research has indicated that individuals scoring higher on measures of cognitive reflection
tend to be less susceptible to various forms of deception, including phishing emails and fake websites
(Ackerley et al., 2022; Jones et al., 2019; Pennycook et al., 2018). Notably, this reduced susceptibility has
been attributed to a tendency to analyse potentially fraudulent communications thoroughly, scrutinising
details (of financial propositions) and identifying inconsistencies or ‘red flags’ (Toplak et al., 2014).
More generally, those who engage in more analytical and deliberate thinking may be less likely to rely on
heuristics and cognitive biases (including overconfidence bias) when making financial decisions (Alo´s-
Ferrer et al., 2016), thereby also reducing the potential to underestimate the risks associated with financial
scams (Mata, 2023).
Overall, while intelligence is suggested to provide the cognitive capacity for more deliberate thought,
it is perhaps the application of this capacity via cognitive reflection that may play a fundamental role in
identifying and avoiding fraudulent schemes. Stated alternatively, it remains possible that intelligent
people who fail to engage in cognitive reflection may still end up falling for scams, whereas those who
habitually employ reflective thinking could be better protected. Given the limited research on this poten-
tial mediation effect, it remains to be seen whether intelligence will continue to have a direct effect on
the scam-susceptibility, controlling for the effects of cognitive reflection.
1.4 Financial literacy
While cognitive reflection offers one pathway through which intelligence may influence an individual’s
susceptibility to financial scams, it is important to also consider other potentially mediating factors.
Given the financial nature of most scams, a person’s financial literacy – defined as the ability to under-
stand and effectively utilise various financial concepts and skills (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014) – may
play an equally important (if not greater) role relative to cognitive reflection in reducing their scam-
susceptibility.
Much like cognitive reflection, financial literacy has been consistently associated with intelligence.
For instance, Lusardi et al. (2010) found that individuals with higher cognitive abilities tend to demon-
strate greater financial literacy, indicating that intelligence may provide a foundation for acquiring and
processing financial information. Notably, this relationship has also been suggested to extend beyond
basic knowledge, with Banks et al. (2010) demonstrating that cognitive ability significantly predicts both
financial literacy and complex financial behaviours, such as portfolio choice. Likewise, Hastings et al.
(2013) found that intelligence correlated positively with quantitative comprehension of complex finan-
cial concepts, while McGrew (2009) suggested that cognitive ability was linked to both better financial
decision-making skills and financial literacy. Finally, a recent meta-analysis confirmed a strong pos-
itive correlation between intelligence and financial literacy (r = .62), particularly in quantitative and
comprehension knowledge (Callis et al., 2023).
Just as higher cognitive reflection has been linked to reduced vulnerability to deception, greater
financial literacy has been associated with lower susceptibility to various forms of fraud (Deevy et al.,
2007; Lusardi and Tufano, 2015). In fact, Engels et al. (2020) reported that financial literacy negatively
correlated with susceptibility to financial scams due to greater sophistication and skills in detecting fraud
– a conclusion echoed by Kasim et al. (2023) regarding investment scams. However, few studies have
focused on younger adults, and no research has examined the possible mediating role of financial literacy
with respect to the relationship between intelligence and scam-susceptibility.
Overall, the potential for the combination of intelligence, cognitive reflection, and financial literacy
in predicting an individual’s susceptibility to financial scams remains largely unexplored. For instance,
financial literacy could enhance the effectiveness of cognitive reflection by providing specific cues for an-
alytical thinking. Conversely, cognitive reflection might improve the application of financial knowledge
in novel scam scenarios. It also remains to be determined whether intelligence directly affects scam-
susceptibility after accounting for financial literacy or if it is mediated by it. Additionally, the relative
importance of financial literacy compared to cognitive reflection in mediating this relationship remains
to be seen.
1.5 Grandiose narcissism
While the above-mentioned cognitive processes may help explain susceptibility to financial scams, cer-
tain personality traits could also play an important role in how individuals apply their financial skills.
Prior studies have linked various personality traits to economic decisions and scam-susceptibility, with
low conscientiousness in particular consistently associated with increased vulnerability to financial scams
(Kadoya et al., 2020). However, less is known about how high self-appraisal of one’s abilities, par-
ticularly grandiose narcissism – typically characterised by traits such as grandiosity, entitlement, and
attention seeking (Miller et al., 2017) – may affect scam-susceptibility.
Notably, this personality trait has been associated with inflated self-assessments of intelligence (Za-
jenkowski and Czarna, 2015) and unrealistic positive self-views (Campbell and Foster, 2007). Such
overconfidence, in turn, has been positively correlated with risk-taking behaviours like gambling and
compulsive buying (Rogier and Velotti, 2018), thereby potentially increasing exposure to fraudulent
situations (Abroshan et al., 2021). Perhaps like the tendency of highly intelligent individuals to overes-
timate their intellectual capacity (Ames and Kammrath, 2004), this overconfidence may also impair the
ability to recognise fraudulent intent.
Individuals high in grandiose narcissism tend to also be insensitive to cues of untrustworthiness,
making them more vulnerable to manipulation (Hart et al., 2021), which may lead them to engage in risky
behaviours such as responding to unsolicited emails (Teunisse et al., 2020). The desire for quick wealth
may also drive impulsive decisions, further heightening scam vulnerability (Whitty, 2020). Finally,
while narcissistic individuals tend to exhibit general mistrust, they can also trust those who appeal to
their inflated self-importance – which, in turn, could increase their risk of financial exploitation (Conrad
et al., 2011).
Overall, individuals with high grandiose narcissistic traits may be more likely to engage in risky
financial activities due to a complex interplay of overconfidence, scepticism towards conventional ad-
vice, susceptibility to flattery, and impulsive decision-making. Given these complex traits, grandiose
narcissism may act as a suppressor variable in the relationship between cognitive factors and scam-
susceptibility. Specifically, a positive association might exist between grandiose narcissism and scam-
susceptibility, whereas little to no correlation may be found between narcissism and objectively mea-
sured cognitive abilities (Paulhus et al., 2004). Thus, while higher intelligence, cognitive reflection,
and financial literacy might generally reduce vulnerability to scams, the presence of grandiose narcissis-
tic traits could negate or even reverse these protective effects. Consequently, controlling for grandiose
narcissism in the analyses may reveal a stronger negative relationship between cognitive factors and
scam-susceptibility than when narcissism is not accounted for.
1.6 Summary and purpose
No research has examined intelligence, cognitive reflection, financial literacy, and grandiose narcissism
jointly when trying to predict susceptibility to financial scams. Moreover, limitations exist in the cur-
rent literature on scam-susceptibility – particularly, in the context of extending the effects to younger
individuals, as most prior studies have focused on older adults or smaller clinical samples. Similarly, re-
search has also been largely confined to using measures of scam-susceptibility that exhibit low reliability
and validity (Xu et al., 2022), making it challenging to accurately assess an individual’s vulnerability to
financial scams.
Perhaps most important, as intelligence, cognitive reflection, and financial literacy are interrelated
constructs, it is necessary to control for their potential confounding effects on each other when estimating
may be influenced by intelligence (Otero et al., 2022; Callis et al., 2023), it remains important to also
investigate these factors as potential mediators between intelligence and scam-susceptibility.
Finally, given that grandiose narcissism may influence the application of cognitive skills in financial
decision-making (Teunisse et al., 2020), it is also necessary to investigate whether grandiose narcissism
may impact the link between intelligence, cognitive reflection, financial literacy, and susceptibility to
financial scams. Ultimately, the presence of any significant associations between these variables will
provide deeper insights into how and why intelligence, cognitive reflection, financial literacy, and/or
grandiose narcissism are related to scam-susceptibility.
Taken together, the first aim of this study is to examine whether intelligence predicts susceptibility
to financial scams in a sample of university students. The second aim of this study is to examine whether
nancial literacy, cognitive reflection, grandiose narcissism, and susceptibility to financial
scams.
CR GN
SFS
FL
Notes: g = general intelligence; CR = cognitive reflection; FL = financial literacy; GN = grandiose narcissism; SFS =
susceptibility to financial scams.
cognitive reflection and financial literacy mediate the suggested relationship between intelligence and
scam-susceptibility. Last, this study aims to also examine whether individual differences in grandiose
narcissism may impact the nature/strength of the associations between intelligence, cognitive reflection,
financial literacy, and susceptibility to financial scams.
1.7 Hypotheses and research questions
Considering the above, the following hypotheses are proposed:
Hypothesis 1 (H ). Intelligence will associate positively with cognitive reflection.
Hypothesis 2 (H ). Intelligence will associate positively with financial literacy.
Hypothesis 3 (H ). Cognitive reflection will associate positively with financial literacy.
Hypothesis 4 (H ). Intelligence will associate negatively with susceptibility to financial scams.
Hypothesis 5 (H ). Cognitive reflection will associate negatively with susceptibility to financial
scams.
Hypothesis 6 (H ). Financial literacy will associate negatively with susceptibility to financial scams.
Hypothesis 7 (H ). Intelligence will associate negatively with susceptibility to financial scams, con-
trolling for the effects of cognitive reflection and financial literacy.
Hypothesis 8 (H ). Cognitive reflection will associate negatively with susceptibility to financial
scams, controlling for the effects of intelligence and financial literacy.
Hypothesis 9 (H ). Financial literacy will associate negatively with susceptibility to financial scams,
controlling for the effects of intelligence and cognitive reflection.
Hypothesis 10 (H ). The effect of intelligence on susceptibility to financial scams will be partially
mediated by cognitive reflection.
Hypothesis 11 (H ). The effect of intelligence on susceptibility to financial scams will be partially
mediated by financial literacy.
Finally, the investigation included a research question:
Research question 1 (RQ ). Will grandiose narcissism associate (positively or negatively) with sus-
ceptibility to financial scams?
2 Method
2.1 Participants
The sample consisted of first-year undergraduate psychology students at the University of Western Aus-
tralia. Participation was voluntary (with partial course credit provided) but required participants to speak
English as a first language for valid intelligence testing. Data were collected between April and August
2024 as part of a group of three Honours students, initially comprising 526 participants, but reduced to
489 after excluding two cases with test completion times of less than 15 minutes (median completion
time = 47.37 minutes), and 35 respondents who failed both attention-check questions. The analytic
sample of 489 yielded statistical power of .99 required to detect a typically sized individual differences
correlation (r = |.20|; Gignac and Szodorai, 2016) as significant (p < .05).
Participant ages ranged from 17 to 65, with a mean (M ) of 19.62 and a standard deviation (SD) =
4.62 (75.5% female; 23.7% male; 0.6% non-binary; 0.2% other). The majority were White (59.7%),
followed by Asian (28.2%), with smaller percentages for other groups (1.8% Black; 1.0 Hispanic; 0.2%
Indigenous; 8.8% Other; 0.2% Prefer not to say). In education terms, 78.7% had completed high school
as their highest level of educational attainment, while the median income was $264 (M = $328.01; SD
= $357.38).
2.2 Survey measures
In addition to the demographic data, participants’ beliefs, expectations, financial perceptions, and cogni-
tive abilities were also tested. The measures relevant to this paper are described as follows.
2.2.1 Susceptibility to financial scams
Susceptibility to Financial Scams Test (SFST). The SFST is a 12-item measure assessing one’s ability
to detect financial scams, drawing primarily on items from Modic et al. (2018). Participants rate items
on a five-point Likert scale, ranging from (1) ‘Very unlikely to be legitimate’ to (5) ‘Very likely to be le-
gitimate’. An example item includes ‘An offer to buy cryptocurrency through an exclusive platform with
the promise of high returns’. For the nine scam items, correct responses (‘Very unlikely’ or ‘Unlikely’)
are scored 1 or .5 respectively; for the three legitimate items, ‘Very likely’ and ‘Likely’ responses are
similarly scored (1 and .5, respectively). All other responses are coded as 0.
Finally, item scores are reversed and averaged, producing a final score between 0 and 1, with higher
scores indicating greater susceptibility to financial scams (SFS). The internal consistency of this measure
was found to be good, with a McDonald’s omega (ω) of .78.
2.2.2 General intelligence
Consistent with Gignac and Stevens (2024), general intelligence (g) was measured via four cognitive
ability tests:
Paper Folding Test (PFT). The PFT is a 20-item measure designed to assess visual-spatial intelli-
gence (French et al., 1963). It features square pieces of paper that are folded between two and four times,
with one or two holes punched through them. Participants are tasked with identifying the spatial arrange-
ment of the holes when the paper is unfolded by selecting from five options. The test consists of two
forms (A and B), each lasting 3.5 minutes and containing 10 items. Participants earn one point for each
correct response, resulting in scores that range from 0 to 20, with higher scores indicating greater visual-
spatial intelligence. The PFT has demonstrated excellent internal reliability and good convergent validity
(Burton and Fogarty, 2003; Dandan and Jin, 2020), while this sample showed an internal consistency of
ω = .84.
Concrete and Abstract Word Synonym Test (CAWST). The CAWST is a 50-item (25 abstract, 25
concrete) measure assessing verbal comprehension by asking participants to select the correct synonym
(out of two available options) for a displayed word within a five-second window (Warrington et al., 1998).
For example, the correct synonym for ‘shed’ would be ‘hut’ and not ‘garage’. A final score ranging from
0 to 50 is then obtained by summing all correct responses (worth one point each), with higher values
indicating stronger verbal comprehension. The CAWST has demonstrated good internal consistency and
convergent validity (Gignac et al., 2023), while the internal consistency derived for this sample was at ω
= .60.
Baddeley 3-Minute Reasoning Test (BRT). The BRT is a 68-item measure of speeded and fluid
reasoning requiring participants to determine the accuracy of two sets of 32 grammatical transformations
on a dichotomous ‘True’ or ‘False’ scale within a 90 second timeframe each (Baddeley, 1968). An
example question includes ‘A comes before B’, with a corresponding answer presented as ‘BA’ (which, in
this case, would be false). Each correct response is worth one point for a possible 64 points in total, with
higher overall scores indicating stronger speeded reasoning ability. The BRT has shown both test-retest
reliability and convergent validity with other intelligence measures (Baghaei et al., 2017; Chamorro-
Premuzic et al., 2006), with a high internal consistency also found in this sample (ω = .93).
Numeracy Test (NT). The NT is a 6-item measure assessing statistical numeracy and risk literacy,
constructed by incorporating items from four established numeracy tests (Cokely et al., 2012; Gigerenzer
et al., 2005; Lipkus et al., 2001; Peters et al., 2007). An example item from Lipkus et al. (2001) asks,
‘Imagine that we rolled a fair, six-sided die 1,000 times. Out of 1,000 rolls, how many times do you
think the die would come up even (2, 4, or 6)?’ with the correct answer being ‘500 out of 1,000’.
The final score is derived by aggregating responses (range: 1–6), where higher values indicate greater
numeracy. Importantly, each individual test has been associated with acceptable reliability (Cokely et al.,
2012). As for this combined measure, internal consistency was found to be very low at ω = .33.
2.2.3 Financial literacy
Financial Literacy Test (FLT). The FLT is an 18-item measure adapted from Gignac and Stevens (2024)
to assess basic financial knowledge. It incorporates items from three previously-established financial
literacy (FL) measures (Allgood and Walstad, 2016; Pinjisakikool, 2018; Ranyard et al., 2020). An
example item from Allgood and Walstad (2016) asks, ‘Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and
the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5 years how much do you think you would have in the account if
you left the money to grow?’ with options: ‘More than $110’ (correct), ‘Exactly $110’, and ‘Less than
$110’.
A final score is derived as the percentage of questions answered correctly (range: 0–100), with higher
scores indicating greater financial literacy. The (original) FLT reported a reliability of ω = .63 (Gignac
and Stevens, 2024), while for this version which includes two additional items from Ranyard et al. (2020)
demonstrated an internal consistency of ω = .59.
2.2.4 Cognitive reflection
Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT). The CRT is a 7-item multiple choice test assessing individual differ-
ences in cognitive reflection (CR) and consists of (all) three items from the New Version of the Cognitive
Reflection Test, as well as the four items from the CRT-2 (Primi et al., 2016; Thomson and Oppenheimer,
2016). This combined test was chosen over the original (Frederick, 2005), as it incorporates both verbal
and numerical reasoning. An example item includes ‘If three elves can wrap three toys in an hour, how
many elves are needed to wrap six toys in two hours?’, with the correct answer being six (and not the
more heuristic response of two).
A final score is calculated as the percentage of correctly answered questions (range: 0–100), with
higher values indicating a greater ability to engage in cognitive reflection. Internal consistency for this
(combined) CRT measure has been recently estimated at ω = .67 (Gignac and Stevens, 2024), while the
current sample achieved a ω = .57.
2.2.5 Grandiose narcissism
Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry Questionnaire (NARQ). The NARQ is an 18-item self-report
scale designed to measure two positively related dimensions of narcissism: Admiration (e.g., ‘I am
great’) and rivalry (‘I want my rivals to fail’; Back et al., 2013). Each item is rated on a six-point scale
ranging from (1) ‘Not agree at all’ to (6) ‘Agree completely’. Each subscale is derived by averaging the
corresponding item responses (range: 1–6), though for the analysis only the admiration dimension was
used. The NARQ has been associated with very good internal consistency (Back et al., 2013), with high
internal consistency also found in this sample (ω = .88).
Attention questions. Each participant was also asked twice over the course of the survey: ‘in one
sentence, describe the sort of statements you were just asked to rate.’ Responses were graded as either
‘True’ or ‘False’, with the former requiring participants to mention at least some aspect of the preceding
test or questionnaire in their answer (e.g., ‘scams’, after the SFS questionnaire). Notably, those who
failed both attention questions were excluded from the final sample. Scored responses between the two
questions was r = .43.
2.3 Procedure
The study was completed entirely online via the university’s School of Psychological Science research
participation system (SONA), with the study’s survey itself hosted on the Qualtrics web-based survey
platform. After providing informed consent (University of Western Australia Human Research Ethics
Committee, 2020/ET000269), each participant was first instructed to answer several demographic ques-
tions. Participants were then tasked with completing the survey’s main questionnaires and tests regarding,
and in the following order: self-rated cognitive intelligence and financial literacy (as compared to other
people), the need for cognition, attitude toward numbers, NARQ, BRT, PFT, numeracy, CAWST, FL, CR,
SFS, susceptibility to the sunk cost effect, general wellbeing, and their financial anxiety and wellbeing.
Overall, the survey took participants between 50 and 60 minutes to complete.
Participants were urged to answer all questions accurately. If they attempted to proceed with unan-
swered questions, a notification showed the number of unanswered questions and offered the choice to
either ‘continue without answering’ or ‘answer the questions. Nevertheless, participants were always
permitted to proceed with the survey regardless of the response(s) they provided.
2.4 Data analytic strategy
All analyses were carried out in R 4.3.2. Associations between the main variables of interest were
computed with Pearson correlations. To test the study’s hypotheses and research question, a structural
equation model (SEM) was employed using the lavaan package, with g, CR, FL, GN, and SFS modelled
as latent variables. For the general intelligence latent variable, the four cognitive ability measures were
aggregated (i.e., ‘parcelled’) as indicators. As for the other four latent variables, item parcels were used
– constructed by aggregating each measure’s items into three broadly-equal thirds.
Model close-fit was assessed to be acceptable via both SRMR and RMSEA (< .08), as well as CFI
and TLI (> .95; Schweizer, 2010). Moreover, the values (or ‘effects’) of the latent variables were derived
through maximum likelihood estimation, with statistical significance of the corresponding standardised
point estimates (95% confidence intervals, p < .05) tested via bias-corrected bootstrapping (2,000 re-
samples).
Finally, and to facilitate the readability of the derived results, the variances for the exogenous la-
tent variables were fixed to one, while the first factor loading for the endogenous latent variables were
restricted to one (Schweizer, 2010).
3 Results
Before carrying out the analyses, the data were examined for outliers. Based on the distribution of the
data, and following an interquartile range rule with a multiplier of 3.0, two outliers were identified for
the CAWST test scores (of 13 and 15, respectively). Accordingly, these outliers were replaced (i.e.,
‘Winsorized’) with the next closest score of 19.
The descriptive statistics and Pearson correlations for the main variables of interest are reported in
in the sample were, on average, less likely to report falling for financial scams. Nevertheless, the corre-
sponding SD of .16 suggested a nontrivial amount of variability, with approximately 16% of participants
reporting a SFS score approaching (or even above) the scale’s midpoint.
The means of both CRT and NARQ (55.68 and 3.17, respectively) were close to the midpoints of their
respective scales, indicating that the sample did not report particularly high or low levels of cognitive
reflection and narcissism. On average, participants answered 61% of the financial literacy questions
correctly, in line with the general population’s reported low levels of financial literacy (Allgood and
Walstad, 2016).
Finally, the PFT, CAWST, BRT, and NT means (of 61.46, 66.95, 54.54, and 65.82, respectively) were
close to their associated scale midpoints, indicating that, on average, the sample performed moderately
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) M SD Skew Kurtosis
(1) SFS (.78) .26 .16 1.86 5.42
(2) BRT -.12 (.93) 54.54 17.05 .09 -.60
(3) PFT -.22 .33 (.84) 61.46 21.01 -.39 -.61
(4) CAWST -.22 .20 .20 (.60) 66.95 8.76 -.16 .42
(5) NT -.06 .21 .38 .28 (.33) 65.82 15.75 -.31 .41
(6) g -.23 .58 .81 .51 .73 (.62) .00 .73 -.09 -.49
(7) FL -.23 .16 .26 .28 .35 .38 (.59) 60.74 15.44 .04 -.29
(8) CR -.15 .32 .40 .24 .40 .52 .33 (.57) 55.68 21.59 -.41 -.21
(9) GN .00 -.05 -.02 -.06 .00 -.04 -.06 -.05 (.88) 3.17 .83 .27 .14
Notes: N = 489; SFS = susceptibility to financial scams; BRT = Baddeley Reasoning Test; PFT = Paperfold Test; CAWST = Concrete
and Abstract Word Synonym Test; NT = Numeracy Test; g = general intelligence; FL = financial literacy; CR = cognitive reflection;
GN = grandiose narcissism; values in parenthesis represent internal consistency reliability (ω); coefficients below the main diagonal are
correlations; values in bold are significant (p < .05).
across the four cognitive ability tests. Notice that for consistency, these ability tests are reported as
percentages of questions answered correctly (range: 0–100).
3.1 Correlation analyses: Observed variables
Turning to the correlations between the observed variables, significant and positive associations were
found between the four cognitive ability measures of PFT, CAWST, BRT, and NT (r = .20–.38), consis-
tent with the expectation of a general factor of intelligence.
Supporting H and H , intelligence significantly and positively correlated with both cognitive re-
1 2
flection (r = .52, 95% CI [.45, .58], p < .001) and financial literacy (r = .38, 95% CI [.30, .46], p <
.001), suggesting that more intelligent individuals tend to be more financially literate and cognitively
reflective. Further, and supporting H , cognitive reflection correlated significantly and positively with
financial literacy (r = .33, 95% CI [.25, .41], p < .001), indicating that people with higher levels of
cognitive reflection tend to also be more financially literate.
Next, and supporting H , H , and H , susceptibility to financial scams correlated statistically and
4 5 6
negatively with intelligence (r = −.23, 95% CI [−.31, −.14], p < .001), cognitive reflection (r = −.15,
95% CI [−.23, −.06], p < .001), and financial literacy (r = −.23, 95% CI [−.31, −.14], p < .001),
suggesting that individuals with higher scam-susceptibility tend to be less intelligent and have lower
levels of cognitive reflection and financial literacy.
With respect to RQ , no statistically significant relationship was found between narcissism and sus-
ceptibility to financial scams (r = .00, 95% CI [−.09, .08], p = .928).
3.2 Bivariate latent variable correlations
Next, the correlations (or ‘total effects’) between the dimensions of interest as latent variables are re-
ported. First, and supporting H and H , the general intelligence latent variable correlated significantly
1 2
and positively with both the cognitive reflection latent variable at r = .86, 95% CI [.76, .95], p < .001,
and the financial literacy latent variable at r = .65, 95% CI [.53, .77], p < .001. Moreover, and support-
ing H , the cognitive reflection latent variable correlated significantly and positively with the financial
literacy latent variable at r = .57, 95% CI [.45, .69], p < .001.
Next, and supporting H , H , and H , the susceptibility to financial scams latent variable was signif-
4 5 6
icantly and negatively correlated with the general intelligence latent variable (r = −.34, 95% CI [−.47,
−.22], p < .001), the cognitive reflection latent variable (r = −.26, 95% CI[−.38, −.13], p < .001),
and the financial literacy latent variable (r = −.36, 95% CI[−.49, −.24], p < .001). Last, and regarding
RQ , the narcissism latent variable was not significantly correlated with the susceptibility to financial
scams latent variables (r = −.03, 95% CI [−.15, .08], p = .592).
As a brief summary, these findings indicate that more intelligent people tend to report higher levels
of financial literacy and cognitive reflection. Moreover, these individuals are less likely to fail to identify
financial scams. However, reporting a higher level of narcissism does not appear to be associated with
being more (or less) susceptible to financial scams.
3.3 Structural equation modelling
there was no direct effect between general intelligence and susceptibility to financial scams, controlling
for the effects of cognitive reflection and financial literacy (β = −.32, 95% CI [−.84, −.19], p = .216),
implying that the previously observed significant total effect between general intelligence and suscepti-
bility to financial scams (i.e., r = −.34) may be due to financial literacy and/or cognitive reflection.
Likewise, and contrary to H , the direct effect between cognitive reflection and susceptibility to
financial scams was not significant, controlling for the effects of general intelligence and financial literacy
(β = .16, 95% CI [−.30, .62], p = .500), suggesting that the significant total effect between cognitive
reflection and susceptibility to financial scams (r = −.26) may be due to financial literacy.
Indeed, and supporting H , a significant and negative direct effect between financial literacy and
susceptibility to financial scams was observed, controlling for the effects of general intelligence and
cognitive reflection (β = −.25, 95% CI [−.46, −.03], p = .026). Note, however, that this beta-weight is
smaller than the total effect between financial literacy and susceptibility to financial scams (r = −.36).
Turning to the mediation hypotheses, and contrary to H , there was no significant indirect effect
between general intelligence and susceptibility to financial scams via cognitive reflection (β = .14, 95%
CI [−.26, .54], p = .505), implying that the significant total effect between general intelligence and
scam-susceptibility (r = −.34) was not mediated by cognitive reflection. However, and supporting
H , a significant indirect effect between intelligence and susceptibility to financial scams via financial
grandiose narcissism and susceptibility to financial scams.
C1.r C2.r C3.r N1.r N2.r N3.r
.70 .56 .66 .40 .42 .32
CR.p1 CR.p2 CR.p3 GN.p1 GN.p2 GN.p3
.66 .76
.54 .59 .78 .82
.82
C.r CAWST
CR GN
.43
SFS.p1
.86 .16 S1.r
.68 .54
.63 -.06
P.r PFT .61
.05
-.32 .63
SFS.p2
SFS S2.r
.61
.81
.44
B.r BRT
.61 -.25
.71
SFS.p3
S3.r
.60
.49
.64
FL
N.r NT
.51 .60
.59
FL.p1 FL.p2 FL.p3
.74 .65 .65
F1.r F2.r F3.r
Notes: N = 489; g = general intelligence; CR = cognitive reflection; FL = financial literacy; GN = grandiose narcissism; SFS = susceptibility to financial
scams; all parameter estimates are standardised; coefficients in bold are statistically significant (p < .05).
literacy was observed (β = −.15, 95% CI [−.31, −.01], p = .039), indicating that the significant total
effect between intelligence and scam-susceptibility was mediated by financial literacy. Overall, note
183.17, p < .001, CFI = .948, TLI = .935, RMSEA = .043, SRMR = .045. Additionally, the percentage
of susceptibility to financial scams true score variance accounted for by the model was 16.2% (R = .16,
95% CI [.11, .21], p < .001).
3.4 Supplementary model
Given the very substantial association between the intelligence and cognitive reflection latent variables
(r = .86), there was likely unacceptable levels of multicollinearity in the model, which may have im-
pacted the stability of the results (i.e., unstable point-estimates; inflated standard errors). Consequently,
a supplementary model was tested where the CRT was simply specified as an indicator of the intelligence
As can be seen, and once again contrary to H , there was no direct effect between intelligence and
susceptibility to financial scams, controlling for the effects of financial literacy (β = −.15, 95% CI [−.36,
.05], p = .132). However, and supporting H , a significant and negative direct effect between financial
literacy and susceptibility to financial scams was observed, controlling for the effects of intelligence (β
= -.27, 95% CI [−.48, −.06], p = .013).
Finally, supporting H , a significant indirect effect between intelligence and susceptibility to finan-
cial scams via financial literacy was found (β = −.17, 95% CI [−.32, −.03], p = .017), once again
suggesting that the significant total effect between intelligence and scam-susceptibility was mediated by
financial literacy.
The supplementary model was associated with acceptable levels of model close-fit χ (72) = 150.04,
p < .001, CFI = .948, TLI = .934, RMSEA = .047, SRMR = .046. The percentage of susceptibility to
financial scams true score variance accounted for by the model was 14.9% (R = .15, 95% CI [.11, .19],
p < .001).
susceptibility to financial scams.
N1.r N2.r N3.r
.40 .42 .32
GN.p1 GN.p2 GN.p3
.76
.80
C.r CAWST
.78 .82
.45 GN
.63
SFS.p1
S1.r
P.r PFT
.68 .54
-.06
.61
.82 -.15 .63
SFS.p2
B.r BRT SFS S2.r
.42 .61
.65 -.27
.65
.60
.71
N.r NT
SFS.p3
S3.r
.50
.60 FL
.65
.51 .60
CR.r CRT
.59
FL.p1 FL.p2 FL.p3
.74 .65 .65
F1.r F2.r F3.r
Notes: N = 489; g = general intelligence; FL = financial literacy; GN = grandiose narcissism; SFS = susceptibility to financial scams; all parameter estimates
are standardised; coefficients in bold are statistically significant (p < .05).
4 Discussion
The increasing prevalence of financial scams, particularly among younger individuals presumed to be
at their cognitive peak, necessitates a deeper psychological understanding of scam-susceptibility. Previ-
ous research has identified intelligence, cognitive reflection, financial literacy, and grandiose narcissism
as predictors of financial capability across various contexts. Therefore, it is plausible that these fac-
tors may also influence an individual’s susceptibility to financial scams. Consequently, this study aimed
to investigate whether these factors uniquely predicted scam-susceptibility among university students
– in addition to examining the associations between intelligence, financial literacy, and cognitive re-
flection. As hypothesised, these three factors were indeed found to be positively correlated with each
other, and negatively associated with susceptibility to financial scams. However, only financial literacy
demonstrated a unique association with scam-susceptibility. Contrary to the study’s research question,
grandiose narcissism did not correlate with susceptibility to financial scams. Each of these results will
now be discussed in further detail.
4.1 Intelligence, cognitive reflection, and financial literacy (H , H , and H )
1 2 3
Supporting H , the correlation between intelligence and cognitive reflection was positive and relatively
large (r = .52) according to normative individual differences guidelines (r = |.20|; Gignac and Szodorai,
2016), consistent albeit slightly smaller than the effect size found in a prior meta-analysis (Otero et al.,
2022). Methodologically, this discrepancy may be attributed to potential ceiling effects due to the pop-
ularity of the CRT (Thomson and Oppenheimer, 2016). Nevertheless, this relationship suggests that an
individual’s intelligence influences their cognitive capabilities.
Supporting H , the correlation between intelligence and financial literacy was also positive and rel-
atively large (r = .38), aligning with a recent meta-analysis that observed a similar effect size (Callis
et al., 2023). Therefore, assuming that intelligence influences financial literacy (rather than the reverse),
it is evident that individual differences in financial literacy are impacted by general cognitive ability.
Finally, supporting H , the correlation between cognitive reflection and financial literacy was positive
and relatively large (r = .33), consistent with prior research findings (Mun˜oz-Murillo et al., 2020).
Theoretically, individuals with high cognitive reflective abilities possess more intuitive and analytical
skills (Go´mez-Chaco´n et al., 2014) and demonstrate an enhanced capacity for analytical thinking in
financial contexts (Comerford, 2024).
Overall, these findings collectively underscore the interconnectedness of intelligence, cognitive re-
flection, and financial literacy. However, it is important to note that other non-cognitive abilities (such as
personality) may also influence learning capacity (Kautz et al., 2014), potentially affecting these asso-
ciations. Therefore, future studies could consider controlling for individual differences in non-cognitive
abilities.
4.2 Intelligence and susceptibility to financial scams (H , H , H , and H )
4 7 10 11
Supporting H , a moderate correlation (r = −.23) was found between intelligence and susceptibility to
financial scams. Notably, this effect size was smaller than in previous studies (r = −.54; Pinsker and
McFarland, 2010), possibly due to the younger sample in this research. Theoretically, older adults tend
to accumulate more general knowledge (Sandberg et al., 2016), which enhances confidence in financial
decision-making (Finke et al., 2016) and reduces susceptibility to scams (Mueller et al., 2020). However,
cognitive ability and financial literacy may better explain the specific skills and knowledge required for
informed financial decisions (Lin and Bates, 2022).
Indeed, after controlling for cognitive reflection and financial literacy, the relationship between in-
telligence and susceptibility to financial scams became statistically nonsignificant, contrary to H . This
suggests that cognitive reflection and/or financial literacy may better explain the impact of intelligence
on scam-susceptibility, though caution should be exercised when interpreting this result due to potential
multicollinearity introduced by including both intelligence and cognitive reflection in the SEM (Hae,
2019).
Contrary to H , cognitive reflection did not mediate the association between intelligence and suscep-
tibility to financial scams, implying that intelligence was not indirectly associated with scam-susceptibility
via cognitive reflection. The lack of mediation could be attributed to measurement issues with the com-
monly used CRT (Tjøstheim and Waterworth, 2024). Future studies may therefore consider alternative
measures when examining this proposed mediation channel.
Supporting H , a small but significant negative indirect effect (β = −.15) was observed, indicating
that financial literacy mediates the relationship between intelligence and scam-susceptibility. Notably,
this finding extends the observation that increased financial literacy can reduce scam-susceptibility in
older adults to younger individuals as well (Sur et al., 2023). Theoretically, higher intelligence is asso-
ciated with greater adaptability to acquire financial knowledge (Nepal et al., 2023), which may, in turn,
reduce scam-susceptibility (Burke et al., 2022).
Finally, given the strong association between intelligence and cognitive reflection, a supplementary
model specifying CRT as an indicator of the intelligence latent variable was analysed. This model further
supported H , revealing a significant indirect effect between intelligence and susceptibility to financial
scams via financial literacy (β = −.17) and reinforcing the mediating role of financial literacy in the
relationship between intelligence and scam-susceptibility. Theoretically, lower intelligence is associated
with riskier decision strategies (Brand et al., 2009), potentially leading to greater risk-taking behaviours
and increased scam-susceptibility. However, the restricted range of intelligence, cognitive reflection, and
financial literacy in this student sample may limit the generalisability of these results, highlighting the
need for further research with more diverse populations.
4.3 Cognitive reflection and susceptibility to financial scams (H and H )
5 8
Supporting H , the study found a small but significant negative correlation between cognitive reflection
and susceptibility to financial scams (r = −.15). This correlation, while similar in direction, was smaller
in magnitude compared to earlier research (r = −.34; Han et al., 2016). Nevertheless, this finding
reinforces the notion that higher cognitive ability may serve as a protective factor against fraudulent
schemes. Theoretically, individuals who engage in more reflective thinking tend to scrutinise information
more carefully before making decisions (Mamede and Schmidt, 2023). While previous research has
indicated that older adults are more adept at focusing attention and ignoring distractions when making
such decisions (Ver´ıssimo et al., 2022), the current findings extend this concept to younger individuals.
This suggests that the protective effect of cognitive reflection against financial scams may also apply to
younger populations, though potentially manifesting differently. For example, the smaller correlation
observed in this sample may be explained by age-related factors, warranting further investigation into
how these processes develop and change over the lifespan.
Interestingly, after controlling for intelligence and financial literacy, no statistically significant rela-
tionship was found between cognitive reflection and susceptibility to financial scams, contrary to H .
This suggests that the association between cognitive reflection and scam-susceptibility may be largely
explained by intelligence and/or financial literacy. Theoretically, the reliance on heuristics by individuals
with low cognitive reflection in decision-making may be mitigated by greater financial literacy (Pitthan
and De Witte, 2024) or reasoning abilities (Kelley et al., 2023). Therefore, this finding underscores the
importance of controlling for intelligence and financial literacy when examining scam-susceptibility in
future studies, as these factors may play a more significant role than previously thought.
4.4 Financial literacy and susceptibility to financial scams (H and H )
6 9
Supporting H , the correlation between financial literacy and susceptibility to financial scams was neg-
ative and small (r = −.23), consistent with previous studies (r = −.28; James et al., 2014). This
consistency is perhaps particularly noteworthy given the population difference between this study (uni-
versity students) and prior research (older adults), suggesting a robust relationship across age groups.
Theoretically, financial literacy may act as a protective mechanism against fraud through the increased
sophistication to detect fraud (Engels et al., 2020) or increased prudence when making financial decisions
(Blackwell et al., 2024). Further studies are required to understand these potential mechanisms.
Notably, this relationship persisted even after controlling for intelligence and cognitive reflection (β
= −.25), supporting H and further highlighting the unique contribution of financial literacy in reducing
scam-susceptibility. The marginal increase in effect size when controlling for intelligence and cognitive
reflection suggests that financial literacy’s influence on scam-susceptibility operates independently of
these other cognitive factors.
However, the relatively moderate effect size indicates that while financial literacy is important, it is
likely just one of several factors influencing scam-susceptibility. Theoretically, as social and affective
cognitive skills are also associated with scam-susceptibility (Walzak and Thornton, 2022), future research
may consider including such factors for more comprehensive models of vulnerability.
4.5 Grandiose narcissism and susceptibility to financial scams (RQ )
In response to RQ , no statistically significant relationship emerged between grandiose narcissism and
susceptibility to financial scams. Theoretically, as narcissistic attitudes are known to lower sensitivity
to detect cues of fraudulent activity (Hart et al., 2021), it is possible that the effects of cognitive ability
on scam-susceptibility may not be influenced by personality traits, or could be scam context-dependent
and therefore not captured in this study (Whitty, 2020). Future studies are required to examine these
possibilities.
4.6 Limitations and future research directions
Beyond the limitations already highlighted above, future research may want to address several further
considerations. First, using the FLT, rather than one eliciting scam-specific literacy, may not fully cap-
ture the likely nuanced knowledge required to discern various types of financial scams (Whitty, 2020).
Likewise, the scam items in the SFST may have failed to capture the varying vulnerabilities to different
types of fraud. Furthermore, the self-report nature of both these measures may be subject to response
biases (van de Mortel, 2008), potentially reducing measurement accuracy.
Second, the convenience sample of university students limits generalisability. While recent studies
suggest a wider range of intelligence levels in such cohorts (Uttl et al., 2024), financial literacy may still
be influenced by factors such as gender and faculty (Ergu¨n, 2018), potentially exaggerating the negative
effects of financial literacy on scam-susceptibility.
Last, the cross-sectional nature of the study naturally precludes causal inferences, making it difficult
to establish the direction of relationships between variables. Instead, employing longitudinal designs, in
addition to extending the study to a wider population, incorporating scam-specific literacy measures, and
considering a broader range of personality factors and situational variables, would likely provide a more
comprehensive understanding of scam-susceptibility.
4.7 Implications and concluding remarks
This study attempts to advance the understanding of the cognitive and personality factors influencing
young adults’ susceptibility to financial scams by investigating intelligence, cognitive reflection, finan-
cial literacy, and grandiose narcissism jointly. A key finding, and perhaps a novel one, is that financial lit-
eracy uniquely and negatively associates with scam-susceptibility, suggesting that cognitive factors may
be particularly important in determining a person’s vulnerability. Notably, this result also contributes to
theories of scamming vulnerability (Langenderfer and Shimp, 2001), while carrying promising impli-
cations for fraud prevention efforts, particularly as financial literacy is more amenable to intervention
compared to perhaps more enduring cognitive and personality traits (Gerl et al., 2020; Lusardi, 2019).
Additionally, potential policy implications may include targeting financial education recommenda-
tions toward vulnerable cohorts (ASIC, 2023), potentially through banks to encourage critical evaluation
of financial transactions (van Zoonen et al., 2024). Furthermore, possible therapeutic implications could
involve framing financial education within the context of enhancing overall well-being, addressing both
financial literacy and scam-susceptibility (Stewart et al., 2023; Sur et al., 2023). Ultimately, as financial
scams continue to evolve, this study lays perhaps the groundwork for developing more effective preven-
tion strategies and educational programs, in addition to highlighting the importance of ongoing research
to safeguard individuals and promote financial well-being.