MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 1
What‘s the Matter? Assessing Levels of Psychological Mattering and Extracurricular
Involvement in Students at Dalhousie University
Megan Sponagle
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University
PSYO 4901
Dr. Sean Mackinnon and Taylor Hill
April 5th, 2024
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 2
Abstract
Introduction: Mattering, defined as the extent to which an individual feels they are significant
and important, is associated with well-being. The university setting provides emerging adults
with the opportunity to develop their identity by exploring new experiences and interests,
including by participating in extracurricular activities. In this study, we investigate whether
there is a positive relationship between extracurricular participation and feelings of mattering.
Methods: Undergraduate students (N = 384) at Dalhousie University completed an online
survey measuring extracurricular involvement (using the Dalhousie Extracurricular Involvement
Survey) and feelings of mattering. Most participants were women (78%), living off-campus with
roommates (45%), and in their second-year of study (36%). The Dalhousie Extracurricular
Involvement Survey asked students about the types of extracurriculars they were involved in,
the number of hours of participation, and words to describe how they felt when being involved.
Data were analyzed with Spearman's correlations and visualized using scatterplots.
Results: 59% of participants were involved in extracurricular activities, with the highest
proportion of the total sample involved in academic societies (21%). The results indicated weak
but significant positive correlations between total hours involved in extracurricular activities,
general and interpersonal mattering, and a moderate correlation between involvement and
university mattering.
Discussion: These results can be used to provide valuable information that universities can use
to develop initiatives that reduce stress and promote well-being on campus, and investigate
whether extracurricular involvement can be used as a potential intervention to improve
mattering in university students.
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 3
Introduction
University is a stressful time for many students. A study from the American College
Health Association (2019) found 88.2% of students felt overwhelmed with their academic
workload while in university. Feelings of being overwhelmed (a stress response) negatively
influences well-being in students (Barbayannis et al., 2022); however, social support can
strengthen well-being (Mo et al., 2022). When students feel supported, they are more likely to
have higher levels of self-esteem, socioemotional adjustment, and psychological well-being
(Yusof et al., 2022). Social support could be a precursor to mattering because they both relate
to an individual’s perceived level of importance to others (Elliott et al., 2004). Understanding
how students experience mattering is important for universities so they can develop programs
which incorporate these measures to promote student well-being. The purpose of this study is
to investigate levels of mattering and extracurricular involvement in students at Dalhousie
University, to inform efforts aiming to promote well-being in university.
What is Mattering?
The term mattering was coined by Rosenberg and McCullough in 1981 (as cited in Casale
& Flett, 2020) and refers to an individual’s perceived level of significance. Mattering can be
separated into different types, depending on the domain of life it refers to. General mattering is
an individual’s perceived level of significance when taking into consideration all relationships,
situations, locations and experiences they have had across their lifetime (Flett, 2018). In
contrast, a more specific type of mattering is interpersonal mattering, which considers an
individual’s perceived significance in reference to their close relationships, such as friends and
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 4
family (Moschella & Banyard, 2021). University mattering refers to students’ perceived feelings
of importance in reference to their university community (Marcus & Rosenberg, 1987).
The psychological construct of mattering has evolved since its original conceptualization.
After a period of neglect (Dixon, 2016; Flett, 2018), there has recently been a resurgence of
interest in the concept of mattering (Flett, 2022). Rosenberg and McCullough (1981, as cited in
Casale & Flett, 2020) originally described general mattering as consisting of three components,
known as the 3-factor model of mattering: awareness, reliance, and importance. Awareness
refers to an individual’s perceived level that others pay attention to them, such as when a
person notices that you enter a room. Reliance is an individual’s perceived level of how much
others need and rely on them, for instance, when another individual asks for your support.
Importance consists of an individual’s perceived level of others’ concern for them, such as when
others prioritize spending quality time with you. Rosenberg (1985; as cited in Casale & Flett,
2020) added a fourth factor, suggesting that mattering is influenced by whether an individual
feels others would miss them if they were no longer there. A fifth factor was added by
Schlossberg in 1989 (as cited in Casale & Flett, 2020), that feelings of mattering are influenced
by whether an individual feels others appreciate them and what they do. The 5 factors of
mattering speak to its importance in our lives. Flett (2018) encompasses this by saying “you
cannot understand someone without having a sense of whether they feel as though they
matter, and of how much they need to matter” (p. 4).
Mattering and Wellbeing
Generally, the feeling of mattering is associated with higher well-being. Scarpa et al.,
(2021) found that general mattering was predictive of higher overall, interpersonal, community,
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 5
occupational, physical well-being, psychological, and economic well-being. This means that
mattering impacts many different domains of an individual’s life and health, consistent with the
positive relationship between mattering and holistic well-being (Paradisi et al., 2024). A study
by Giangrasso et al., (2021) found university students with higher levels of general mattering
were more likely to be satisfied with their life, than those with lower feelings of mattering. The
relationship between mattering and well-being demonstrates its importance for research.
Generally, people want to live happy and healthy lives, and studying ways to improve levels of
mattering supports this goal.
People report wanting to be confident that they are significant and meaningful to the
other people near them and tend to orient their actions around accomplishing these goals
(Dixon et al., 2009; Elliott et al., 2004). In this sense, mattering may influence social
relationships, by making people more likely to feel they matter when the people around them
are supportive and caring (Elliot et al., 2004). Perceived social support may explain the boost to
well-being that is associated with mattering (Foo & Prihadi, 2021). For instance, Elliot et al.,
(2004) found a positive correlation between mattering and an individual’s perceived amount of
social support. Importantly, it was the perceptions of social support that were linked to
mattering, not the actual amount of social support an individual had (Elliot et al., 2004).
Similarly, it is an individual’s perception of how much they feel they matter that influences well-
being, not how important they actually are. These studies show that mattering plays a
contributing role in an individual’s social well-being.
Psychosocial Benefits of Extracurricular Participation
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 6
Most university students are developmentally classified as emerging adults (Arnett,
2015), and are likely to consider questions about their importance and significance, given the
identity exploration processes characteristic of this developmental stage (Wood et al., 2017).
Emerging adulthood offers “the most opportunity for identity development in the areas of love,
work and worldviews” (Wood et al., 2017, p. 124). One way young adults begin to form their
identity is by trying new interests, which can be achieved through participating in
extracurricular activities (Higgins, 2006). Extracurricular activities are defined as activities that
occur within the university community but are not connected to the content of an academic
course (Ribeiro et al., 2023). Involvement in extracurricular activities has been linked to many
positive outcomes, such as developing skills for future jobs, and improved academic
achievement (Ribeiro et al., 2023), and may also contribute to students’ feelings of significance
in reference to their university community (Moschella & Baynard, 2021).
Previous research has examined extracurricular activities that can be classified as social,
prosocial, athletic, or administrative in nature, and have been investigated in the context of
mattering. Through interviews with students, Klug (2008) showed that students feel more
significant when they feel that others know them, recognize their potential, and are supportive
in times of need.
Prilleltensky et al., (2023) reports mattering as being a cycle of both “feeling valued” and
“adding value” (p. 202). This “adding value” component “requires that individuals contribute,
participate, and make a difference.” People add value through activities, such as caring for,
serving and advocating for others, volunteering, and participating in community activities
(Prilleltensky et al., 2023). Prosocial activities are those where participants freely help another
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 7
human being, such as volunteering, fundraising for charities, and community service (Eisenberg
et al., 2006). While not explicitly linked in the context of mattering, prosocial behavior fits the
examples provided by Prilleltensky et al. (2023) and is positively associated with feelings of life
meaning and well-being, similar to mattering (Baumsteiger, 2019). For instance, students
involved in executive or administrative committees reported high levels of university mattering
and felt they contributed to the greater university community. Students involved in university
sports and clubs also felt they mattered more to their university, particularly when their role
entailed aspects of leadership, as they felt others relied on them to fulfill their needs (Klug,
2008). Interestingly, students explained that mattering arose from the meaningful relationships
in these activities, rather than the content of the activities themselves, or the focus of the
university club itself (Klug, 2008).
Other studies have looked at the influence of other on-campus supports, initiatives, and
activities on levels of mattering at university. Shine et al., (2021) identified that accessibility of
university resources (e.g., advising, study spaces, clubs, housing, healthcare) predicted
mattering and had a moderate positive correlation to well-being. This finding was also
identified in Black students by Oliveria (2017) who demonstrated accessibility to a multicultural
center positively contributed to feelings of mattering, most prominent in students who were
highly engaged in the multicultural center. These findings show that university involvement,
such as participating in extracurricular activities is associated with well-being, which in turn is
associated with mattering.
Rationale
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 8
Understanding levels of mattering in students at Dalhousie University may guide future
research on ways to improve well-being on-campus. Results from prior literature show
increased resilience, engagement and decreased stress while on- and off-campus for students
with high mattering (Flett et al., 2019). Both prosocial behavior and mattering have been
associated with higher levels of well-being and perceived life purpose, making these important
constructs to cultivate in university students (Baumsteiger, 2019; Marshall, 2001; Matera et al.,
2021). Assessing the types of extracurricular activities most strongly correlated to mattering will
inform university societies, allowing them to select the most impactful activities for students to
improve levels of mattering on campus. Accordingly, the goal of this study is to assess levels of
mattering and extracurricular involvement at Dalhousie University.
I expect there will be a positive correlation between mattering and extracurricular
involvement, because of the relationships and effect sizes reported in the literature between
mattering, well-being, social support, and feelings of belonging (Christison, 2013; Casale & Flett,
2020; Elliot et al., 2004). For instance, Shine et al., (2021) found levels of university mattering
and overall well-being were moderately positively correlated.
H1: Levels of extracurricular involvement will be positively correlated to levels of all types of
mattering (general, interpersonal, and university).
I expect that scores of general, interpersonal, and university mattering will be
significantly, moderately and positively correlated with the level of prosocial activity
involvement. I predict this relationship will be slightly stronger than non-prosocial
extracurricular activities because prior literature shows well-being (e.g., meaning in life) is
correlated to both prosocial behavior, and mattering (Baumsteiger, 2019; Dakin et al., 2022;
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 9
Matera et al., 2021; Marshall, 2001). For instance, an intra-class correlation of 0.48 was found
between feelings of daily meaning and levels of prosocial behavior (Dakin et al., 2022).
H2: Involvement in prosocial extracurricular activities will be associated with higher levels of all
types of mattering (general, interpersonal, and university).
The results of this study will help us better understand levels of mattering in students at
Dalhousie University, whether those who participate in extracurriculars more experience higher
well-being, and whether future research is needed to investigate other on-campus supports to
improve levels of mattering overtime. I will be able to see if there is a stronger correlational
relationship between mattering and certain types of activities, which could guide future
research studies to examine whether extracurricular involvement could be a potential
intervention to better mattering in university students.
Methods
Participants
To participate, students had to be registered as a part- or full-time undergraduate
student at Dalhousie University. The target sample size (N = 355) was calculated using a
precision analysis (by evaluating prior correlations in the psychological literature, which is on
average, r = .21; Richard et al., 2003). This sample size is required to obtain a 95% confidence
interval with a half-width of ± .10, which will be sufficient to interpret correlations of 0.20 or
larger. Overall, 454 Dalhousie students participated in this study. I continued to collect data
past the target sample size until December 10th 2023, leading to a sample size larger than
initially targeted. About 7% (N = 70) of these participants were excluded because they chose to
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 10
be observers and not have their data recorded, leaving our study with a sample size of 384
in the results section.
Measures
Students completed an online survey which consisted of five measures described below
and began with demographic questions. Students had the option to select “Prefer not to
answer” if they did not want to complete a question, on all scales except for demographics and
the Dalhousie Extracurricular Involvement Survey. If the student chooses not to answer a
question (by selecting “Prefer not to answer”), their response to that specific question was
considered missing. All measures, including all those not analyzed in the present study are
Demographics
Open-ended questions included age and proportions of in-person, hybrid, and online
classes taken within the past year. Closed-ended questions included: gender identity; year of
undergraduate degree; race; location of study (remote, hybrid, or in-person); international or
first-generation student status; current living arrangement; full-time or part-time registration;
and membership in a sorority or fraternity.
Dalhousie Extracurricular Involvement Survey
I created the Dalhousie Extracurricular Involvement Survey for this study to measure
levels of extracurricular involvement in participants. I began by creating a list of extracurricular
activities by looking at Dalhousie University's society and sports websites. The societies were
pre-categorized into groups based on topics on Dalhousie’s Student Union website (e.g., Arts
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 11
Music & Media Societies, Constituent Societies, Faculty Societies; Dalhousie Student Union,
2023). I organized sports extracurriculars into categories based on level and type of activity
(e.g., Intramural Sports Groups, Sports Clubs/Societies, Recreational or Varsity Teams;
Dalhousie Tigers, 2023; Dalhousie University, n.d.-a, n.d.-b). Categories are presented in
alphabetical order, beginning with sports, then followed by ratified societies. All activities listed
on Dalhousie’s Student Union and Athletics websites were included. In the chance that an
extracurricular was not listed on Dalhousie’s websites, the survey concluded with a category
“other on-campus activities”, where students could complete the proceeding questions in
reference to this missing extracurricular. For each category of extracurriculars, students were
presented with a list including activities, and asked if they had participated in any of the
activities on the list within the past year. If students responded yes, they were asked a series of
follow up questions: a) the number of activities in this category that they have participated in,
b) a percentage of meetings, events or practices they have attended for the extracurriculars in
this category, c) the number of hours they spent participating in the extracurriculars in this
category over the past month, d) three words that describe how participating in these activities
makes the individual feel, and e) the amount of helping or serving others involved in the
activity. If participants responded no (to participating in any extracurricular activities in that
category), the proceeding questions were skipped, and the survey continued to questions
about the next category of extracurricular activities. The survey does not ask students to
identify the specific name of extracurricular activities they have participated in to protect the
identity of respondents and activities.
General Mattering Scale
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 12
The General Mattering Scale is used to measure an individual’s perceived level of
significance they have to others, when looking at all domains across their life (Flett et al., 2021;
General Mattering Scale, 1981). The scale includes 5 items (e.g., “How important are you to
others?”) using a 4-point scale, with options “1= Not at all”, “2= A little”, “3= Somewhat” or “4=
A lot” (General Mattering Scale, 1981). The General Mattering Scale was created by Marcus &
Rosenberg (1987). Previous studies that have used this scale have reported its factorial validity,
and high internal consistency (Dixon et al., 2009; Flett et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023). Higher
scores reflected higher levels of an individual's perceived significance to the people around
them (Flett et al., 2021; Marcus & Rosenberg, 1987). This scale is important to measure student
levels in mattering in a more general sense, when not being considered in the context of a
specific situation or relationship in the student’s life (Dixon et al., 2009).
Interpersonal Mattering Scale
Moschella and Banyard’s (2021) shortened version of the Interpersonal Mattering Scale
was used to measure participants’ perceived levels of mattering in their close relationships. This
scale follows the 3-factor model of mattering by assessing levels of awareness, importance and
reliance. The shortened interpersonal mattering scale includes 12 statements across a 5-point
scale, where 1 represents “Strongly disagree” and 5 represents “Strongly agree.” Students were
asked to consider the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with each statement (e.g.,
“Most people do not seem to notice when I come or when I go”) when considering their close
relationships in the Dalhousie University community. The shortened interpersonal mattering
scale was found to have high levels of criterion validity and a strong correlation between the
subscales in the shortened and original scales. Moschella and Banyard (2021) report acceptable
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 13
reliability between the shortened and original scales, shown by Cronbach's alpha values of 0.87
(awareness), 0.89 (importance), and 0.86 (reliance).
University Mattering Scale
Moschella and Banyard’s (2021) shortened version of the University Mattering Scale was
included to measure students’ perceived feelings of mattering in reference to the Dalhousie
University community. Similar to the Interpersonal Mattering Scale, the University Mattering
Scale is broken into 3 subscales- awareness, importance and reliance. The scale contains 10
statements (e.g., “The majority of people at my university recognize me”), rated on a 6-point
scale ranging from 1 = “Strongly disagree” to 6 = “Strongly agree” based on how much the
student feels the statement applies to their life over the past year. Moschella and Banyard
(2021) also found the shortened and original scales were strongly correlated, showing criterion
validity. Cronbach's alpha values demonstrated acceptable reliability for the shortened
interpersonal (0.87 (awareness), 0.89 (importance), and 0.86 (reliance)) and university
mattering scales (0.89 (awareness), 0.87 (importance), and 0.85 (reliance)) (Moschella &
Banyard, 2021). Since university students tend to have very busy schedules, we chose to use
the shortened version of the Interpersonal and University mattering scales to reduce
participant burden. These versions were found to have satisfactory internal consistency and
were consistent in criterion validity (Moschella & Banyard, 2021).
Procedure
Prior to conducting research, this study was approved by Dalhousie University’s
Research Ethics Board for Social Sciences and Humanities (#2023-6841). Participant recruitment
ran from October 27th, 2023 until December 10th, 2023 using Dalhousie’s undergraduate
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 14
participant pool (SONA) system, and through poster advertisements. Dalhousie’s SONA system
allows students enrolled in specified courses to participate in research studies in exchange for
bonus points. Physical posters were advertised around Dalhousie’s Studley and Carleton
campuses.
Students who saw a poster contacted the researchers and were sent the survey link by
email. They were compensated with a $10 (CAD) Amazon gift certificate. Students who
registered through Dalhousie’s SONA bonus point system were emailed the link to the survey.
They were compensated by receiving half a bonus point (0.5) towards an applicable psychology
class of their choice, or they could choose to receive the same cash prize as the non-SONA
sample.
The online survey was created and released on the platform SurveyMonkey, hosted on a
Canadian server. The measures in this survey were combined with another study which
measured perfectionistic tendencies and academic outcomes. The survey (including measures
from both studies) was estimated to take half an hour (30 minutes) to complete. After clicking
the link to the survey, students were first presented with the consent form and an overview of
the research study, including potential risks, benefits and discomforts. Students were asked for
their consent across different levels: consent to participate (with the option to exit the survey
at any time prior to submitting it; N = 454), whether they’d like to have their data shared in an
open-access repository (N= 372) or whether they’d like their data to be destroyed after the
survey and not considered in the analysis (N = 70). Students were then asked if they preferred
to be compensated with half (0.5) a bonus point to an applicable class of their choice, or a $10
Amazon gift card. Students could still receive course credit or the gift card if they chose to have
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 15
their data destroyed after participation. Participants then completed all measures in the study:
demographics, the Dalhousie Extracurricular Involvement Survey, General Mattering Scale,
Need Satisfaction Scale, Interpersonal Mattering Scale, University Mattering Scale and scales
used for the other study on perfectionistic tendencies and academic outcomes. After the
participant submitted the survey, they were sent an email containing the $10 Amazon gift card,
or the SONA system added a half bonus point to their course.
Results
Data Analysis Plan
Data analyses were conducted by observing correlational relationships between
quantitative variables (levels of extracurricular involvement and prosocial activity involvement
and levels of general, interpersonal and university mattering). Levels of extracurricular
involvement were measured through responses to the survey question: “Approximately how
many hours per month have you been involved with these extracurricular activities?” Sums of
responses from each extracurricular activity were used to calculate an overall value for
extracurricular involvement for each student.
Level of prosocial activity involvement was computed according to the results of the
survey question: “How much time are these extracurricular activities involved in helping or
serving others?” Response options “0-25%”, “26-50%”, “51-75%” and “76-100%” were coded 1,
2, 3, and 4, respectively. A value to represent average level of prosocial activity was calculated
for each student through summation of the ranks in each extracurricular category a student has
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 16
been involved in, divided by the total number of categories they have been involved in (sum of
ranks/total number of categories).
Levels of general, interpersonal, and university mattering were measured as average
scores on the general mattering, shortened interpersonal mattering, and shortened university
mattering scales respectively, where higher average scores show higher levels of mattering.
Items that were reverse coded in the shortened interpersonal mattering, and shortened
university mattering scales were recoded so higher scores were still associated with higher
levels of mattering.
R 4.3.1 was used for statistical analyses and data visualization. Participation in each
extracurricular category was reported using proportions and percentages of the sample.
Descriptive statistics for levels of general, interpersonal and university mattering, and
extracurricular and prosocial activity involvement were calculated using means and standard
deviations. The frequency of words associated with involvement in extracurriculars were
calculated to create a word cloud.
Relationships between all types of mattering, extracurricular and prosocial activity
involvement were analyzed using Spearman’s correlations. Spearman’s correlations are non-
parametric (the data does not need to follow a normal distribution) and analyze a monotonic
relationship (variables change at different rates) between two numerical variables. The strength
of the relationship is determined by calculating the spearman’s correlation coefficient ⍴.
Correlations between variables are also displayed using scatterplots.
Demographics
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 17
were women, 71 were men, 8 were nonbinary, and 10 reported their gender as unspecified.
Most participants self-reported their ethnicity as White (73.4%), followed by South Asian
(8.6%), Middle Eastern (7%), East Asian (6%), Black (4.4%), Southeast Asian (2.9%), Indigenous
to North America (2.6%), Latino (1.8%), and other (1.8%). Most students heard about the survey
through Dalhousie’s SONA bonus point system (58.1%), and were studying full time (97%), and
on-campus (94%). The highest proportion of students were studying 2nd year (36%), followed
by 1st year (26%), 3rd year (19%), 4th year (14%), 5th year (3.8%) and 6th year or above (1.6%).
Most participants were not first-generation (80%), nor international students (84.6%). The most
common living arrangement was living off-campus with roommates (45%), and 1.6% of our
sample was involved in a sorority or fraternity.
Descriptive Statistics
percentages of extracurricular involvement, the total number of hours involved in Dalhousie
extracurricular activities, the average percentage of involvement and average levels of general,
interpersonal, and university mattering.
Dalhousie Extracurricular Activity Involvement
Proportions and percentages of involvement in each extracurricular club category are
sample size (N = 384), since participants could be involved in more than one extracurricular
category. The highest involvement occurred in academic societies, with 80 out of the 384
students (21%) participating in this extracurricular group. The lowest involvement was in skill
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 18
development groups, where only four students participated (1.1%). 158 of the 384 participants
in our sample (41%) were not involved in any campus extracurricular activities.
Words Associated with Involvement in Extracurriculars
For each extracurricular category a student was involved in, they provided three words
to represent how participating in these activities makes them feel. Using these responses, we
created a word cloud to visually represent how Dalhousie students feel when participating in
fulfilled (93), excited (83), stressed (63), fun (38), included (37), involved (33), relaxed (32),
helpful (20), and social (19).
Descriptive Statistics
The average student reported spending 17 hours per month involved in Dalhousie
extracurricular activities, however this variable had large variability, ranging from 1 to 154
hours (SD = 20). Students who reported they spent 0 hours involved in extracurricular activities
were excluded from this calculation (N = 158).
When participants ranked the percentage of extracurricular meetings, events or
practices they had attended in the past month, held by the groups they are involved in (1 = 0-
25%, 2 = 26-50%, 3 = 51-75%, 4 = 76-100%), the average value was 2.37 (SD = 1.10).
percentage of their extracurricular involvement that was prosocial (e.g. helping others,
volunteering) for each category across a 4-point Likert scale (1 = 0-25%, 2 = 26-50%, 3 = 51-75%,
4 = 76-100%). An average across each extracurricular category a student participated in was
calculated. The average rank was 1.80 (SD = 0.98).
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 19
Descriptive statistics for general, interpersonal and university mattering are shown in
the midpoint of the 4-point rating-scale (halfway between ratings of 2 = “A little”, and 3 =
“Somewhat”). The average overall interpersonal mattering score was 3.59 (SD = 0.66). This is
above the midpoint of the 5-point rating scale (a rating of 3). The average overall university
mattering scale was 3.28 (SD = 0.99). In contrast to general and interpersonal mattering, this
average value was slightly lower than the midpoint of the 6-point rating scale (halfway between
ratings of 3 and 4).
Correlations
Spearman correlations for relationships between each target variable are shown in
Tables 4 and 5. Although first year students were originally filtered out of the dataset (leaving a
chance to get involved in clubs for very long yet), we explored what correlations would look like
excluding 1st year students are recorded. Scatterplots to visually represent each correlation are
Relationship Between Total Hours of Extracurricular Involvement and General Mattering
When comparing total hours of extracurricular involvement, and average scores of
general mattering, results showed a spearman’s rho of 0.23, showing a weak but statistically
significant relationship (⍴ = 0.23, p = 0.0037). When first year students were included,
Spearman's rho weakened to 0.15, and remained statistically significant (⍴ = 0.15, p = 0.0360).
All scatterplots showing total involvement contain the majority of the data near the y-axis,
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 20
showing most participants spent between 1 and 25 hours per month involved in
extracurriculars. There is one outlier who was involved over 154 hours per month. Scatterplots
that included 1st year students contained more data near the y-axis, showing many first year
students did not spend many hours involved in extracurricular activities. Levels of general
mattering have a wide range across the y-axis, with a higher proportion in between average
general mattering scores of 2.5 and 3.75. When 1st year students are excluded, there is less
data between scores of 1 and 2.
Relationship Between Total Hours of Extracurricular Involvement and Interpersonal Mattering
Statistical analyses revealed a spearman’s rho of 0.16 demonstrating there is a weak but
statistically significant relationship between total hours of extracurricular involvement and
interpersonal mattering (⍴ = 0.16, p = 0.0377). Spearman’s rho remained statistically significant
when including first years (⍴ = 0.14, p = 0.0361). When observing the scatterplots both
including and excluding 1st year students, most data falls clumps toward the center of the y-
axis, showing an average interpersonal mattering score of between 3 and 4. There is no
interpersonal mattering data above a score of 5, and only two data points below a score of 2.
Relationship Between Total Hours of Extracurricular Involvement and University Mattering
When analyzing the relationship between total hours of extracurricular involvement and
university mattering, we found a moderate, statistically significant spearman’s rho of 0.38 (⍴ =
0.38, p < 0.001). When first year students were included in the analysis, spearman’s rho
decreased but remained significant at 0.35 (⍴ = 0.35, p < 0.001). Both the scatterplots including
and excluding first year students follow a similar shape, with most data points falling between 1
and 5.
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 21
Relationship Between Average Prosocial Activity Involvement and General Mattering
There were no statistically significant spearman's correlations between average
prosocial activity involvement and general mattering scores, neither when excluding, nor
including first year students (⍴ = 0.13, p = 0.094; ⍴ = 0.095, p = 0.161, respectively). The
scatterplots do not reveal any consistent shape, with data spread across the x-axis. When
looking at the y-axis, most data falls above an average general mattering score of 2.
Relationship Between Average Prosocial Activity Involvement and Interpersonal Mattering
When analyzing the relationship between average prosocial activity involvement and
interpersonal mattering, spearman's correlations were also insignificant both when excluding
and including first year students (⍴ = 0.035, p = 0.656; ⍴ = 0.051, p = 0.454, respectively). Data
on the scatterplots were spread across the x and y-axis, with most interpersonal mattering
scores between 2 and 5. On the graph where first year students were included, there is a small
cluster of data with low prosocial involvement, and interpersonal mattering scores between 3
and 4.
Relationship Between Average Prosocial Activity Involvement and University Mattering
When comparing average prosocial activity involvement, and scores of university
mattering, correlations were also statistically insignificant both when 1st year university
students were excluded and included (⍴ = 0.033, p = 0.675; ⍴ = 0.025, p = 0.712, respectively).
The scatterplots show slightly more data points near the y-axis, however points are spread
throughout the entire plot and do not reveal any trends.
Discussion
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 22
Prior research on mattering has demonstrated its links to various aspects of overall and
social well-being (Scarpa et al., 2021; Elliot et al., 2004; Flett, 2022). Social well-being is
particularly important for university students as they navigate educational stressors, journey
through emerging adulthood and form their identity (Barbayannis et al., 2022; Yusof et al.,
2022; Wood et al., 2017). This study explored whether levels of general, interpersonal and
university mattering were associated with total levels of extracurricular involvement and
prosocial activity involvement in students attending Dalhousie University. We hypothesized
that all levels of mattering would be positively associated to levels of both extracurricular and
prosocial activity involvement.
Descriptive Statistics and Word Cloud
In the word cloud, nine of the ten most frequently reported words are positive. This
demonstrates that most students at Dalhousie feel positively about engaging in extracurricular
activities. The one negative word (in the list of the top ten) was stressed, reported 63 times.
This may indicate that tasks associated with being involved in an extracurricular can make
students feel overwhelmed, especially when added to the stressors of university. This is
supported by McKeirnan et al., (2021) who found pharmacy students holding multiple
leadership positions had higher levels in some indicators of stress.
Average levels of general and interpersonal mattering were higher than the midpoint in
Dalhousie students, indicating these levels may be higher than in other populations.
Mattering and Total Levels of Extracurricular Involvement
Significant positive correlations were found between total hours of extracurricular
involvement and general, interpersonal and university mattering, both when 1st year students
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 23
were included and excluded. Although this demonstrates all types of mattering were at least
weakly related to involvement, these correlations were not as strong as predicted. This
relationship aligns with prior research that finds that students report thoughts and feelings
related to mattering when asked about their experiences of being involved in extracurriculars
(Buckley & Lee, 2018). For instance, one student who participated in Buckly & Lee’s (2018)
interviews said involvement “makes you feel like you have a sense of purpose in university
rather than just being there to get a degree”, demonstrating awareness; another student said
“no matter what club you are in you always have someone there for you”, showing importance;
and a third student showed reliance by saying “[b]eing someone to help first [years] enjoy their
college life” (p. 43-44). Themes in these comments align with some of the words identified in
the word cloud, including: fulfilled, included, fun, helpful, connected, engaged, welcomed,
supported, entertained, belonging and accepted. Studies on the construct belonging, which is
related to mattering, have been found to be improved by participating in extracurricular
activities (De Sisto et al., 2021).
The most significant correlation was found between university mattering and total
extracurricular involvement when first year students were excluded. This makes sense, because
a more specific measure, such as the University Mattering Scale would be more likely to
correlate to the type of involvement in the same context, extracurricular involvement at
university. However, a general measure, such as the General Mattering Scale, would be more
likely to be correlated to a general type of involvement, such as involvement in activities across
all domains of an individual’s life. This could explain why the correlation between general
mattering and total involvement was weaker.
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 24
When we included first year students into our analysis, correlations consistently
decreased. This makes sense, because first-year students would have completed the survey
with limited time to engage in extracurricular activities due to limited overall time spent at
Dalhousie at this early point in their degree. Students in second-year or higher have had at least
1 full school year to explore and engage in extracurricular, making it more likely for them to
choose to be more involved from this experience the prior year. This makes it more likely for
the extracurricular to have affected their mattering. Research has reported higher community
leadership values in students who were involved in extracurriculars for five or more years,
showing the length of time involved in extracurricular activities has positive outcomes for
students (Kim & Wargo, 2022). Future studies can investigate whether the total length of time
involved in an extracurricular activity contributes to an individual’s sense of mattering.
Mattering and Average Levels of Prosocial Activity Involvement
There were no associations found between any types of mattering and average levels of
prosocial activity involvement. These findings are inconsistent with prior literature and
predicted results, because mattering, and related constructs have been shown to have a
relationship with prosocial behavior (Baumsteiger, 2019; Dakin et al., 2022; Piliavin & Siegl,
2007; Luque-Suárez et al., 2021). Dakin et al. (2022) found a moderate positive correlation
between prosocial behavior and feelings of meaning in everyday life. Students asked about
their extracurricular involvement reported a benefit being that they could give back to others,
through serving other students, their community, and their university (Buckley & Lee, 2018).
Involvement in these activities had students feel they had a significant impact in bettering the
future of those around them (Buckley & Lee, 2018). One type of prosocial activity, volunteering,
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 25
was found to help people feel satisfied and that they belong (Luque-Suárez et al., 2021). People
reported the primary reason they volunteered was to practice altruistic values by helping
others (Luque-Suárez et al., 2021). Another study found a link between mattering and
volunteering, mediated by the connections between volunteering and well-being (Piliavin &
Siegl, 2007).
One reason why our results may be inconsistent with the findings of other studies is
because we measured prosocial activities differently. Dakin et al., (2022) and Baumsteiger
(2019) measured prosocial activity by having participants report the frequency of prosocial
behaviours using rating scales. In comparison, this study had students report the percentage of
prosocial behavior in extracurricular activities. Students may be doing prosocial behavior
outside of extracurricular groups, which could be affecting their levels of mattering.
This study shows extracurricular involvement is positively associated with mattering,
and that generally, Dalhousie students share positive words from being involved.
Limitations
This study used convenience sampling to recruit participants, meaning any Dalhousie
student that was interested could complete the survey. The risk of volunteer bias may cause
our sample to not be representative of the general Dalhousie student population. It is possible
that students who spent their spare time engaging in extracurriculars would also be more likely
to spend their spare time participating in our study. Excluding participants from correlational
analyses who reported 0 hours of extracurricular involvement limits the generalizability of
these results, because in the real world, not every student will participate in extracurricular
activities.
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 26
Another limitation is that we did not account for other meaningful activities in students’
lives outside of Dalhousie extracurriculars, such as extracurriculars outside school, or part-time
jobs, which could both influence mattering (making them a confounding variable that was not
accounted for), or decrease student’s time available for extracurriculars on-campus.
Specifically, one study estimates 40% of full-time college students hold a part or full-time job
(National Center for Education Statistics, 2022). Prior studies have found positive relationships
between job satisfaction, leadership, retention and mattering (Connolly, 2000; Reece et al.,
2019).
Finally, the question asking about the average level of prosocial activity involvement:
“How much time are these extracurricular activities involved in helping or serving others?”, has
students respond on a 4-point scale representing proportions. These response options are
broad, making it difficult to estimate the true level of prosocial involvement students engaged
in. If the question was asked differently, such as by having students rate their prosocial activity
involvement on a Likert scale, the results may have been different. Asking for a more precise
amount of prosocial activity involvement by using a rating scale may lead to higher scores of
prosocial involvement, because currently 0-25% of prosocial activity involvement is grouped
together as the same score. This will also lead to more precise average values of prosocial
involvement, because the values in the calculation will be closer to the true amount of prosocial
activities in that extracurricular category.
Practical Implications and Future Directions
In knowing that mattering is associated with total time spent in university
extracurricular activities, we can suggest extracurricular involvement to students who feel like
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 27
they are insignificant or do not matter. Since this study was only able to assess correlational
relationships between involvement and mattering, future studies can investigate causal
relationships. For instance, investigating whether prescribing extracurricular involvement as an
intervention has a causal effect on levels of mattering, compared to a control group who was
not involved.
Future research can also look at whether certain types of extracurriculars improve
mattering more. For example, whether team sports have a greater impact on mattering due to
the strength interpersonal connections between members. Other studies could investigate
whether holding leadership positions in an extracurricular has a greater impact on mattering,
and whether this is mediated by the length of time spent being involved in the activity.
Overall, this study furthers the research available on mattering and its impact on
university students, adding to the body of knowledge of the importance of mattering in the
everyday lives of individuals.
MATTERING AND EXTRACURRICULAR INVOLVEMENT 28