Title Page
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Shining the Light on Left-Wing Authoritarianism
in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland
Ann Krispenz , Leandra Hautle, Benjamin M. Schmid, & Alex Bertrams
Corresponding author
Ann Krispenz, University of Bern, Division of Educational Psychology, Fabrikstrasse 8, 3012
Leandra Hautle, Pädagogische Hochschule Luzern, Sentimatt 1, 6003 Luzern, Switzerland,
email: leandra.hautle@phlu.ch
Benjamin M. Schmid, University of Bern, Division of Educational Psychology, Fabrikstrasse
7288-7729
Alex Bertrams, University of Bern, Division of Educational Psychology, Fabrikstrasse 8,
1331-5178
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Statements and Declarations
 Prior to the data collection, the hypothesis and analysis plan for the current studies were
searchbox.org/1893&PEER_REVIEW_passcode=CYNGVR.
 The materials of the current studies and the full datasets generated for all studies are
 The studies were approved by the local ethics commission of the University of Bern
(Switzerland) (no. 2022-05-00006). All participants provided informed consent prior to
participating.
 The authors declare that they have no financial conflict of interest. AK declares that she
is a member of the LGBQ community. AB declares that during the conducting and the
publication process of the current studies, he was a member of the party FDP.The Lib-
erals (FDP.Die Liberalen) Switzerland and the Network for Academic Freedom
(Netzwerk Wissenschaftsfreiheit). No funds, grants, or other support was received.
 All authors contributed to the paper. All authors developed the study concept and de-
sign. LH supervised the translation and backtranslation of the LWA items. The data was
analyzed and interpreted by AK and BMS. AK and BMS prepared the draft manuscript.
LH and AB provided critical revisions. All authors approve the final version to be pub-
lished, and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions
related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated
and resolved.
 We thank Thomas H. Costello for his expertise in reviewing the backtranslation of the
LWAI items and the provision of his valuable insights.
Blinded Manuscript Click here to view linked References
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Shining the Light on Left-Wing Authoritarianism
in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Abstract
Research on left-wing authoritarianism (LWA) is still scarce in German-speaking coun-
tries as a valid self-report measure is currently missing. The present research closes this
7 gap by adapting the Left-Wing-Authoritarianism-Index (LWAI) from English and Span-
ish into German (LWAI-G), testing its psychometric properties, and investigating its va-
lidity considering the recently proposed dark-ego-vehicle principle (DEVP). For the
present research, we applied the LWAI-G in a convenience sample from German-speak-
ing countries (N = 388) and representative samples from Germany (N = 2,048), Austria
(N = 837), and the German-speaking part of Switzerland (N = 826). Results showed that
the LWAI-G demonstrates adequate psychometric properties, but only for the 13-item
24 version of the LWAI-G the expected first-order factor structure with the three correlated
LWA factors (antihierarchical aggression, anticonventionalism, and top-down censor-
ship) emerged. Results further evidence the validity of the LWAI-G, particularly regard-
ing specific dark personality traits (e.g., narcissism, psychopathy).
Keywords: dark-ego-vehicle principle, left-wing authoritarianism, narcissism, psychopathy,
scale adaptation
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Shining the Light on Left-Wing Authoritarianism in
Austria, Germany, and Switzerland
Throughout history, authoritarianism has shown its dark face on several occasions,
7 for example during the rule of Nazi Germany when the atrocities of the Holocaust were per-
petrated and about six million Jews were systematically murdered. However, authoritarianism
is not just a relic of the past but still globally prevalent. For example, according to the World
Population Review (2024), countries such as China, Iran, and North Korea are considered to
have authoritarian governments not allowing for free and fair elections, suppressing free
speech, and controlling the spread of information. But also, in consolidated democracies such
as the United States and the United Kingdom, contemporary authoritarians are on the rise.
24 Such developments cause growing concerns as authoritarianism may seriously erode the foun-
dations of liberal democracies (Fasce & Avendaño, 2020).
According to Adorno and his colleagues (1950), authoritarianism is characterized by
three key aspects: (1) a submissiveness to authority figures of the ingroup, (2) an aggression
towards members of outgroup subordinates, and (3) conventionalism (i.e., adherence to estab-
lished values). Most research on authoritarianism has been conducted investigating the atti-
tudes, traits, and behaviors of individuals with right-wing ideologies (so called right-wing au-
thoritarianism; RWA; Altemeyer, 1996). Initially, in line with Adorno et al.’s (1950) concep-
tualization of authoritarianism, individuals high in RWA were described in the research litera-
46 ture as high in authoritarian aggression, authoritarian submission, and conventionalism. Later
on, it was argued that RWA merely reflects the submissiveness dimension of authoritarian-
ism, while its dominance dimension seems to be rather mirrored by another construct – social
dominance orientation (SDO) (Altemeyer, 1998). In line with this differentiation, studies
show that individuals with high levels of RWA are close-minded (e.g., Hodson et al., 2009),
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
fundamentalistic in their religious orientation, and prejudiced towards minority groups (Al-
temeyer & Hunsberger, 1992), while SDO was found to be related to racism and homophobia
(Pratto et al., 1994), narcissism (e.g., Zeigler-Hill et al., 2021), and dark personality traits
7 such as psychopathy (e.g., Hodson et al., 2009).
In contrast, research on authoritarianism in individuals with left-wing ideologies (i.e.,
left-wing authoritarianism; LWA) has been less prolific for a long time. Although some re-
search found evidence for the existence of LWA (e.g., Conway et al, 2018), many researchers
are still doubtful in this regard (e.g., Altemeyer, 1996; Nilsson & Jost, 2020). One reason for
this dispute may be that a generally applicable self-report measure of LWA had been lacking
in the past. For example, some measures of LWA were focused solely on specific target
24 groups (e.g., former communist Eastern European countries; De Regt et al., 2011) making
their scope of application very restricted. Altemeyer (1996) was one of the first researchers
who conceptualized a measure of LWA on a broader (i.e., theoretical) basis by describing
LWA as a form of authoritarianism with direct parallels to the three dimensions of his RWA
model. According to Altemeyer’s approach, authoritarianism (i.e., the common denominator
of both RWA and LWA) comprises of authoritarian aggression, authoritarian submission, and
conventionalism. However, Altemeyer (1996) argued that individuals high in LWA – contrary
to their RWA counterparts – do not submit to the established but revolutionary authorities
which strive to overturn the established authorities in an aggressive manner. Notably, by us-
46 ing the term “left-wing”, Altemeyer did not intent to refer to a (left-wing) political mindset
but rather to a psychological attitude expressing an opposition towards the societal established
authorities. In accordance with his theoretical argument, Altemeyer (1998) developed an
LWA measure based on his RWA scale. Altemeyer’s approach, however, is problematic for
two reasons: On the one hand, there is methodological critique regarding Altemeyer’s RWA
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
scale as some of its items tap into more than one construct at once (i.e., they are multi-bar-
reled; Duckitt et al., 2010; Funke, 2005). Further, exploratory as well as confirmatory factor
analyses (e.g., Duckitt & Fisher, 2003) usually reveal a two-factor structure of the RWA
7 scale, which may either be a consequence of a methodological factor (i.e., the wording of the
items as pro- vs. contra-trait), or the unequal representation of the three RWA subconstructs
in the RWA scale (i.e., there are too few items representing authoritarian submission), or
both. On the other hand, even though there is evidence that LWA and RWA may share a com-
mon core (Conway et al., 2018; Osborne et al., 2023), there is little support for the assumption
that LWA perfectly mirrors RWA and its three subdimensions (Avendaño et al., 2022; Cos-
tello et al., 2022; Costello & Patrick, 2023).
24 Based on this realization, more recent research used an empirical approach to con-
ceptualize LWA (Costello et al., 2022). In their research, the authors developed and tested a
novel, multidimensional conceptualization and measurement of LWA – the 39-item Left-
Wing Authoritarianism Index (LWAI). Based on their results, Costello and his colleagues, ar-
gue that LWA is a tripartite construct separate from RWA comprising three correlated dimen-
sions: (1) antihierarchical aggression, (2) anticonventionalism, and (3) top-down censorship.
LWA antihierarchical aggression is characterized by the belief that the existing authorities
need to be overthrown even if this requires the use of violence. This characterization is
founded on empirical results which show that antihierarchical aggression is not only associ-
46 ated with a desire to protest violently for left-wing political causes (e.g., in racial justice pro-
tests), but also predicts behavioral aggression towards members of the opposite political party.
Further, LWA antihierarchical aggression seems to mirror SDO as both constructs are related
to specific personality traits (e.g., low levels of agreeableness, honesty-humility, and consci-
entiousness). LWA anticonventionalism is characterized by the rigid rejection of traditional
moral values and the endorsement of progressive moral values which is reflected in a moral
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
absolutism. This means that left-wing authoritarians do not only support progressive moral
values but also strive to coercively impose those progressive moral values onto others. In line
with this description, Costello and his colleagues found LWA anticonventionalism to be asso-
7 ciated with left-wing anti-conservative political ideology (see also Avendaño et al., 2022;
Conway et al., 2018; Fasce & Avendaño, 2020), free speech suppression, and social vigilan-
tism. Further, previous research (Avendaño et al., 2022; Fasce & Avendaño, 2020) found in-
dividuals with high levels of LWA to be less religious. This is in line with the assumption that
religious values should be strongly rejected by individuals with high levels of LWA because
religious values mirror conventional (i.e., non-progressive) beliefs. LWA top-down censor-
ship describes the motivation of individuals high in LWA to instrumentalize group authority
24 to restrict the expression of right-wing (i.e., traditional, conventional) beliefs and behaviors.
For example, some left-wing authoritarians may try to force universities to limit free speech
on campus to regulate the expression of right-wing beliefs. This assumption is supported by
the empirical correlates of top-down censorship – low openness, cognitive rigidity, and politi-
cal intolerance.
Interestingly, LWA has been shown to be empirically related to certain dark person-
ality traits (e.g., psychopathic disinhibition and meanness: Costello et al., 2022; narcissism
and psychopathy: [authors blinded for review]; narcissism: Zeigler-Hill et al., 2021). Accord-
ing to contemporary taxonomies, dark personality traits include narcissism, Machiavellianism,
46 psychopathy (the Dark Triad; Jones & Paulhus, 2014). Individuals with high (subclinical) lev-
els of one or more of these dark personality traits share a common set of attributes as they are
behaving in a callous, emotionally cold, manipulative, and aggressive fashion. However, de-
spite this overlap, each of the dark personality traits is assumed to have its own specific char-
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
acteristic. For example, subclinical (grandiose) narcissism is marked by entitlement, grandios-
ity, and dominance, while subclinical psychopathy expresses itself through high impulsivity
and thrill seeking paired with low anxiety (Miller et al., 2017).
7 The empirical links between LWA and dark personality traits such as narcissism and
psychopathy found in previous studies ([authors blinded for review]; Zeigler-Hill et al., 2021)
may be explained by the dark-ego-vehicle principle (DEVP; [authors blinded for review]).
The DEVP states that individuals high in dark personality traits are likely to be attracted to
certain kinds of prosocial activism – if and when these individuals can use those forms of
activism to satisfy their own ego-focused needs. For example, [authors blinded for review]
found narcissistic grandiosity to predict involvement in environmental activism. Further, the
24 authors found this relationship to be mediated by typical correlates of pathological narcissistic
grandiosity (i.e., virtue signaling, dominance, and sensation seeking). These results demon-
strate the potential of social activism (e.g., environmental activism) to attract individuals with
dark personality traits (e.g., grandiose narcissists) as the involvement in such activism allows
those individuals to satisfy their needs for receiving admiration for (ostensible) moral
superiority (e.g., through virtue signaling), the possibility to act out a high tendency for
aggression and power (e.g., by dominating others), as well as the satisfaction of the need for
thrills (i.e., sensations seeking). In line with this argument, other studies have found sound
empirical evidence for the validity of the DEVP not only in the context of environmental ac-
46 tivism ([authors blinded for review]) but also with regard to anti-sexual assault activism ([au-
thors blinded for review]), feminist activism ([authors blinded for review]), LGBQ activism
and gender-identity activism ([authors blinded for review]).
Likewise, according to the DEVP ([authors blinded for review]), individuals with
dark personality traits are assumed to be attracted to certain (political) ideologies. In support
of this assumption, [authors blinded for review] found positive associations between anti-
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Semitism and dark personality traits (e.g., subclinical as well as pathological narcissism,
psychopathic meanness and disinhibition). Furthermore, there is direct initial empirical
evidence for a link between LWA (as measured with the LWAI developed by Costello et al.,
7 2022) and certain dark personality traits: In their research, [authors blinded for review] inves-
tigated the relationship between LWA (and its subdimensions) and antagonistic (subclinical)
narcissism (Study 1; N = 391) as well as between LWA (and its subdimensions) and psychop-
athy (Study 2; N = 377) in socio-demographically diverse US samples. The authors found an-
tagonistic narcissism as well as psychopathy to be associated with LWA anti-hierarchical ag-
gression whereas altruism and social justice commitment were unrelated to this LWA facet.
The empirical research regarding the validity of the DEVP in the context of LWA
24 ([authors blinded for review]) has until now been restricted to English- and Spanish-speaking
countries as the LWAI is not yet available in German. This fact is unfortunate because in the
German-speaking countries, contemporary authoritarianism researchers still seem to focus
mainly on RWA and/or SDO (e.g., Decker et al., 2022; Funke, 2005; Seipel et al., 2022)
while mostly neglecting the topic of LWA (Jungkunz, 2019). However, there is clear empiri-
cal evidence of LWA in Europe (including the German-speaking countries). For example,
Visser et al. (2014) investigated possible reasons for the support of radical left-wing ideolo-
gies in 32 European countries. Their results showed that from 2002 to 2010, in each of these
countries, at least some part of the population supported radical left-wing ideologies. In par-
46 ticular, the authors reported that more than 10% (vs. less than 6%) of the German population
adhered to a radical left-wing (vs. right-wing) political ideology. However, the authors did not
directly measure LWA (as a psychological construct independent of political ideology as pro-
posed by Altemeyer, 1996), but rather left-wing political ideology via participants’ self-iden-
tification with left-wing ideology through placement on a political right-to-left scale.
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
The Present Research
Thus, the goal of the present research was to adapt the LWAI (Costello et al., 2022;
Costello & Patrick, 2023) to provide a standardized self-report measure of LWA for German-
7 speaking individuals. To reach this goal, we translated the LWAI from English (Costello et
al., 2022; Costello & Patrick, 2023) and Spanish (Avendaño et al., 2022) into German
(LWAI-G). Next, we tested whether the three-factor structure found in the original LWAI
(i.e., antihierarchical aggression, anticonventionalism, and top-down censorship) also satisfac-
torily explains the factor structure of the LWAI-G. Further, we tested the convergent validity
of the LWAI-G in different nomothetic dimensions. In particular, we investigated the relation-
ships of LWA with certain sociodemographic variables (e.g., age, religiousness), cognitive
24 variables (e.g., need for cognitive closure), and personality traits (e.g., extraversion) including
specific dark personality traits (e.g., narcissism, psychopathy). These latter variables were in-
cluded to test the validity of the LWAI-G based on the assumptions of the DEVP ([authors
blinded for review]).
To reach these goals, we applied the LWAI-G in four samples. Mirroring the ap-
proach of Avendaño et al. (2022), for Study 1 the sample (N = 388) was recruited through so-
cial media (i.e., Facebook, Instagram) including but not restricted to individuals with distinc-
tive political profiles (e.g., Kritische Bürger Deutschlands [Critical Citizens of Germany],
Linkes Forum [Left-wing Forum]). For Studies 2 to 4 of the present research, we recruited
46 representative samples from Germany (Study 2: N = 2,048), Austria (Study 3: N = 837), and
the German-speaking part of Switzerland (Study 4: N = 826).
Methods
Ethical Requirements and Open Science Standards
All four studies of the present research were ethically approved (identifier [blinded for
review]) by the human research ethics committee of the University of [blinded for review].
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Participants provided informed consent in accordance with the guidelines of the university.
Prior to the data collection, the hypotheses and analyses plan for all four studies were pre-reg-
box.org/1893&PEER_REVIEW_passcode=CYNGVR.
German Adaptation of the Left-Wing-Authoritarianism Index
The LWAI-G was created in the following steps: First, the 39 items of the original
LWAI (Costello et al., 2022; Costello & Patrick, 2023) were translated from English into Ger-
man by two native German speakers with proficiency level in English. Simultaneously, the
Spanish version (Avendaño et al., 2022) was also translated into German by a native German
24 speaker with a proficiency level in Spanish living in Mexico. The three resulting translations
were then compared by the first and the last author of the present paper. The most concise
versions of the LWAI items were selected for the LWAI-G. Next, those items were slightly
adapted to be comprehensible for the German-speaking public outside of America. For exam-
ple, in LWAI item 4 (“America would be much better off if all of the rich people were at the
bottom of the social ladder”) the word “America” was replaced by “my country”. All adapta-
with a proficiency level in German translated the items back into English for cross-validation
46 (2022) carefully reviewed the back-translations and evaluated the adaptation of the content.
The suggestions for adaptations were then discussed a final time by all authors. The resulting
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Participants
Study 1
First, we estimated the minimum required sample size for the planned exploratory
7 structural equation modeling analyses (ESEM; van Zyl & ten Klooster, 2022) to test the factor
structure of the LWAI-G. We based this analysis on the approach of MacCallum et al. (1996)
and planned for three ESEMs testing the factor structure of the 39-item (df = 627), the 25-
item (df = 228), and the 13-item (df = 42) versions of the LWAI. As we aimed at 80% power
to reject the hypothesis of not-close fit (RMSEA ≥ .05) at a 5% significance level, the mini-
mum sample size for those models ranged from N = 65 to N = 297. Second, to calculate the
necessary sample size to test the validity of the LWAI-G, we used G*Power 3.1 (Faul et al.,
24 2009). Assuming an effect of each of the predicted eleven bivariate Spearman’s rank correla-
tions of || = .21 (cf. Schönbrodt & Perugini, 2013) and a respective Bonferroni corrected er-
ror probability of  = .005 (one-tailed), the results of the power analysis revealed a minimum
sample size of N = 260 to obtain sufficient power of 80% (cf. Cohen, 1988).
Based on previous experience, we were expecting some data loss (e.g., due to failed at-
tention checks). Hence, we decided to aim at recruiting N = 500 participants for Study 1. The
39 sample was acquired using social media posts and mass emails advertising a study about “At-
titudes and Behavior”. At this point, individuals were informed that they had the chance to
participate in a raffle to win one of 20 vouchers worth about 25 USD after completion of the
survey. Ultimately, N = 1,855 individuals started to participate in the survey. As pre-regis-
tered, we excluded participants from the original sample when they did not complete the sur-
vey (n = 1,162) or failed the attention check (n = 305). Thus, the final sample for Study 1 con-
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Studies 2 to 4
For Studies 2 to 4, we aimed at recruiting representative samples from different Ger-
man-speaking countries. These samples were acquired via the LINK recruitment platform
for recruiting representative samples of individuals living in Germany between the age of 16
and 93 years (Study 2), in Austria between the age of 18 and 79 years (Study 3), and the Ger-
man-speaking part of Switzerland between the age of 18 and 79 years (Study 4). For Study 2,
we aimed at a sample of N = 2,000 participants from Germany which was quoted for age,
gender, and region. The final sample from Germany consisted of N = 2,048 individuals. For
Study 3, we aimed at a sample of N = 800 participants from Austria which was quoted for
24 age, gender, and region. The final sample from Austria consisted of N = 837 individuals. For
Study 4, we aimed at a sample of N = 800 participants from the German-speaking part of
Switzerland which was quoted for age, and gender. The final sample from Switzerland con-
sisted of N = 826 individuals. For the report of the full sample demographics of these three
Procedure
Study 1
Study 1 lasted about 20 minutes. All instructions and measures were provided via the
survey software Unipark. In a first step, participants gave written informed consent. Next,
participants paid sufficient attention to the instructions, they were next explicitly asked to
continue without responding to the item “I breathe oxygen every day” (Jones & Paulhus,
2014). Any response to this item was considered a case of failed attention. Afterwards, LWA,
narcississm, the HEXACO personality traits, need for cognitive closure, and political
orientation was assessed. Last, participants were presented with a vignette assessing the
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
proneness to free speech suppression. At the end of Study 1, participants were thanked for
participation, debriefed, and given the opportunity to participate in the raffle.
Studies 2 to 4
7 Studies 2 to 4 were announced as “Attitudes and Behaviors” studies and lasted each
about 10 minutes respectively. All instructions and measures were provided online via the
survey software used by LINK. After giving written informed consent, LWAI, psychopathy,
political orientation, and religiousness were measured. In a last step, demographic information
(including gender and age) was assessed. After that, participants were thanked for their
19 1
participation, and debriefed. Participants were reimbursed for their effort through LINK.
Measures
24 In the following, we report the measures assessed in the four studies in the sequence
29 measure. Note that some of these measures were assessed for all studies, while others were
only utilized either in Study 1 or in Studies 2 to 4.
34 Political Orientation
For all four studies, political orientation was measured with one item (Costello et al.,
2022) asking participants to place themselves on a 7-point scale with regard to their political
views ranging from 1 (extremely left-wing) to 7 (extremely right-wing).
Religiousness
For all four studies, religiousness was assessed with the item (“How religious are
you?”) of the Religiousness Scale (ZA & ZUMA, 1997). Answers were provided on a 10-
53 1
For another research project, we also assessed several items measuring self-control, willpower, and vitality in
Studies 2 to 4. As these variables are irrelevant for the present research, we do not report them in the following.
VIEW_passcode=CYNGVR).
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
point scale ranging from 1 (not religious) to 10 (religious).
Left-Wing Authoritarianism
7 Ratings of the items were made using a 7-point scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree). Inverse items were recoded before calculating mean scores for all items as well as the
three LWA subdimensions. High mean scores indicate a high level of LWA, antihierarchical
aggression, anticonventionalism, and top-down censorship, respectively.
Narcissism
For Study 1, narcissism was assessed with the German Five-Factor Narcissism
Inventory (FFNI-BF; Jauk et al., 2023). The FFNI-BF comprises 30 items assessing
24 narcissism on three subdimensions: agentic narcissism (8 items; e.g., “I aspire for greatness”),
antagonistic narcissism (16 items; e.g., “I’m pretty good at manipulating people), and neurotic
narcissism (6 items; e.g., “I feel ashamed when people judge me”). Agreement with those
items was assessed using a 5-point scale from 1 (disagree strongly) to 5 (agree strongly).
After recoding inverse items, we calculated a total FFNI-BF mean score with high scores
indicating a high level of narcissism. Further, a mean score was calculated for the three
respective FFNI-BF dimensions with high scores indicating high levels of agentic,
antagonistic, or neurotic narcissism, respectively.
Psychopathy
46 For Studies 2 to 4, psychopathy was assessed with the respective subscale of the
German Short Dark Triad Personality Measure (Malesza et al., 2019). The psychopathy
subscale has nine items (e.g., “Payback needs to be quick and nasty”). Agreement with those
nine items was rated on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
agree). After recoding inverse items, a mean score was calculated with high scores indicating
a high level of psychopathy.
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
HEXACO Personality Traits
For Study 1, personality traits were measured with German version of the 60-item
HEXACO Personality Inventory (Moshagen et al., 2014). The HEXACO assesses six
7 different personality traits each with 10 items: honesty-humility (e.g., “Having a lot of money
is not especially important to me”), emotionality (e.g., “When it comes to physical danger,
I’m very fearful”), extraversion (e.g., “In social situations, I’m usually the one who makes the
first move”), agreeableness (e.g., “I tend to be lenient in judging other people”),
conscientiousness (e.g., “I plan ahead and organize things, to avoid scrambling at the last
minute”), and openness to experience (e.g., “I’m interested in learning about the history and
politics of other countries”). Agreement with the items was assessed using a 5-point scale
24 from 1 (disagree strongly) to 5 (agree strongly). After recoding inverse items, we calculated
mean scores for each personality trait with high scores indicating a high level of the
respective trait.
Need for Cognitive Closure
For Study 1, need for cognitive closure was assessed with the German Short Scale for
the Assessment of Cognitive Closure (Schlink & Walther, 2007), which has 16 items (e.g., “I
don’t like it when a person’s statement is ambiguous”). After recoding inverse items, we
calculated a mean score with high scores indicating a high need for cognitive closure.
Free Speech Suppression
46 For Study 1, free speech suppression was assessed with a vignette based on the free
speech suppression vignette used by Costello et al. (2022), which read:
“There are always some people whose ideas are considered violent or dangerous by
other people. For instance, in a recently published peer-reviewed empirical study, the
authors introduce the so called “Dark-ego-vehicle principle” according to which: “[…]
individuals with dark personalities – such as high narcissistic and psychopathic traits –
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
are attracted to certain ideologies and forms of political activism. We [the authors of
the study] assume that such individuals use ideologies and political activism as a
vehicle to satisfy their own ego-focused needs instead of actually aiming at social
7 justice and equality. For example, a highly narcissistic/psychopathic person may
participate in a pro-BLM protest pretending to fight against racism while actually
using such protesting activities to meet their own aggressive motives and thrills (e.g.,
via violent escalations during pro-BLM protests). Further, such individuals might be
attracted to pro-BLM activism because this form of activism can provide them with
opportunities for positive self-presentation (e.g., virtue signaling).”
After reading the vignette, participants were asked if the authors should be forced to
24 retract the paper. Response options ranged from 1 (definitely not) to 4 (definitely yes).
Results
29 Psychometric Properties of the LWAI-G Items
deviations, and internal consistencies (i.e., McDonald’s ) for the total LWA score, each
subdimension, all versions of the LWAI-G (i.e., 39, 25 and 13 items) and across all four
kurtosis, and corrected inter-item correlations for each of the 39 items of the LWAI-G
separately and across all four studies. In line with Costello et al. (2022) and Aveñdano et al.
(2022), we checked for non-normal distributions (skewness > |2.0| and kurtosis > |7.0|). In
Study 1, all items were within those thresholds except for item 28 which was very close to the
51 treshold (skewness = –2.10). In Studies 2 to 4, results showed normal distributions for all
items. Furthermore, results revealed acceptable corrected inter-item correlations (r > .20) for
it
the positively worded LWAI-G items. However, a deviating pattern emerged for the
negatively worded (i.e., inverse) LWAI-G items (i.e., items 24, 25, 37–39) which – over all
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
four studies – often demonstrated low (and sometimes even negative) inter-item correlations.
Factor Structure of the LWAI-G
Previous research on the LWAI had shown that the measure exhibits a three-factor
7 structure with three correlated first-order factors: antihierarchical aggression, anticonvention-
alism, and top-down censorship (Costello et al., 2022). In a first step, we therefore statistically
tested the pre-registered hypothesis that the three-factor structure found in the original LWAI
also satisfactorily explains the structure of the LWAI-G. We replicated the procedure
employed by Costello et al. (2022) and conducted confirmatory factor analyses (CFA) as well
as ESEM (cf. van Zyl & ten Klooster, 2022). We specified three factor first-order models,
first with CFA and second with ESEM models. In these models, antihierarchical aggression,
24 anticonventionalism, and top-down censorship were estimated as distinct but related first
order factors. Both methodes allowed us to target the LWAI-G items to load in a specific way
on the three LWA factors (i.e., antihierarchical aggression, anticonventionalism, and top-
down censorship). However, other than CFA, ESEM allowed for cross-loadings of the items
between the factors while constraining non-target loadings to be as close to zero as possible.
This way, ESEM models reduce the inflation of factor correlations which is a possible
consequence of CFA and their assumption of zero cross-loadings.
To analyze the data, we used Mplus (Muthén and Muthén, 1998–2017) and applied
the weighted least squares mean and variance adjusted (WLSMV) estimator as well as the tar-
46 get rotation. For the evaluation of model fit, we relied on the following guidelines by Scher-
melleh-Engel et al. (2003) (acceptable model fit: TLI and CFI ≥ 0.95, SRMR ≤ 0.10, RMSEA
≤ 0.08; good model fit TLI and CFI ≥ 0.97, SRMR ≤ 0.05, RMSEA ≤ 0.05). Also, we report
the results of the χ -test – however, as this test is sensitive to sample size (van Zyl & ten
Klooster, 2022), we do not rely on these results for the evaluation of the model fit. To dis-
criminate between models, we relied on changes in TLI, CFI, SRMR, and RMSEA. Further,
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
we report the factorial inter-correlations between the latent factors. Regarding these correla-
tions, we will retain the model with the lowest factor correlations (cf. van Zyl & ten Klooster,
2022). Also, we consider standardized factor loadings λ ≥ .300 as meaningful (Bandalos &
7 Gerstner, 2016) because each of the three original LWA dimensions represents a broader con-
struct (i.e., antihierarchical aggression, anticonventionalism, and top-down censorship). Fi-
nally, we regard small to medium cross-loading (λ < .500) as acceptable (van Zyl & ten
Klooster, 2022).
CFA Models
In a first step, we estimated CFA models for all three versions of the LWAI-G (i.e.,
24 model fits for all estimated models. Altogether and for all four studies of the present research,
the CFA models did not demonstrate acceptable fit: For Study 1, the model fit for the 39-item
version of the LWAI-G was poor (χ (699) = 2281.156, p < .001; TLI = .833, CFI = .843,
SRMR = .073, RMSEA = .076 (90% CI [.073; .080]). The model fit did not improve for the
shorter versions of the LWAI-G (25-item version: χ (272) = 1139.704, p < .001; TLI = .856,
CFI = .869, SRMR = .067, RMSEA = .091 (90% CI [.085; .096]); 13-item version: χ (62) =
260.387, p < .001; TLI = .865, CFI = .892, SRMR = .050, RMSEA = .091 (90% CI [.080;
.102]). Similar poor model fits were found for the CFA models in Studies 2 to 4.
In all CFA models, we found the factors to be correlated: For Study 1, we found the
46 correlations to decline with the shorter versions (39-item version: from r = .38 to r = .66; 25-
item version: r = .13 to .34; 13-item version: r = .12 to r = .33). In the representative samples,
correlations between the factors were lower than in Study 1: Study 2 (39-item version: r = .13
to r = .28; 25-item version: r = .13 to r = .26; 13-item version: r = .11 to .30), Study 3 (39-
item version: r = .10 to r = .19; 25-item version: r = .11 to .18; 13-item version: r = .11 to r =
.28), and Study 4 (39-item version: r = .22 to r = .36; 25-item version: r = .20 to r = .36; 13-
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
item version: r = .20 to r = .39).
ESEM Models
In a second step, we estimated ESEM models for all three versions of the LWAI-G. In
39-item version of the LWAI-G improved in comparison to the respective CFA model but
was still not satisfactory (χ (627) = 1908.956, p < .001; TLI = .849, CFI = .873, SRMR =
.051, RMSEA = .073 (90% CI [.069; .076]). For the 25-item version of the LWAI-G, model
fit improved but was still below the relevant thresholds (χ (228) = 919.747, p < .001; TLI =
.863, CFI = .896, SRMR = .046, RMSEA = .088 (90% CI [.083; .094]), even though this ver-
sion already excludes four of the five inverse items. However, the 13-item version of the
24 LWAI-G demonstrated a clear improvement of the model fit from poor to acceptable (χ (42)
= 107.318, p < .001; TLI = .934, CFI = .965, SRMR = .025, RMSEA = .063 (90% CI [.049;
.078]). Very similar patterns regarding the model fits were found in Studies 2 to 4 where the
model fit improved with the shorter versions.
tors (i.e., antihierarchical aggression, anticonventionalism, and top-down censorship) to be
positively correlated (r = .48 to .67) in the ESEM models. In the present research, for the 13-
item version of the LWAI-G, results were similar: In the four studies, we found statistically
significant correlations between the three LWA factors to range from r = .09 to .67 with only
46 one exception – in Study 3, we found no statistically significant correlation between antihier-
archical aggression and top-down censorship (r = .05). For all correlations, see Supplemen-
In all four studies, for the 13-item version of the LWAI-G, the three LWA factors
clearly emerged – the LWAI-G items loaded meaningfully on their respective target factors (λ
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
= .409 to λ = .891). Also, there were no problematic cross-loadings (λ ≤ .443) and no instance
where an item’s largest loading was not on their target factor. Factor loadings for all ESEM
13 LWAI-G items loaded on the first factor (i.e., antihierarchical aggression; McDonald’s 
≥ .706), four items on the second factor (i.e., anticonventionalism, McDonald’s  ≥ .694),
and five items on the third factor (i.e., top-down censorship, McDonald’s  ≥ .622). While
these reliability values are questionable to acceptable, a comparison with the reliability values
found for the 25-item version (McDonald’s  ≥ .779) and the 39-item version (McDonald’s
 ≥ .801) indicates that the lower reliability values found for the 13-item version were
probably caused by the lower number of items (cf. Malkewitz et al., 2023).
Validation of the LWAI-G
Next, we tested the validity of the 13-item version LWAI-G by investigating the rela-
tionships between LWA (and its subdimensions) on the one hand and variables representing
different nomothetic dimensions of LWA on the other hand. For this purpose, we calculated
37 bivariate Spearman’s rank correlations for all LWA-G scores on the one hand and all
validation variables on the other hand. As preregistered, we considered Bonferroni adjusted p-
42 values (Study 1: p < .005, one-tailed; Studies 2 to 4: p < .010, one-tailed) as statistically sig-
nificant. Further, we report the bias-corrected and accelerated 99% bootstrapped confidence
intervals based on 1,000 bootstrap samples. The seed for the Mersenne twister was set at
2’000’000. For the longer versions of the LWAI-G, we also report the correlations as pre-reg-
and S6c (Study 4).
Age
59 For Studies 2 to 4, based on the results of previous research ([authors blinded for
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
review]), we pre-registered the assumption that LWA is negatively associated with age. As
predicted, the results of Study 2 showed that the total LWAI-G-13 score was negatively re-
lated to age (r = –.129, p < .001). Similar results were found in Study 3 (r = –.167, p < .001)
7 and Study 4 (r = –.102, p = .002).
Gender
For all four studies, based on previous research (Avendaño et al., 2022; [authors
blinded for review]), we pre-registered the assumption that women are more likely to show
higher LWA than men. In line with our assumptions, the results of Study 1 showed that LWA
was higher among women (r = –.129, p = .006). Specifically, we found statistically significant
negative correlations between LWA top-down censorship and gender (r = –.136, p = .004).
24 Similar results were found for Studies 2 to 4.
Political Orientation
For all four studies, based on the results of previous research (Costello et al., 2022;
[authors blinded for review]), we predicted that LWA would be positively associated with a
left-wing political orientation. In line with our assumptions, the results of Study 1 revealed
that the LWAI-G total score was associated with left-wing political orientation (r = –.473, p <
.001). For Study 2, these correlations were lower but still statistically significant (r = –.166, p
< .001). Similar results to those of Study 2 were found for Study 3 (r = –.195, p < .001) and
Study 4 (r = –.203, p < .001).
46 Religiousness
For all four studies, based on previous results (Avendaño et al., 2022; Fasce & Aven-
daño, 2020), we hypothesized that LWA would be higher among non-religious individuals.
The results of Study 1 are in line with this prediction (r = –.116, p = .011). In particular, we
found statistically significant correlations between LWA anticonventionalism and religious-
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
ness (13-item version: r = –.228, p < .001). However, for Studies 2 to 4, we did not find statis-
tically significant associations between LWA and religiousness (Study 2: r = .017, p = .215;
Study 3: r = .062, p = .037; Study 4: r = .052, p = .069).
7 Narcissism
For Study 1, we pre-registered the hypothesis that LWA would be positively associ-
ated with subclinical narcissism. This hypothesis was based on previous research which found
subclinical narcissism and LWA to be related ([authors blinded for review]; Zeigler-Hill et
al., 2021). Results revealed a positive association between the total LWAI-G-13 score and
narcissism (r = .069, p = .088). However, these correlations did not reach statistical signifi-
cance. A closer look revealed statistically significant relationships between LWA antihierar-
24 chical aggression and antagonistic narcissism (r = .142, p = .003). Also, we found statisti-
cally significant relationships between LWA antihierarchical aggression and neurotic narcis-
sism (r = .202, p < .001). Replicating the approach of [authors blinded for review], we con-
ducted supplementary regression analyses which revealed that LWA antihierarchical aggres-
sion was statistically significantly predicted by all three narcissism dimensions (all ps < .001;
Model 1a). Yet, when we controlled for age and gender (Model 1b), antagonistic narcissism
was revealed to be the strongest predictor of LWA antihierarchical aggression (β = .27, p <
Psychopathy
46 For Studies 2 to 4, we pre-registered the expectation that LWA would be positively as-
sociated with psychopathy as previous research has shown a positive relationship between
LWA (in particular antihierarchical aggression) and psychopathy (Costello et al., 2022;
[authors blinded for review], Study 2). In line with our hypothesis, the results of Study 2 re-
vealed a positive correlation between the total LWAI-G-13 score and psychopathy (r = .286,
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
p < .001). Similar results were found for Study 3 (r = .217, p < .001) and Study 4 (r = .299, p
< .001).
HEXACO Personality Traits
7 For Study 1, based on the results of Costello et al. (2022), we pre-registered the hy-
pothesis that LWA would be negatively associated with certain personality traits (i.e., hon-
esty-humility, openness, agreeableness, conscientiousness, and extraversion) while it should
be positively correlated with emotionality. Contrary to our prediction, in Study 1 we found no
relationship between the total LWAI-G-13 score and the HEXACO trait of honesty-humility
(r = –.034, p = .251). Regarding the LWA subdimensions, the strongest association was found
between LWA antihierarchical aggression and honesty-humility (r = –.090, p = .038). Con-
24 trary to our assumptions, we found a positive relationship between the total LWAI-G-13 score
and the HEXACO trait of openness to experience, which however did also not reach statisti-
cal significance (r = .092, p = .035). The only exception was found for the association be-
tween LWA anticonventionalism and openness to experience (r = .172, p < .001). Also, there
were no statistically significant relationship between the total LWAI-G-13 score and the
HEXACO trait of agreeableness (r = –.009, p = .428). As predicted, we found a negative rela-
tionship between the total LWAI-G-13 and the HEXACO trait of conscientiousness which
again did not reach statistical significance (r = –.112, p = .014). However, the association be-
tween LWA antihierarchical aggression and conscientiousness was statistically significant
46 (r = –.159, p < .001). In line with our hypotheses, results revealed a statistically significant
negative association between the total LWAI-G-13 score and the HEXACO trait of extraver-
sion (r = –.168, p < .001). Finally, we found a positive relationship between the total LWAI-
G-13 score and the HEXACO trait of emotionality (r = .200, p < .001).
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Cognitive Closure
For Study 1, we predicted that LWA would be positively correlated with need for cogni-
tive closure (i.e., the desire for a definite solution of a problem in an uncertain and/or ambigu-
7 ous situation; Schlink & Walther, 2007). This prediction was based on results which show
that individuals high in LWA more strongly rely on their fast intuitions than on slow and ana-
lytical information processing as expressed by low in cognitive reflectivity (Costello et al.,
2022). In line with our assumptions, we found a positive relationship between the total
LWAI-G-13 score and need for cognitive closure (r = .204, p < .001). Interestingly, the rela-
tionship between LWA and need for cognitive closure was most pronounced for LWA top-
down censorship (r = .194, p < .001).
24 Free Speech Suppression
For Study 1, based on the results of Costello et al. (2022), we predicted that LWA
would be positively related to free speech suppression. As pre-registered, we found a positive
relationship between the total LWAI-G-13 score and free speech suppression (r = .185, p <
.001). The relationship between LWA and free speech suppression was again most pro-
nounced for LWA top-down censorship (r = .173, p < .001).
Discussion
In the German-speaking countries, the research on authoritarianism is still imbal-
anced as it mainly focuses on RWA and/or SDO (e.g., Decker et al., 2022; Funke, 2005;
46 Seipel et al., 2022) while the topic of LWA is mostly neglected (Jungkunz, 2019). One reason
for this imbalance may be the fact that a sound psychometric self-report measure for LWA in
German is missing. Hence, the present research aimed at providing such a measure for Ger-
man-speaking individuals by adapting the LWAI from English (Costello et al., 2022; Costello
& Patrick, 2023) and Spanish (Avendaño et al., 2022). For this purpose, the LWAI was trans-
lated from English and Spanish into German. The factor structure and the validity of the
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
LWAI-G was then investigated in four different samples (three of them representative) from
Germany, Austria, and the German-speaking part of Switzerland.
Factor Structure of the LWAI-G
7 Based on the results of previous research regarding the LWAI (Avendaño et al., 2022;
Costello et al., 2022; Costello & Patrick, 2023), we first tested if the three-factor structure
found in the original LWAI (i.e., antihierarchical aggression, anticonventionalism, and top-
down censorship) also satisfactorily explains the factor structure of the LWAI-G. For this pur-
pose, we replicated the procedure employed by Costello et al. (2022) who conducted CFA as
well as ESEM (cf. van Zyl & ten Klooster, 2022). Other than CFA, ESEM allows for cross-
loadings of the items between the factors but constrains non-target loadings to be as close to
24 zero as possible. Previous researchers (Avendaño et al., 2022; Costello et al., 2022) found
evidence for the effectiveness of the full (i.e., 39-item version) and the shorter (i.e., 25- and
13-item) versions of the LWAI, yet only when conducting ESEM analyses. In the present
research, we were not able to fully replicate those results: As in the previous studies, the
results of the CFA models revealed poor fits for all versions of the LWAI-G (i.e., for the 39-,
the 25, and the 13-item version). In contrast to previous studies, in the ESEM analyses
throughout all four studies of the present research, the three-factor structure of the orgininal
LWAI only emerged in the 13-item version of the LWAI-G – for the 39- and the 25-items
versions of the LWAI-G, the ESEM models fit the data only poorly.
46 These results may – at least partly – be a result of the exclusion of the negatively
worded (i.e., inverse) items from the 13-item version of the LWAI-G. Throughout all four
studies of the present research, these inverse items demonstrated low (and sometimes even
negative) inter-item correlations. This observeration indicates a methodological problem with
the inverse LWAI-G items and may be due to an acquiesence effect (i.e., the tendency of
individuals to provide affirmative answers regardless of item content; Hinz et al., 2007).
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
Particularly, we assume that individuals did not realize the inverse nature of the first
negatively worded item (i.e., LWAI-G item 24) as it appears relatively far back in the
measure. Thus, the inverse LWAI-G items may potentially have created an independent
7 method factor which obscured the dimensionality of the latent LWA subscales and expressed
itself in the poorer model fits of the longer LWAI-G versions. Yet, despite the inclusion of the
inverse items, previous studies found all three versions of the LWAI (i.e., the 39-, the 25-, and
the 13-item version) to demonstrate excellent fit indices for the ESEM models in English-
speaking samples (Costello et al., 2022; Costello & Patrick, 2023) as well as in Spanish-
speaking individuals (Avendaño et al., 2022).
Hence, we assume that the decreased model fit of the longer versions of the LWAI-G
24 is due to another reason. In particular, we argue that some of the LWAI-G items – which are
only included in the 25- and the 39-item version of the LWAI-G – may have elicited deviating
answers from German-speaking individuals on the basis of inter-cultural differences. This ar-
gument is based on the following observations: Firstly, some of the LWAI-G items measuring
antihierarchical aggression refer to a perceived wealth gap. For example, LWAI-G item 2
reads “Rich people should be forced to give up virtually all of their wealth”. However, recent
studies show that the living conditions in Germany are more advantageous to those in the U.S.
(Priewe, 2024): On the one hand, poverty rates are markedly lower in Germany than in the
U.S.; on the other hand, in the U.S. the concentration of wealth in the upper class is more than
46 twice as high as in Germany. In addition, Germany has a wider and stronger welfare state su-
perior to the U.S., leading to less wealth inequality in Germany. Therefore, we assume that
the LWAI items representing the aggression expressed towards wealthy individuals may have
elicited a stronger sentiment in English-speaking individuals than in individuals from Ger-
many. This argument should also hold for individuals living in Austria and Switzerland be-
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
cause our results show that – despite the differences in income levels and cost of living – indi-
viduals in all three German-speaking countries reported similar levels of subjective economic
status.
7 Another item, only included in the longer versions of the LWAI-G, measures anticon-
ventionalism and reads “There is nothing wrong with bible camps”. This item should be
strongly rejected by individuals with high levels of LWA because it endorses religious (i.e.,
non-progressive) values (Avendaño et al., 2022; Fasce & Avendaño, 2020). However, the re-
sults of the present research (i.e., in Studies 2 to 4) show individuals’ total scores of LWAI-G
not to be associated with religiousness. This indicates that the German-speaking individuals
reacted differently to LWAI item 25 than their Spanish-speaking counterparts.
24 Thirdly, when the LWAI items were adapted from English to German, their wording
had to be changed to make them more comprehensible for the German-speaking public. For
example, in the English version of the LWAI, there are several items measuring top-down
censorship referring to specific “rights” (e.g., item 32 “right to free speech” and item 39 “le-
gal right to their opinions”). However, the expressions of certain opinions (e.g., regarding the
Holocaust) are legally sanctioned by law in Germany, Switzerland, and Austria and, thus, not
protected by the “right to free speech” in those countries. These items are included in both
longer versions of the LWAI-G, but no longer present in the 13-item version.
In concert, all these observations indicate that some of the LWAI-G items (from all
46 three LWA dimensions) may have elicited deviating answers from German-speaking individ-
uals due to specific cultural characteristics which – in turn – may have led to poorer model
fits for the longer LWAI-G versions in comparison to previous studies.
Psychometric Properties of the LWAI-G-13
Based on these considerations and the results of the present research, we recommend
the use of the 13-item version of the LWAI-G (i.e., the LWAI-G-13). The psychometric
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
properties of the LWAI-G-13 items were similar to those of the English and the Spanish
versions of the LWAI. Also, in all four studies, for the 13-item version of the LWAI-G, the
three LWA factors clearly emerged – the items loaded meaningfully on their respective target
7 factors. Importantly, there were no problematic cross-loadings and no instance where an
item’s largest loading was not on their target factor. Further, the LWAI-G-13 demonstrated
satisfying to good internal consistencies in all four studies of the present research with regard
to the total score. With regard to the three LWA subscales, some reliability values were
questionable in comparison with the reliability values found for the 25-item version and the
39-item version. However, these low internal consistencies are most likely caused by the low
number of items measuring each of the LWA subscales (cf. Malkewitz et al., 2023). Lastly, in
24 the LWAI-G-13, the three LWA factors were positively correlated. Only in Study 3, we found
no relationship between the LWA dimensions of antihierarchical aggression and top-down
censorship. These results are similar to the correlations reported in previous research (Cos-
tello et al., 2022) which found the three specific LWA factors (i.e., antihierarchical aggres-
sion, anticonventionalism, and top-down censorship) to be moderately correlated. Thus, the
LWAI-G-13 provides a reliable psychometric measure allowing for an economic assessement
of LWA in German-speaking samples.
Validity of the LWAI-G-13
In a last step, we tested the validity of the LWAI-G-13. In particular, we investigated
46 the relationships of LWA with sociodemographic variables (e.g., age, religiousness), cogni-
tive variables (e.g., need for cognitive closure), and personality traits (e.g., extraversion) in-
cluding specific dark personality traits (e.g., narcissism, psychopathy). Our assumptions were
based on previous research investigating the validity of the LWAI in English and Spanish-
speaking countries (Avendaño et al., 2022; Costello et al., 2022; Fasce & Avendaño, 2020;
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
[authors blinded for review]). The variables assessing narcissism and psychopathy were spe-
cifically included to test the validity of the LWAI-G considering the DEVP ([authors blinded
for review]).
7 In line with previous research (Avendaño et al., 2022; Costello et al., 2022; Fasce &
Avendaño, 2020; [authors blinded for review]), we found LWA to be higher among younger
individuals. Also, we found women to be more likely to report higher levels of LWA in com-
parison to men. In particular, women were more likely to report to participate in top-down
censorship. Further, results revealed a positive association between LWA and a left-wing po-
litical orientation. Also, we had predicted that LWA would be higher among non-religious in-
dividuals but only the results of Study 1 (which was conducted using a convenience sample)
24 were in line with this prediction. In contrast, for Studies 2 to 4 (which investigated the validity
of the LWAI-G-13 using representative samples), we did not find statistically significant as-
sociations between the total LWA score and religiousness. These results deviate from the re-
sults reported by Avendaño et al. (2022) as well as Fasce and Avendaño (2020) which investi-
gated the validity of the Spanish version of the LWAI using convenience samples for their re-
search. Therefore, the deviating results of the present research regarding the (missing) rela-
tionship between LWA and religiousness may reflect the necessity to use representative sam-
ples to gain unbiased results. Yet, the differences in the results could also be the consequence
of cultural differences between Spanish- and German-speaking samples as discussed above.
46 The results further revealed a positive relationship between LWA and need for cogni-
tive closure. Need for cognitive closure is characterized by the desire for a definite solution of
a problem in uncertain and/or ambiguous situations (Schlink & Walther, 2007). The results of
Study 1 demonstrate – in line with Costello’s et al. (2022) description of LWA – that individ-
uals with high levels of LWA are more likely to rely on their fast intuitions than on slow and
analytical information processing. This result matches another finding of Study 1, which
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
showed a positive relationship between LWA and free speech suppression. In sum, these re-
sults demonstrate the inclination of individuals high in LWA for the regulation of right-wing
beliefs and behaviors (e.g., by means of coercion and the employment of group authority).
7 Regarding the personality (i.e., HEXACO) correlates of LWA, we found individuals
with high levels of LWA anticonventionalism to report lower levels of openness to experi-
ence. Further, LWA antihierarchical aggression was negatively related to conscientiousness
and extraversion. Also, LWA was positively correlated with emotionality. Contrary to our
predictions, we found LWA not to be associated with either honesty-humility or agreeable-
ness. Previous research (Costello et al., 2022) also found mixed results for the relationships
between the HEXACO personality traits on the one hand and LWA on the other hand: For ex-
24 ample, the authors found a statistically significant negative association (i.e., zero-order corre-
lation) between LWA antihierarchical aggression and agreeableness (r = –.15, p < .010) in
Sample 1 but not in Sample 2 (r = .03, p > .050). These mixed results in the existing literature
demonstrate that the link between LWA and general personality traits need further (theoreti-
cally driven) investigation.
In a last step, we investigated the validity of the LWAI-G-13 and specific dark per-
sonality traits based on the DEVP ([authors blinded for review]). According to the DEVP,
individuals high in dark personality traits (e.g., narcissism, psychopathy) are drawn to certain
kinds of prosocial activism and (political) ideologies – if and when those forms of activism
46 and ideologies can be used to satisfy their own ego-focused needs. In line with these
assumptions, the results of Study 1 revealed a consistent positive association between LWA
antihierarchical aggression for both antagonistic and neurotic narcissism. The results of a sup-
plementary analysis revealed that the strongest predictor of LWA antihierarchical aggression
was antagonistic narcissism when certain covariates (i.e., age and gender) were controlled for.
Further, the results of Studies 2 to 4 of the present research showed that higher levels of LWA
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
were related to higher levels of psychopathy. All these results are in line with previous re-
search ([authors blinded for review]; Zeigler-Hill et al., 2021) which investigated the relation-
ship between LWA and narcissism/psychopathy. Thus, the results of the present research pro-
7 vide further evidence for the validity of the LWAI-G based on the DEVP as they indicate that
individuals with dark personality traits are potentially attracted to certain (political) ideologies
(see also [authors blinded for review]). In concert, the results of the present research provide
empirical evidence of the convergent validity of the LWAI-G-13 regarding several variables
representing different nomothetic dimensions of LWA.
Limitations and Future Research
There are some limitations which need to be addressed. Firstly, the present research
24 included one convenience sample (Study 1), but also three representative samples (Studies 2
to 4) which are more diverse than the samples of previous studies investigating the reliability
and validity of the LWAI (Avendaño et al., 2022; Costello et al., 2022). Nonetheless, the sam-
ples for Studies 2 to 4 are not perfectly representative but quoted for age, gender, and – when
applicable – for region (i.e., in Germany and Austria). Secondly, that the 13-item version of
the LWAI-G allows for the assessment of LWA in German-speaking samples. This short ver-
sion of the LWAI-G, however, does no longer contain any contra-trait items. Consequently,
when using the LWAI-G-13, researchers should be aware of the possibility of common
method variance bias (cf. Chang et al., 2010). This bias may occur when self-report question-
46 naires are administered in cross-sectional research designs which include measures also favor-
ing positively worded items as some study participants may tend to respond in the same man-
ner (e.g., positively) regardless of the actual item content. Thirdly, the present research inves-
tigated (only) the convergent validity of the LWAI-G-13. However, future research is needed
to test the discriminant validity of the measure. Also, we suggest future research to include
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX
behavioral measures (e.g., paradigms to assess behavioral aggression) to test the validity of
the LWAI-G-13 in German-speaking samples.
Conclusions
7 The results of four studies (including three representative samples) demonstrate that
the LWAI-G-13 provides a reliable and valid measure of LWA for German-speaking samples.
As LWA is an underresearched topic in Europe (including the German-speaking countries),
the LWAI-G-13 significantly adds to the research on LWA in Germany, Austria, and the Ger-
man-speaking part of Switzerland.
GERMAN LEFT-WING AUTHORITARIANISM INDEX