Unequal educational outcomes for children with similar early childhood vocabulary but
different socio-economic circumstances
Emma Thornton1*, Danielle Matthews2, Praveetha Patalay3, Colin Bannard4
1 Manchester Institute of Education, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.
2 Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, United Kingdom.
3 Social Research Institute and Department of Population Science and Experimental
Medicine, University College London, United Kingdom.
4 Department of Linguistics and English Language, University of Manchester, United
Kingdom.
Abstract (up to 150 words)
In a purely meritocratic society educational outcomes would reflect ability, and only ability.
Vocabulary size is a common measure of cognitive ability that predicts educational outcomes
but is confounded with socioeconomic circumstances (SEC). We ran preregistered analyses
of the nationally-representative UK Millennium Cohort Study data (N=15,576), sharing all
analysis code and data definitions to support follow-up and reproducibility. We show that
age-5 vocabulary strongly predicted age-16 educational attainment even after adjusting for
both SEC and caregiver vocabulary ability. However, the weight of evidence for the effect
was lower than that for the effect of SEC. Further, larger vocabulary was most advantageous
for those in middle SEC groups. This demonstrates the current limits of meritocracy in
education attainment. It suggests that early language interventions are well founded but
cannot by themselves be expected to counteract the effect of social inequality on life chances.
Language ability in early childhood is related to later educational attainment. It has
often been assumed that this relationship is causal – that children’s language skills affect their
ability to access the curriculum and exchange their thoughts and ideas which in turn affects
their academic performance (e.g., Hulme et al., 2020). However, determining a causal link is
complicated by the existence of a third factor that is related to both language and educational
attainment – children’s socio-economic circumstances (SEC).
It is well established that there are wide socioeconomic inequalities in language
ability which are observed from 18 months of age in both the United States of America
(USA; Pace, Luo, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2017; Fernald, Marchman & Weisleder, 2013)
and the United Kingdom (UK; McGillion, Pine, Herbert & Matthews, 2017). That there are
parallel socioeconomic inequalities in educational attainment has led many to claim that these
are driven by early inequalities in cognitive skills, most specifically language, since language
is the medium of so much education. However, this understanding rests on two untested
assumptions. The first is that the relationship between language ability and educational
outcomes is causal rather than simply reflecting their both being driven by a third variable
associated with social or other circumstances. The second assumption is that, if there is a
causal relationship between language and educational outcomes, it holds across SEC levels
equally. In other words, it assumes that we live in a broadly meritocratic society such that
children who have similar skills at school entry will, all other things being equal, succeed in
the education system, regardless of their SEC.
While there are recognised problems with the assumption that we should aim only for
meritocracy (Sandel, 2020), considerable effort is put into early interventions on the
assumption that supporting children’s language skills prior to school entry will allow them to
access educational and social activities, thereby breaking the cross-generational transmission
of disadvantage. It is therefore important to test the basic assumptions that underpin these
efforts. In this paper, we first aim to establish whether childhood vocabulary is indeed related
to age-16 educational attainment in the UK once SEC differences have been accounted for in
a large, nationally representative sample of children. We then further explore the meritocratic
assumption by examining whether children of similar language ability upon entering the
school system achieve similar education outcomes, regardless of their socioeconomic
circumstances.
There are many reasons to expect language skill to be a driver of learning and
educational attainment. The majority of teaching is delivered through the medium of
language. Oral language is a foundation for literacy and mathematics development, which in
turn are useful for learning other subjects (Lervåg et al., 2018; Moll et al., 2015; Slusser et
al., 2019; Snowling & Hulme, 2020). Indeed, an association between early language and both
early and later educational attainment is well documented (e.g., Bleses et al., 2016; Durham
et al., 2007; Einarsdóttir et al., 2016; Lehrl et al., 2019).
On the basis of such findings, language has been targeted by early interventions with
the aim of improving child outcomes, for example via initiatives such as Reach Out and Read
(Mendelsohn et al., 2001), or the Video Interaction Project (Piccolo et al., 2023) in the USA
and the Nuffield Early Language Intervention in the UK (West et al., 2021). However, the
potential of such interventions to improve education outcomes hinges on vocabulary playing
a causal role. It is therefore important as a first step to establish whether vocabulary predicts
educational attainment once all measured confounding factors have been accounted for.
Socioeconomic inequalities in vocabulary are known to widen before the entry to
school in the UK, and persist throughout childhood and into adolescence (Pace, 2017;
Sullivan, Moulton, & Fitzsimons, 2021; Thornton, Matthews, Patalay, & Bannard, 2022).
The reasons why are not well understood. Variance in vocabulary skill is thought to be partly
heritable (Chow & Wong, 2021) and shaped by the environment in which children are raised
(Rowe & Weisleder, 2020), two factors that are known to interact (e.g., Scarr & McCartney,
1983). A key feature of this study is that we include a control measure of caregiver
vocabulary (measured using gold standard assessments delivered by a researcher), since this
likely reflects both the genetic component of vocabulary skill, and the language environment
that cohort members experience.
Family SEC is also consistently found to predict educational attainment as indicated
by meta-analyses of studies in the USA and in developing countries (Harwell, Maeda,
Bishop, & Xie, 2017; Kim, Cho, & Kim, 2019; Sirin, 2005). In the UK, pupils eligible for
free school meals (a proxy for socio-economic disadvantage) are more likely to reach the end
of free education at the age of 19 without the basic benchmark of qualifications (5 GCSEs
grades A*-C/ 4-9, typically attained at age 16) and it is thought this gap is widening further
(The Children’s Commissioner, 2019). Low educational attainment tends to come at a cost to
the individual in terms of later poverty and unemployment, an inequality that is often passed
on to the next generation (Centre for Social Justice, 2013).
In sum, while it is reasonable to assume that a minimum level of language ability is a
prerequisite for access to much education, the nature of the relationship is obscured by the
existence of parallel SEC inequalities in both language and educational attainment. Indeed,
the pathways that explain the associations between SEC, early language, and education are
far from clear. We know that there are SEC inequalities in vocabulary, that there are SEC
inequalities in educational attainment, and that vocabulary predicts attainment. However, we
do not know 1) whether vocabulary predicts educational attainment above and beyond both
SEC in early childhood and caregiver vocabulary; and 2) whether vocabulary predicts
educational attainment equally for different (more or less advantaged) SEC groups.
In the current study, we used a large, nationally representative, contemporary British birth
cohort (the Millennium Cohort Study, MCS), to explore these research questions in a series
of pre-registered analyses. To address the first question, we tested whether early vocabulary
predicted age-16 educational outcomes, adjusting for a range of control variables including
SEC and caregiver vocabulary (with the latter used as a proxy for both the genetic component
of vocabulary skill, and the language environment that cohort members are exposed to). We
addressed the second question by testing whether the relation between early vocabulary and
age-16 educational outcomes is moderated by SEC. The outcomes assessed at age 16 were
the national qualifications that form a gateway to later education and employment in the UK.
Results
Descriptive statistics.
The analytical sample (N= 15,576) consisted of all cohort members with either a
response on the vocabulary measure at age 5 or with an educational attainment outcome.
Where there were multiple cohort members from the same family, one of these was selected
at random for inclusion in the sample. Missing data were accounted for using multiple
imputation (see Method). Descriptive statistics were calculated across the 25 imputed datasets
sample, and proportions were similar between the whole cohort and our analytical sample
(see supplementary file). However, means (±SD) for the average GCSE and average N5
grades were slightly higher in the whole cohort compared to our analytical sample.
(N=19,243)
Proportion (%) or
Mean(±SD) [95% CIs]
Whole Cohort Analytical Sample
Variable
(N= 19243) (N=15,576)
Vocabulary
Cohort Member Vocabulary 54.67(±10.97) 54.53(±11.06)
(Naming Vocabulary Score) [54.5;54.85] [54.36;54.71]
Caregiver Vocabulary 11.46(±4) 11.14(±4.03)
(Word Activity Test Score) [11.39;11.53] [11.07;11.2]
Cohort Member Education
Core Subjects Grade ≥ 4: No 34.28 37.98
Core Subjects Grade ≥ 4: Yes 65.72 62.02
Average GCSE grade 5.37(±1.59) 4.84(±1.69)
(England, Wales & Northern Ireland)1 [5.33;5.41] [4.81;4.87]
Average N5 grade 4.35(±0.69) 3.59(±0.98)
(Scotland)2 [4.29;4.41] [3.54;3.63]
Demographics
Sex (Male) 51.31 50.99
Sex (Female) 48.69 49.01
Ethnicity
85.9 86.21
(White)
Ethnicity
3.37 3.29
(mixed)
Ethnicity
1.87 1.91
(Indian)
Ethnicity
4.42 4.4
(Pakistani & Bangladeshi)
Ethnicity
3.06 2.9
(Black/ Black British)
Ethnicity
1.39 1.28
(other incl. Chinese)
EAL
88.42 88.73
(English only)
EAL
9.02 8.86
(English and another language)
EAL
2.56 2.41
(only another language)
Country
82.11 82.21
(England)
Country
5.04 4.95
(Wales)
Country
9.02 8.98
(Scotland)
Country
3.83 3.86
(Northern Ireland)
Socioeconomic Circumstances
Parent Education
5.82 5.43
(NVQ1)
Parent Education
25.45 25
(NVQ2)
Parent Education
15.99 15.98
(NVQ3)
Parent Education
34.9 36.33
(NVQ4)
Parent Education
7.23 7.58
(NVQ5)
Parent Education
10.61 9.68
(None of these/overseas qualifications)
Income Quintile 1 19.8 22.02
Income Quintile 2 24.33 23.8
Income Quintile 3 21.6 20.44
Income Quintile 4 20.9 20.16
Income Quintile 5 13.37 13.57
Wealth Quintile 13 26.36
Wealth Quintile 2 12.37
Wealth Quintile 3 17.92
Wealth Quintile 4 20.15
Wealth Quintile 5 23.2
Occupational Status
22.18 21.88
(routine)
Occupational Status
19 19.12
(intermediate)
Occupational Status
38.45 40.08
(higher managerial)
Occupational Status
20.37 18.92
(unemployed)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
12.85 12.22
(most deprived decile)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
10.99 10.6
(10 - <20%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
10.33 10.18
(20 - <30%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
9.18 9.14
(30 - <40%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
9.76 9.9
(40 - <50%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
9.71 9.79
(50 - <60%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
8.84 8.95
(60 - <70%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
9.02 9.3
(70 - <80%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
9.4 9.73
(80 - <90%)
Relative Neighbourhood Deprivation
9.9 10.2
(least deprived decile)
1Average GCSE grade refers to the average grade across English, Mathematics and Science subjects and was calculated
post imputation on data from England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
2Average N5 (National Five) grade refers to the average grade across English, Mathematics and Science subjects and was
calculated post imputation on data from Scotland.
3Wealth was derived post imputation and therefore we do not present the proportions for Wealth quintiles in the whole
cohort, due to the high level of missing data among the wealth components.
In analyses, the average GCSE grade and average N5 grade were converted into z scores and combined into one variable
pre-imputation.
Note that descriptives for the whole cohort (N=19,243) do not indicate the level of missing data for these variables in the
Analytical sample descriptive statistics were calculated and pooled across 25 imputed datasets and are weighted to
account for the sample design of the MCS and attrition.
Early vocabulary predicts age-16 educational attainment when controlling for Socio-
Economic Circumstances and Caregiver Language Ability
Educational attainment was captured by two outcome variables in our analyses: 1) a
binary variable indicating whether cohort members achieved benchmark educational
qualifications (grade ≥C/4 in English, Maths and Science subjects), and 2) a continuous
variable indicating average performance across these subjects. Full results can be found in the
supplementary file, section 2.
When considering the binary outcome variable, in an unadjusted logistic regression
model (i.e., not including any potential confounding variables), there was a significant
relation between age 5 vocabulary and achieving ≥ grade 4 on the core subjects at the end of
secondary school, such that with every SD unit increase in age 5 vocabulary, the odds of
test whether this relation held when potential confounding factors were included, we first
tested whether two sets of potential confounding variables predicted achieving benchmark
educational qualifications: 1) sex, ethnicity, English as an Additional Language (EAL),
country, parent education, parent income, parent occupational status, parent wealth, and
neighbourhood deprivation, to adjust for sociodemographic factors; and 2) caregiver
vocabulary, to adjust for both heritable differences in language ability and language exposure
variance over and above these variables.
Compared to a model with no predictors, a model with the first set of
sociodemographic confounding variables improved the model fit (Dm(36,3473.53)=39.87,
p<.001). Model comparisons further revealed caregiver vocabulary to predict variance in
achieving the benchmark above sociodemographic variables (Dm(1,81.25)=127.75, p<.001).
Further, adding age 5 vocabulary scores to a model containing sociodemographic and
caregiver vocabulary factors improved the model fit (Dm(1,86.05)=237.67, p<.001) such that
higher vocabulary scores were associated with increased odds of passing the benchmark
grade threshold. After controlling for sociodemographic and caregiver vocabulary factors,
with every SD unit increase in age 5 vocabulary, the odds of passing the benchmark of ≥
When considering the average grade in core subjects, in an unadjusted linear
regression model (i.e., not including any potential confounding variables), a positive relation
was observed, such that higher age 5 vocabulary scores were associated with higher levels of
factors were included, we first tested whether the above two sets of potential confounding
subsequently assessed whether vocabulary explained variance over and above these variables.
Compared to a model with no predictors, a model with sociodemographic
confounding variables improved the model fit (Dm(36,3418.41)=89.91, p<.001). Further,
caregiver vocabulary predicted variance in average performance across the core subjects
above sociodemographic variables (Dm(1,78.57)=254.34, p=<.001). Finally, adding age 5
vocabulary scores to a model containing sociodemographic and caregiver vocabulary factors
improved the model fit (Dm(1,61.43)=325.08, p<.001) such that higher vocabulary scores
standard deviation increase in age 5 vocabulary scores, average performance in the core
subjects improved by 0.22 of a standard deviation.
Complete case analyses for both outcome variables, including Welsh as a core subject
for those who were living in Wales, and analyses conducted on each country separately did
not change this overall pattern of results: vocabulary predicted unique variance in educational
attainment in all analyses (see Supplementary Material, Sections 3-6). Further, exploratory
analyses on attainment in English, Mathematics and Science as separate subjects revealed
that vocabulary similarly predicted achievement in each of these subjects and predicted
unique variance above and beyond SEC and caregiver vocabulary factors (see Supplementary
Materials, Section 7).
Finally, to establish the explanatory value of age 5 vocabulary compared to SEC for
age-16 educational outcomes, we compared relative AIC values in separate models that
composite was found to have better predictive value than age-5 vocabulary, as indicated by
the lower AIC value for this predictor.
In sum, regardless of how we conceptualise the outcome, stronger age 5 vocabulary
predicted better educational attainment at the end of secondary school even after accounting
for sociodemographic and caregiver vocabulary factors. However, it was found to be a less
valuable predictor of their educational attainment than SEC alone.
The relation between early vocabulary and age-16 educational attainment is different
for different socio-economic groups.
To test whether the effect of age-5 vocabulary on age-16 educational attainment was
compared to a model without this interaction term, the interaction term was found to explain
relationship between early vocabulary and educational outcomes at age 16 is strongest for
those in the middle SEC quintiles and weaker for both the most disadvantaged and the most
advantaged children. The likelihood of reaching benchmark educational qualifications
increases as a function of age-5 vocabulary but this increase is not equal across SEC groups.
The gradient is somewhat shallow for cohort members in the lowest SEC quintile (the most
disadvantaged children), is particularly steep in quintiles 3 and 4, and then is shallower again
for the highest SEC quintile.
To spell this out, cohort members in quintile 3 with average age-5 vocabulary have
roughly a 50-50 chance of reaching benchmark educational qualifications, whereas cohort
members in this group with very low age-5 vocabulary have a 20% chance, and cohort
members with very high age-5 vocabulary have an 80% chance. In contrast, cohort members
with the most disadvantaged circumstances (quintile 1) are unlikely to reach benchmark
educational qualifications no matter how high their age-5 vocabulary - those with the lowest
vocabulary levels have a 15% chance, those with average vocabulary have a 33% chance, and
lowest age-5 vocabulary have a 40% chance of reaching benchmark educational
qualifications, those with average age-5 vocabulary have an 80% chance and those with very
high age-5 vocabulary have a chance of over 90% of reaching benchmark educational
qualifications.
The overall pattern of results persisted when the average grade in core subjects was
vocabulary increases in all SEC groups, and the biggest increases seen in the middle SEC
groups. Since the average grade in core subjects does not include cohort members who did
shows the pattern of results when the outcome is a binary variable indicating whether cohort
members took the core subjects (regardless of whether the grade met the benchmark for the
subject taken or not). The likelihood of having the core subjects at GCSE increases with
vocabulary skill, and this increase is greater in the middle SEC groups. In sum, regardless of
how educational attainment at the end of secondary school is conceptualised, it is clear from
these figures that the relation between vocabulary and education is not equal across different
socioeconomic groups.
Sensitivity analyses
1) Including Welsh as a core subject in the moderation analyses
A sensitivity analysis where Welsh was included as a core subject for those who were
living in Wales found that SEC did not moderate the relation between age 5 vocabulary and
educational attainment (see Supplementary File, Section 5). This may reflect SEC and other
related differences (such as confidence and attitudes towards the language) in the uptake of
studying Welsh across different areas of Wales, which is something to be further explored in
a Welsh context (National Survey for Wales 2017-18, 2018). Sensitivity analyses on
England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland separately revealed a significant moderation
effect of SEC in England only. There was no moderation of SEC on the relation between age
5 vocabulary and educational attainment in Wales, Scotland, or Northern Ireland (see
four countries, therefore this pattern of findings may be a result of analyses in the smaller UK
countries being underpowered.
2) Investigating each SEC component in the moderation analyses
To unpack the moderating effect of the SEC composite further, we investigated each
comparisons were again used to test the significance of the interaction terms. Parent
education (Dm(5, 865.4)=2.41, p = .035), household income (Dm(4, 511.18) =2.57, p=.037),
and occupational status (Dm(3, 379.31)=5.08, p=.002) all moderated the relation between
age 5 vocabulary and achieving benchmark educational qualifications (see Supplementary
File, Section 9). Wealth (Dm(4, 584.49) = 1.67, p=.155) and relative neighbourhood
deprivation (Dm(9, 1102.32)=0.8, p = .621) did not moderate the relation (see Supplementary
File, Section 9). Parent education and occupational status particularly clearly reflect the
pattern observed when considering SEC as a composite variable, with the steepest increase in
3) Adjusting for potential confounding on the interaction term
To control for potential confounding effects on the interaction term, we conducted an
extremely conservative set of sensitivity analyses whereby interaction terms between the
potential confounders (remaining SEC variables) and the predictor (vocabulary), and
interaction terms between potential confounders and the moderator (each SEC variable in
turn) were entered into the model (Keller, 2014). Over 25 imputed datasets, there were no
moderation effects for individual SEC indicators. This suggests that the individual indicators
of SEC are not separable in their interaction effects on the relation between vocabulary and
educational attainment. The moderation of SEC is likely an additive effect of each SEC
indicator, which likely have shared variance in their interaction terms.
4) Addressing the possibility of regression to the mean
Finally, we explored the possibility that the observed moderation effect could be
attributed to “regression to the mean”. Previous work has made the claim that the advantages
for educational attainment of early cognitive abilities is much greater in higher than lower
SEC groups, only for a reanalysis to show that the effect was spurious (Jerrim & Vignoles,
2013).We therefore addressed the possibility of regression to the mean in a final set of
sensitivity analyses: we ran a series of simulations based on the approach proposed by Krause
and Pinheiro (2007). These simulation analyses indicate that a moderation effect persists
beyond any presence of regression to the mean (pooled adjusted p value = .018; see
supplementary file, section 11).
Relationship in Each Analysis
Binary Outcome Continuous Outcome
Analysis Details
(OR [95% CIs] (β [95% CIs]
Age 5 Vocabulary
predicting educational
1.86[1.78; 1.94]*** .35[.33;.37]***
Unadjusted attainment at the end of
Relationship secondary school in an p<.001 p<.001
unadjusted model. Main
pre-registered analysis.
Age 5 Vocabulary
predicting educational
Adjusting for attainment at the end of 1.62[1.52;1.72]*** .22[.19;.24]***
sociodemographic and secondary school in a p<.001 p<001
caregiver vocabulary fully adjusted model.
factors Main pre-registered
analysis.
Fully adjusted model
with an age 5*SEC
composite interaction
term to assess whether
Moderation analysis the role of vocabulary 1.09[1.03; 1.15]** NA
(SEC composite) in predicting p=.004
educational attainment
is stable across SEC
groups. Main pre-
registered analysis.
Indicator AIC AIC
Age 5 Vocab 17300.86[17260.58;17341.14] 438.7
Composite SEC 16862.16[16822.97;16901.35] AIC*
Discussion
In a series of pre-registered analyses, we tested the assumption that vocabulary is an
important predictor of educational attainment at the end of secondary school, using a large,
nationally representative, contemporary British birth cohort, adjusting for important
sociodemographic factors. We also tested whether vocabulary predicts educational attainment
equally across different socioeconomic groups. Age-5 vocabulary was a strong predictor of
both achieving benchmark educational qualifications and average performance across core
subjects in public examinations taken around the age of 16. This was the case above and
beyond family SEC and caregiver vocabulary. This supports the claim that educational
success depends upon language ability. However, SEC alone was found to be a better
predictor of educational attainment that age-5 vocabulary. Furthermore, the effect of
vocabulary on educational attainment was not stable across SEC groups: the benefits
conferred by strong age-5 vocabulary on educational attainment were greatest in the middle
SEC groups.
That vocabulary predicts educational attainment at the end of secondary school is
perhaps not surprising since so many school learning activities involve using and
understanding spoken and written language. Vocabulary skills lay the foundations for reading
and mathematics which are essential for later academic achievement (Ricketts, Lervåg,
Dawson, Taylor, & Hulme, 2020; Slusser, Ribner, & Shusterman, 2019; Schuth, Köhne, &
Weinert, 2017). Moreover, a rich vocabulary feeds itself in that, when a child comes across a
new word, knowing the words that surround it will help them infer its meaning (Elleman,
2019; Larsen & Nippold, 2007). However, it must also be noted that vocabulary was a less
valuable predictor of educational outcomes than SEC alone.
There are several reasons why SEC might moderate the relation between early
language skills and educational outcomes. First, children experiencing disadvantage are both
more likely to have clinical levels of language difficulty and less likely to be referred for, or
be in receipt of, speech and language therapy services (Roy et al., 2014). Second,
opportunities available to children differ as a function of socio-economic circumstances, for
example, children experiencing disadvantage are less likely to access private tuition, to attend
high-quality schools or to take part in extra-curricular activities (Jerrim, 2017). Third, it is
possible that non-academic outcomes may be more valued than academic qualifications
among lower SEC caregivers (House of Commons, 2021).
It is worth noting that we also found that caregiver vocabulary ability predicted child
educational attainment, even after accounting for SEC. Previous studies have found caregiver
vocabulary mediates the relation between SEC and offspring vocabulary skill (Sullivan et al.,
2021). It is assumed that this is because caregiver vocabulary is a proxy for both genetic and
environmental factors. There is a heritable component of both childhood vocabulary and
educational attainment (Chow & Wong, 2021; Selzam et al., 2017). However, a recent
adoption study found that a beneficial impact of the quality of maternal language input on
vocabulary remained, even in the absence of genetic effects (Coffey et al., 2021). The
gene*environment hypothesis suggests that the influence of genetics may be suppressed
among children experiencing socio-economic disadvantage (Gottschling et al., 2019; Scarr &
McCartney, 1983) and this may partly explain the current results.
In exploratory analyses, we investigated the moderating role of each SEC indicator
separately (parent education, household income, occupational status, household wealth and
relative neighbourhood deprivation). Only parent education, household income and
occupational status were significant moderators, indicating they may be driving the
moderating effect observed by the composite indicator. However, when we ran conservative
sensitivity analyses (that aimed to control for the influence of potential confounding variables
Click here to enter text. on the interaction term: Keller, 2014), these suggested shared
variance among the individual SEC indicators in how they moderate the relation between
child vocabulary and later educational attainment. Thus, no conclusion about any one
indicator can be drawn here. The moderating effect based on the composite SEC factor also
showed the largest effect sizes, which again reflects a cumulative effect of all SEC indicators.
The current findings have practical implications. The fact that age-5 vocabulary
ability uniquely predicted educational attainment at the end of secondary school, even after
controlling for SEC and caregiver vocabulary, suggests that interventions and policies that
support early vocabulary development may well improve age-16 educational outcomes,
which in turn are a gateway to further qualification and the labour market (Lupton, Thomson,
Velthuis, & Unwin, 2021; The Children’s Commissioner, 2019). While it is important to note
the greater relative predictive value of SEC, indicating that improving early language ability
is not a panacea, it is clearly a valuable available lever for policymakers.
To have meaningful long-term effects, support for language skills should not stop at
age 5. Our moderation effect indicates that even children who enter school with relatively
strong language skills are not that likely to gain gateway qualifications if they experience
socio-economic disadvantage. Indeed, other modelling work suggests that, as children enter
adolescence there is a widening of disparities in vocabulary ability as a function of socio-
economic circumstances (Thornton et al., 2022). Understanding the causal mechanisms here
is a significant scientific challenge as it is not practical, or sometimes ethical, to
experimentally manipulate the factors involved in isolation of each other. Nonetheless,
careful introduction of new policies such that their impact can be assessed would allow more
rapid improvements of services for families.
To take one example, the predictive value of caregiver vocabulary (used here to
capture both heritable language ability and the caregiving language environment) could be
taken to suggest that improving provision of adult education, which is currently sparse and
concentrated among more affluent adults, might help parents and caregivers to help their
children (Social Mobility Commission, 2019). This would be relatively easy to test. Another
example concerns debates around entry requirements for further and higher education. In
England, there were debates among the previous government in 2022 around introducing a
minimum level of school achievement on eligibility for student loans for university
attendance (Department for Education, 2022). The current findings, in line with findings
reported by Drayton and van der Erve (2022), suggest caution would be necessary if the
Labour government were to revisit these plans, to ensure able but disadvantaged pupils are
not locked out of education. Again, a more flexible model of adult education may be
valuable.
There are some limitations to this research that need to be kept in mind when
interpreting findings. Our educational attainment outcomes are based on self-reported
qualifications: cohort members were asked to indicate the subjects they studied and the grade
they achieved, with subjects being presented to them in a list format. Some work with the
MCS has found some underestimation at the bottom of the distribution and some
overestimation at the top of the distribution in the self-reported data, when compared to
linked National Pupil Database (NPD) data (Anders, Green, Henderson & Henseke, 2024).
Future research could use linked NPD data (which is only available for England) to
investigate whether the results found here replicate with a more objective version of
qualification data. However, the aforementioned paper found that pupil self-report data on
their eight best GCSE grades was similarly distributed to the objective Attainment 8 measure
(a measure of pupil’s eight best performing subjects) held in the NPD, with a correlation of
0.89, despite the under/over estimation at either end of the distribution (Anders et al., 2024).
Furthermore, in other datasets such as the Twins Early Development Study found a
correlation of .99 between self-report and NPD qualification data (Smith-Woolley et al.,
2018). Together, these findings suggest that self-report qualification data is reliable in the
absence of more objective data, such as that held in the NPD.
Relatedly, different qualifications are taken in England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland at the end of secondary school. We harmonised educational attainment in
each country to the best of our ability. Finally, as with any longitudinal data analysis,
missing data had to be accounted for. Families experiencing lower SEC tend to be
underrepresented in subsequent sweeps of cohort studies (Elliot & Shepherd, 2006; Mostafa
& Wiggins, 2014), and it is also possible that those with poor vocabulary may have been less
likely to respond to later sweeps, meaning we may have underestimated effect sizes.
However, analyses were sample and attrition weighted and we used multiple imputations
with a rich set of auxiliary indicators to account for missing data, which is a “best effort”
approach (Little & Rubin, 2002).
Despite these limitations, the strengths of this research lie in the large, nationally
representative longitudinal birth cohort used, which has rich data using gold-standard,
researcher-administered standardised tests of vocabulary and a broad range of SEC indicators
across all four nations of the UK. The strengths of this dataset allowed us to robustly estimate
the relation between early vocabulary and the attainment of important gateway qualifications.
Further, we can be confident that our results are generalisable across the United Kingdom,
given the nationally representative sample. Another major strength of this work is that we
were able to include a direct measure of caregiver vocabulary in our analyses, which likely
reflects both the environment cohort members are exposed to as well as genetics, both of
which are important for vocabulary development and educational attainment. Finally, we can
have confidence that there is a true moderating effect of SEC in the relation between
vocabulary and education, due to the simulation analyses which we included to account for
regression to the mean.
Conclusion
Overall, we found that in a large, nationally representative cohort, early vocabulary
predicted unique variance in age-16 educational qualifications that form an important
gateway to later education and employment in the UK. This was the case even after adjusting
for SEC and caregiver vocabulary. However, we also found SEC to moderate the relation
between age-5 vocabulary and later educational outcomes such that the benefits of a larger
vocabulary were most stark for children in middle SEC bands. This suggests that supporting
early vocabulary development as a means of improving educational attainment is well
founded but not sufficient. Support for children and their caregivers across the lifespan is
likely necessary to ensure children derive the benefits of education.
Method
Data from the Millennium Cohort Study (MCS) were used in these analyses, a
longitudinal birth cohort study of 19,518 young people from 19,244 families, born across
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland between 2000-02 (Connelly & Platt, 2014),
which enabled us to look at the effects of vocabulary on achievement at the end of secondary
school across the United Kingdom. We selected all cohort members with either a response on
the vocabulary measure at age 5 or with an educational attainment outcome. Where there are
multiple cohort members from the same family, one of these was selected at random for
inclusion in our sample. This resulted in a total sample of 15,576 cohort members.
Measures
Predictor variable: Age 5 vocabulary: Naming Vocabulary BAS II subscale (Elliott,
Smith, & McCulloch, 1996).
At age 5, MCS cohort members completed the Naming Vocabulary BAS test, as a
measure of their expressive language (see Chapter 2). Cohort members were shown a series
of images, one at a time, and asked to name each item. Progression through this test depends
on performance, and poor performance may result in a different, easier set of items being
administered. Cohort members were also born over a 1.5-year period (September 2000-
January 2002) and assessed over a range of months, so their age at the time of testing may
differ between cohort members. Therefore, we used t-scores adjusted for item difficulty and
age. These were converted to z scores for analyses.
Outcome variables: educational attainment at the end of secondary school.
Using self-reported qualification data, we focused on qualifications usually taken
~age 16 (i.e., GCSEs for England, Wales, and Northern Ireland and N5 qualifications for
cohort members in Scotland), and conceptualised educational attainment in the following two
ways: a binary variable indicating whether cohort members achieved benchmark educational
subjects); and a continuous variable indicating average performance across these subjects.
Details on we derived these outcome variables can be found in the Supplementary Methods.
Highers BTEC
GCSE iGCSE National Five
(level 2)
English (first Language: Language: NA
English
Englis language) English English
h English
English literature
subject language
s English
literature
Mathematic NA
Mathematics Mathematics Mathematics
Mathematics
(linear)
Maths
Mathematics
subject
(numeracy)
Further
Mathematics
Additional
mathematics
Biology Biology Biology Biology Science
Human Applied
Chemistry Chemistry Chemistry
Biology Science
Physics Physics Physics Chemistry
Scienc
Computer
Applied Science Science Physics
Science
Subject
Additional Computer Computer
Applied Science Science Science
Additional
science
Combined
Science
Further
additional
science
Science
Science
(modular)
Additional
Science
(modular)
Human Biology
Computer
Science
Due to the self-report nature of the data, a wide variety of subjects are reported by cohort members, particularly for GCSE.
We have no way of establishing exactly what cohort members mean when they report a specific subject, therefore we chose
was a particular issue for Science, due to the number of different Science subjects reported. We cannot know for sure what a
student was referring to, for example when they reported “Science” or “Additional applied science”, therefore we chose to
include all of these as contributing towards the “core subjects” variable. Computer Science is also included, as this counts
towards the Science subjects (Department for Education, 2018). In Wales, pupils can take either Mathematics or
Mathematics (Numeracy) and so both of these are counted in the “core subjects” variable. English language is compulsory in
all schools, and English literature is compulsory in most schools, therefore cohort members reporting at least one were
classed as having “core subjects”.
Modification variables: Socioeconomic circumstances
We considered 5 SEC indicators. These were first converted into a factor score to give
a composite variable of parental SEC when cohort members were aged 3 (except wealth,
which was measured when cohort members were aged 11), using confirmatory factor analysis
(see Supplementary Methods). This composite variable was used as the moderator variable in
the main analysis, as in previous analyses, this composite variable was shown to explain the
most variance in vocabulary throughout childhood and into adolescence (Thornton, 2021),
when compared to each separate SEC indicator. The individual indicators that make up the
composite factor score are detailed below.
Parental education: as a measure of parent’s education, we used NVQ levels (both
academic and vocational qualifications derived into NVQ levels 1-5, with level 1 equating to
GCSE grades D-G or NVQ level 1 vocational equivalents, and level 5 equating to higher
degree qualifications; see Rosenberg, 2012). We used the highest household NVQ level, as
this was shown to predict the most variance in vocabulary (Thornton, 2021).
Income: UK OECD weighted income quintiles at age 3 (an indication of household
income 1=lowest, 5=highest, accounting for family size) were used. If data was missing,
OECD weighted income quintiles at age 9 months were used instead.
Occupational status: highest household occupational status (NS-SEC 4 categories:
higher managerial; intermediate; routine; unemployed) at 3 years was used. If data was
missing, occupational status at age 9 months was used instead.
Wealth: a measure of total net wealth, taken from the age 11 sweep of the MCS was
used. This measure was derived from 4 variables: amount outstanding on all mortgages,
house value, number of investments and assets, and number of debts owed. Outstanding
mortgages were subtracted from the house value, to give a measure of housing wealth. Debts
owed was taken from the number of investments and assets, to give a measure of financial
wealth. Housing wealth and financial wealth were then summed to give an overall measure of
total net wealth.
Relative neighbourhood deprivation: Indices of multiple deprivation (IMD) deciles,
ranging from the most deprived decile to the least deprived decile were taken from the age 3
sweep of the data. If data is missing, IMD deciles at age 9 months were used instead.
Potential confounding variables.
Demographic confounders. In all models, we controlled for cohort member’s sex at
birth (male, female); ethnicity (White, mixed, Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi, Black or
Black British, other ethnic group (including Chinese); whether English was spoken as an
additional language in the home (English only, English and another language, only another
language); and the country that the cohort member lived in (England, Wales, Scotland,
Northern Ireland).
Caregiver vocabulary.
Caregiver vocabulary was measured in the age 14 sweep of the MCS, using the Word
Activity Test (Closs, 1986): they were given a list of 20 target words, each presented
alongside 5 other words, and had to choose the word which meant the same, or nearly the
same as the target word, from the 5 options. In the MCS, there is a main respondent (usually
the mother) and a partner respondent (usually the father), and both the main and partner
respondents had the opportunity to complete the word activity test, with a different set of 20
words each. We used the mean score across respondents, under the assumption that the cohort
member spends roughly an equivalent amount of time with both caregivers. Taking the mean
enabled us to account for more of what cohort members are exposed to in terms of caregiver
vocabulary and a proxy measure for the heritable component of vocabulary.
Data analysis
All analyses were pre-registered on the Open Science Framework website (OSF
number blinded for peer review), and all R code can be found on GitHub (blinded for peer
review). Analyses consisted of a series of multiple logistic and multiple linear regression
models.
Missing data strategy. Multiple imputation using chained equations was employed to
account for missing data, using the mice package in R (van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn,
2011), to minimise the impact of biased attrition on the model estimates (Elliott & Shepherd,
2006). Imputations accounted for the interaction between SEC variables and age 5
vocabulary, since the interaction between these variables is of interest here (van Buuren,
2011). The dataset was imputed 25 times, as this was greater than the overall percentage of
missing data for each variable in the dataset, which also includes auxiliary variables used in
the multiple imputations. The percentage of missing data among the outcome variables is
high (36.65% for the binary outcome variable and 50.73% for the continuous outcome
variable). We therefore conducted sensitivity analyses on complete cases for each outcome
variable, which did not change the overall pattern of results (see Supplementary File,
Sections 3 and 4).
Combined sampling and attrition weights were applied to the data to account for the
stratified clustered design of MCS cohort data, and the oversampling of subgroups, as well as
for missing data due to attrition from the MCS before the age of 5, when the vocabulary
measure of interest was measured.
Analysis plan.
Investigating the relationship between early vocabulary and educational attainment at
the end of secondary school, controlling for the effect of SEC
We estimated the relation between age five vocabulary and educational attainment
using a series of logistic and linear regression models. These were built in the same way,
employing the first outcome (achieving ≥grade 4/C in the core subjects) in the logistic
regressions, and the second outcome (the mean grade across core subjects) in the linear
regressions. First, the unadjusted relationship was estimated to assess whether there was an
association. Subsequently, to test if any association remained over and above SEC and
caregiver vocabulary factors, sociodemographic confounding variables (sex, ethnicity, EAL,
country, parent education, income, occupational status, wealth, and neighbourhood
deprivation) were included in a first regression model. Caregiver vocabulary was then added
in a second model, and age five vocabulary was added to a model containing all potential
confounding variables to see if an association remained after adjusting for these variables.
For these models, a model containing demographic confounders (sex, ethnicity, EAL,
parent education, income, occupational status, wealth, and neighbourhood deprivation) was
compared to a model with no predictors. Each model was subsequently compared to the
previous model to see if the different potential confounding variables predicted unique
variance in educational attainment. An improvement in model fit was assessed using nested
model comparisons for imputed data, using the method of Meng and Rubin (1992). If an
improvement in fit is seen when adding caregiver vocabulary to a model with demographic
and SEC predictors, this would indicate that caregiver vocabulary predicts variance in
educational achievement above and beyond SEC predictors. Similarly, if an improvement in
model fit is seen after adding age 5 vocabulary, this would indicate that early vocabulary
predicts unique variance in attainment, even after controlling for sociodemographic
information, enabling us to answer the question of whether any relation holds above and
beyond SEC and caregiver vocabulary factors. As a planned additional analysis, we
investigated at the effects of age 5 vocabulary on attainment in English, Maths and Science
separately at the end of secondary school, rather than as a combined measure, to see if
language affects these subjects differently, or effects one subject more than others (see
Supplementary File, Section 7).
To establish whether our main findings were contingent on any of the analytic
decisions outlined above, we ran a series of planned sensitivity analyses. First, Welsh was
also included as a core subject for cohort members in Wales in the first two sets of regression
models (RQ1 & RQ2); Welsh is a compulsory GCSE for those sitting the examinations in
Wales; we therefore want to assess whether including this in our conceptualisation of core
subjects changes the pattern of our results (see Supplementary File, Section 5). We also re-
ran analyses on each country separately (England, Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland),
due to the different education systems and examinations taken in each of these countries. This
analysis allowed us to see if any one country is driving any particular finding (Supplementary
File, Section 6).
Establishing how much early vocabulary matters for educational attainment in
different socioeconomic groups.
To assess if vocabulary is equally as important across SEC groups, and thus whether
the UK really is meritocratic, the following multiple logistic regression model was built, with
the binary variable ascertaining whether cohort members achieved benchmark educational
qualifications was the outcome variable: sex, ethnicity, EAL, country, caregiver vocabulary,
with a parent SEC composite* age 5 vocabulary interaction term. To test the significance of
the interaction term, a model with the interaction term was compared to a model without the
interaction term using nested model comparisons for imputed data (Meng & Rubin, 1992), to
see whether the interaction term predicts unique variance in the outcome. We conducted a
series of additional analyses to any moderation effects further, since each indicator of SEC
could theoretically influence both vocabulary and education in different ways. To unpack any
moderating effect of the composite variable and establish if it is any one SEC indicator in
particular driving any interaction, we included each indicator of SEC as a moderator in
separate models. Again, to test the significance of each interaction term, a model with the
interaction term was compared to a model without the interaction term using nested model
comparisons for imputed data (Meng & Rubin, 1992), to see whether the interaction term
predicted unique variance in the outcome.
There is some concern in the literature that regression models with potential
confounding variables simply being added as control variables do not properly adjust for the
confounding effect of these variables on the interaction term – only on the potential
confounding influence of the predictor variable (here, vocabulary) on the outcome (GCSE
attainment) (Keller, 2014). To control for potential confounding effects on the interaction
term, all potential confounders and interaction terms between the potential confounders and
the predictor, and potential confounders and the moderator, must be entered into the model
(Keller, 2014). We therefore ran sensitivity analyses for our SEC* vocabulary moderations,
whereby we included interaction terms between potential confounders (remaining SEC
variables) and between the predictor (vocabulary) and potential confounders and the
moderator (each SEC variable in turn), to ensure the confounding effect of SEC on the
interaction term was accounted for (see Supplementary File, Section 10).