PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 1
THIS MANUSCRIPT IS CURRENTLY UNDER REVIEW
“A Continuous Opening of Life”: Perspectives on Aging Across Time, Gender, and Race
Kristen M. Johnson,1 Bidushi Bhowmik,2 Noor Al-Khaouli,2 and Hollen N. Reischer2
1Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
2Department of Psychology, University at Buffalo
Author Note
We have no conflicts of interest to disclose. This study was supported by a Summer
Undergraduate Research Grant from Northwestern University to Kristen M. Johnson. Data
collection was supported through a grant from the Foley Family Foundation to Dan P. McAdams
to establish the Foley Center for the Study of Lives at Northwestern University. Portions of this
study’s findings were presented at the 2024 Society for Personality and Social Psychology
Annual Convention, 2024 Midwestern Psychological Association Conference, and 2024
Northwestern Undergraduate Research and Art Exposition.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kristen M. Johnson at
kmjohnson25@uchicago.edu.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 2
Abstract
Research on narrative identity—the ongoing process of shaping and being shaped by life
stories—provides rich insight into personality development and can predict psychosocial well-
being. However, narratives about aging remain underexamined, limiting our understanding of
narrative identity processes over the life course. We explored individuals’ narratives on aging,
examining how narrative themes vary across age, gender, and race, and relate to four domains of
self-reported well-being (psychological well-being, generativity, physical health, body image).
We analyzed narrative scenes from 143 late midlife adults (62% women, 38% men; 58%
White, 40% Black, 2% interracial/other) twice, first at mean age 60.37 (SD=0.90; n=135) and
again at mean age 64.5 (SD=0.95; n=136). Participants responded to questions about stability
versus change in personal identity and feelings about the aging process. We coded five narrative
themes: agency, communion, closure, self-actualization, and exploratory processing.
Results showed exploratory processing was the only narrative theme to increase
significantly over time. Black participants scored higher than White participants on agency, self-
actualization, and closure; no gender differences were found. Most narrative themes predicted
well-being measures in models controlling for race. In particular, self-actualization predicted all
four measures, and agency predicted all but generativity. Psychological well-being was predicted
by four of five themes and physical health/fitness was predicted by three.
We interpret these findings in the context of the interplay of race, gender, and master
narratives, and highlight the importance of narrative identity processes to well-being in late
midlife, with implications for understanding diverse aging experiences.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 3
Public Significance Statement
Among late-midlife adults narrating personal stories of aging, there were no thematic differences
by gender, but Black participants’ stories were significantly more agentic, self-actualized, and
emotionally resolved than those of White participants. For all participants, robust self-
actualization and agency themes predicted enhanced well-being, pointing to the value of
interpreting aging experiences with a sense of self-determination and self-fulfillment. The
science of “successful aging” must be nuanced and grounded in the lived experience of diverse
adults.
Keywords
narrative identity, aging perceptions, Black people, psychological well-being, generativity
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 4
“I don't look at aging as [a] coming to an end, but as a continuous opening of life.” This
portrait of getting older from one study participant stands in contrast with the common depiction
of aging in the United States (Kluger, 2023). Rather than framing aging within a context of loss
—a life process to be dreaded—this participant alludes to a self-understanding and self-
expansion that may result from a lifetime of exploring and extracting meaning from one’s
experiences. Another study participant shared, “I'm better than I were [sic] as far as knowing
who I am, the history of who I am, what it means to be…in this world…I'm more astute and
more educated,” reflecting on the benefits of increased knowledge and wisdom that come with
the accrual of lived experiences. For this participant, too, the widespread narrative of aging-as-
loss fails to capture their lived experience. With regards to aging, there appears to be a fuller and
more nuanced personal narrative available for individuals.
Understanding the lived experiences and needs of aging individuals is increasingly
critical as populations around the world grow older, with projections indicating this trend will
accelerate in coming decades (Goldstein, 2023; US Census Bureau, 2023; World Health
Organization 2021). Studies on the well-being of aging populations have revealed challenges and
opportunities associated with longer lifespans on individual and societal levels (Buecker et al.,
2023; Corwin et al., 2009; Fried et al., 2022; Rowe & Kahn, 2015). Many studies focus on health
concerns and pharmacotherapeutic treatments for aging adults, given that “longer lives are, in
some cases, associated with morbidities, loneliness, and inactivity” (Plácido el al, 2022). Others
allude to the economic advantages of people living longer and generally healthier lives
(Gottmark et al., 2018; Scott, 2021). Vital toward the creation and provision of resources for
aging individuals, research focused on medical and economic concerns must also be augmented
by research centered on aging adults’ lived experiences. Otherwise, an incomplete model of
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 5
“successful aging” could inform policy and treatment decisions, leading to a disconnect and
deterioration in the relationship between aging adults and the institutions meant to serve them.
Better understanding of how individuals perceive and make meaning of their own aging
processes, particularly the most challenging and most rewarding, is important both
epistemologically and pragmatically. Rigorous research on the lived experience of aging
individuals is therefore vital to meet the needs of an increasingly older population.
The Lived Experience of Aging
Comparatively small in the broader context of aging research, some previous literature
has explored aspects of the lived experience of aging. Existing qualitative work has highlighted
themes in individuals’ personal stories of aging such as adaptation to physical changes, shifts in
social roles, and reflections on purpose and legacy (Blawert & Wurm, 2020; Burns & Leonard,
2005; Shellman, 2004; Washburn & Williams, 2020; Xiao et al., 2024). Other studies have
quantified individuals’ concerns about aging, such as loneliness, change in appearance, and
declining health (Allen et al., 2024; Lytle et al., 2018; Menkin et al., 2017; Montepare, 2007;
Newton et al., 2017; Nikitin et al., 2024). Few studies have traced the meaning that individuals
extract from their experiences of aging or quantified such findings in a way that may be
compared across demographics or correlated with well-being outcomes. No research to date has
specifically examined how individuals “story” the aging process using a narrative identity
framework.
Narrative identity is the study of the internalized and evolving story of the self that
reflects individual meaning-making and personal coherence in one’s life story (McAdams, 2015).
In brief, narrative identity methods typically entail translating qualitative data (interviews with
individual participants telling stories of key personal experiences and beliefs) into quantitative
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 6
ratings of narrative “themes,” which are then included in further analyses to explore relationships
between individual narrative identity and personality or clinical variables of interest (Adler et al.,
2017). Given its ability to both deeply explore and quantify participants’ perceived meaning of
life’s events, narrative identity is an ideal lens through which to explore aging individuals' lived
experiences, how they may pattern across groups, and relate to indicators of well-being.
Successful Aging
In the United States, the dominant “successful aging” narrative emphasizes maintaining
physical health, cognitive function, and social engagement (Martinson & Berridge, 2015; Rowe
& Kahn, 1997; Rowe & Kahn, 2015). Such a narrative is an example of a master narrative, or a
culturally shared story that provides a template for how a life should unfold (Syed & Mclean,
2015). However, as with all master narratives of a “good life,” this view of successful aging may
not align with the lived experiences and values of all individuals.
Individuals’ true perceptions of what constitutes “success” in aging may differ from
master narratives about aging, particularly across dimensions of race, gender, and age. (Åberg et
al., 2020; Buecker et al., 2023; Martinson & Berridge, 2015; McLean, 2008; Menkin et al.,2017).
Master narratives are often experienced differently by members of marginalized groups whose
life stories deviate from dominant narratives that center young White non-disabled cisgender
heterosexual male perspectives (Adler et al., 2021; Chan et a., 2024; Fivush & Grysman, 2022;
McLean et al., 2018; 2022; 2023; McLean & Syed, 2015; Reischer, 2021; Syed & McLean,
2022). This in turn may lead individuals to struggle with well-being or the creation of satisfying
alternative narratives. For instance, a master narrative on aging for women emphasizes the care
of progeny as key to generativity (Fivush & Grysman, 2022; McLean et al., 2022). This may
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 7
increasingly alienate women without children, potentially leading to feelings of insecurity for
individuals who by any other rubric would be considered highly generative.
In addition, individuals with intersectional identities may contend with multiple
conflicting master narratives, further complicating their sense of self and how they “fit” within
the rest of society. (McLean et al., 2022). For example, Black men in the U.S. must shoulder the
double weight of master narratives about aging as men and as Black Americans. These narratives
may conflict in that the master narrative of successful aging for men emphasizes independence
and individual agency (Fivush & Grysman, 2022), whereas a master narrative of successful
aging within the Black community emphasizes connection with younger generations and
community (Fabius, 2016; Shellman, 2004). These dual pressures and conflicting expectations
for a life well-lived may create dissonance for an individual as he ages.
Understanding potential discrepancies between individual life stories and master
narratives on aging can reveal ways in which society is failing to meet the needs of diverse aging
populations. For example, resources may be misdirected toward services that do not align with
what older adults themselves view as most important for well-being. Moreover, promoting
narrow or inaccurate portrayals of "successful aging" could contribute to unhealthy environments
that increase stress and stigma for those who do not fit prescribed ideals (McLean et al., 2018;
McLean et al., 2020a; Syed & McLean, 2022).
Narrative Identity and Aging
It is necessary and possible to construct a more comprehensive and inclusive depiction of
successful aging. Through analyzing individuals’ personal stories, a narrative identity approach
can provide insights into how diverse individuals healthfully integrate their experience of aging
into their evolving sense of self. The inherently mixed methods nature of narrative identity
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 8
research allows for statistical analysis of demographic differences in perceptions of aging as well
as associations between aging narratives and well-being outcomes. In addition, the emphasis on
meaning-making in narrative identity development provides a window not only to how an
individual experiences aging, but also to what effect the experience of aging has on their
understanding of themselves. In this way, narrative identity research invites aging individuals to
participate in the study of their own aging.
Previous literature suggests that narrative identity continues to evolve throughout
adulthood, with narrative themes such as redemption, self-actualization, and closure associated
with developmental priorities that become more salient with age, such as generativity and ego
integrity (McAdams, 2008; McAdams & Guo, 2015; Reischer et al., 2024). Importantly,
numerous narrative themes have been shown to positively correlate with measures of well-being
(Adler, 2009; 2011; 2012; 2015; Booker et al., 2021; 2022; Cowan et al., 2019; Erikkson &
Frisén, 2024; Pals, 2006; Sheldon & Cooper, 2008). This would seem to indicate that the ways in
which a person narrates their experiences may reflect and even influence aspects of their
personal well-being.
Using the narrative identity approach, we examined life story interviews of late-midlife
adults as they enter older adulthood, grounding our analyses in five narrative identity themes
especially relevant to aging experiences.
Narrative Identity Themes
The narrative themes of agency, communion, self-actualization, closure, and exploratory
processing each offer unique insights into how individuals make sense of their lives as they age.
Together these themes, applied to life story narratives, provide a multidimensional understanding
of the aging process: how late-midlife adults entering older adulthood perceive their ability to
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 9
influence their lives and environment (agency), experience fulfillment in social connections
(communion), pursue personal growth and fulfillment (self-actualization), integrate life
experiences into an acceptable life story (closure), and engage in self-reflection and meaning-
making (exploratory processing). By examining perceptions of aging in the context of these
narrative themes, we seek to capture a diversity of aging experiences across demographic groups,
potentially revealing how factors such as race and gender intersect with these narrative identity
processes throughout the lifespan.
Broadly defined, agency refers to an individual's sense of control and autonomy in
effecting change in their life and environment, whereas communion measures the extent of an
individuals’ feelings of connectedness to others (McAdams et al., 1996). Previous research has
found gender differences in these themes, which are often measured in tandem. Specifically, men
tend to score higher in agency, while women more commonly score higher in communion
(Andreoletti et al., 2015; Fivush & Grysman, 2022; Hsu et al., 2021). Scant previous research
has investigated whether narrative agency and communion evolve as individuals age (Grysman
& Booker, 2024), but there is reason to think they may, given the implications of changes in
physical capabilities, social roles, and social connections (Corwin et al., 2009; Nikitin, 2024;
Plácido et al., 2022). Little research has explicitly explored race differences in agency and
communion; that which does shows mixed results (Andreoletti et al., 2015; McAdams, 2001;
Sheldon & Cooper, 2008).
Self-actualization involves awareness of and action towards meeting one’s positive
potential (Reischer et al., 2021). This theme may be particularly pertinent in later life stages, as
individuals may have more opportunities to pursue personal growth and fulfillment freed from
certain societal expectations (Reischer et al., 2021; Washburn & Williams, 2020). Closure refers
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 10
to the ability to reconcile or accept difficult past events (Reischer et al, 2021), an increasingly
relevant task as aging adults engaging in the natural process of “life review” seek to integrate
experiences into a coherent life story (Butler, 1974). In a longitudinal study of adults aging from
their mid-fifties to mid-sixties, Reischer et al. (2024) found participants scored higher on
measures of self-actualization and closure over time. There is also evidence that race but not
gender groups score significantly different in self-actualization and closure, with Black
individuals scoring higher than their White counterparts (Reischer et al., 2021; 2024).
The psychosocial process of “life review” also highlights the importance of the theme
exploratory processing, which denotes the depth of self-reflection in one's narrative and, among
other meaning-making themes, has been shown to increase over time (Fivush et al., 2017; Lodi-
Smith et al., 2009; Pals, 2006; Turner et al, 2024). Some evidence suggests that women may be
more inclined towards processes of accommodative integrative meaning-making in life
narratives (McLean, 2008), however, no studies have explicitly compared exploratory processing
across gender. Similarly, there are no studies on race differences in exploratory processing.
Nevertheless, there may be differences in race and gender given that individuals from
marginalized groups must negotiate between personal experiences and cultural expectations in
identity formation (McLean, 2008; McLean et al., 2020a).
The Present Study
The present study aims to address gaps in understanding the lived experience of aging by
examining narrative identity over a four-year span in a sample of 143 White and Black men and
women. Our research questions were:
1. What topics do participants discuss when prompted to reflect on personal change and
stability as they’ve aged, and the aging process in general?
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 11
2. Do mean levels of agency, communion, closure, self-actualization, and exploratory
processing change over a four-year period?
3. Are there significant race and gender differences in these narrative themes?
4. How do these narrative themes predict various aspects of well-being?
5. To what extent does the content of narratives, and their relationships with well-being,
align with or diverge from the American master narrative of "successful aging"?
Hypotheses
Hypotheses were made in line with previous research described above. We predicted
scores on self-actualization, closure, and exploratory processing would increase between
narratives collected at each time point in our study. We predicted that Black participants would
score higher than White participants on measures of self-actualization and closure. Finally, we
predicted men would score higher on agency than women; women would score higher on
communion than men; and no gender differences would be found in closure and self-
actualization. Due to a lack of literature on changes over time in agency and communion; race
differences in agency, communion, or exploratory processing; and gender differences in
exploratory processing, we did not make predictions about these themes. We did not make
hypotheses about race by gender groups with regard to any theme and considered these analyses
exploratory.
The present study also explores how narrative theme use in discussions of aging may
correlate with four self-report measures: psychological well-being (Ryff & Keyes, 1995),
generativity (McAdams & de St. Aubin, 1992), physical health and fitness, and body image
(Cash, 1990). Because we developed our research questions regarding well-being after reading
narratives, we chose to be conservative in our approach, considering these analyses exploratory.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 12
Finally, given the lack of narrative identity research related to perceptions of aging, we made no
hypotheses about narrative topical content.
Method
Transparency and Openness
We report the process for sample size determination, and describe all data exclusions,
manipulations, and all measures in the study, following the JARS (Appelbaum et al., 2018).
Aside from narratives (withheld to protect participant privacy, but available upon request), all
data, analysis code, and research materials are available at
were performed in R Version 4.3.1 (2023), using packages tidyverse (Wickham et al., 2019),
broom (Robinson et al., 2023), and lm.beta (Behrendt, 2023). Different questions from this
dataset have been studied and reported in other publications (see [REDACTED]). Neither the
study design and hypotheses nor the analytic plan were pre-registered.
Ethics
The study was approved by the [REDACTED] Institutional Review Board [STUDY#]
and carried out in compliance with ethical standards in treatment of human subjects. Participants
signed an informed consent document annually when completing self-report measures and were
reminded of the key consent information prior to Life Story Interviews.
Participants
Participants (n=143) were recruited by a social science research firm in 2008–2009 to be
part of an intensive nine-year longitudinal study on narrative identity and personality
development, [REDACTED]. The sample size was determined, and data collected prior to this
study, therefore we did not conduct an a priori power analysis. The original community sample
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 13
included 163 adults from a large metropolitan area in the Midwestern United States. Participants
were included in the present study if they had responded to the Life Story Interview (LSI;
McAdams, 2007) prompts on aging in 2012 (Time 5 or T5) and/or in 2016(Time 9 or T9).
At T5, the 135 included participants were approximately 60 years old (M=60.37,
SD=0.90); 62% women and 38% men; 40% Black, 58% White, and 2% Other/Interracial. At T9,
the 136 included participants were approximately 65 (M=64.55, SD=0.95); 63% women and 37%
men; 42% Black, 57% White, and 1% Other/Interracial. The median income of participants was
$75,000 to $99,999 for T5 and decreased to $50,000 to $74,999 for T9.
Procedure
One-on-one interviews were conducted at a major research university by trained faculty
members, post-doctoral researchers, and graduate students. Well-being measures were completed
individually as part of a large battery of self-report measures. Participants received $75 for each
survey and each interview completed throughout the study. Audio recorded interviews were
transcribed by a professional service.
Narrative Measures
Life Story Interview
The Life Story Interview (LSI; McAdams, 2007) is a two-hour semi-structured interview
about the story of the participant’s life. It includes questions about life milestones, challenges,
values, and reflections, as well as prompts for explicit articulated meaning-making. The LSI was
administered at study times T1, T5, and T9, with a minority of questions added or subtracted
each year. The present study focuses exclusively on T5 and T9 (see Supplementary Materials
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 14
Narrative theme coding. Narratives were quantitatively coded using validated methods
for narrative identity research (Syed & Nelson, 2015) and coding manuals on each narrative
theme (Adler, 2008; Pals, 2006; Reischer et al., 2021), by three trained research assistants. See
Coders were blind to study hypotheses and participant self-report measures, demographics (other
than those disclosed by participants during interviews), and any other interview responses.
Following an intensive training process led by the first and senior authors, coders reached good
to excellent interrater reliability across themes: agency (ICC=.79), communion (ICC=.85), self-
for descriptions of each theme.
Narrative Theme Definitions and Score Anchors
Theme Definition High Anchor Low Anchor
Agency Narrative conveys a sense Protagonist is either Protagonist is
that one is fundamentally completely or almost completely
concerned with their own totally in control of plot powerless, at
autonomy. Narrator believes outcomes. The mercy of
they can successfully affect protagonist may describe circumstances. All
their own lives and have a situation in which they action and
positive control over the successfully produced outcomes are due
course of their experiences. their desired result. to external powers.
Communion Narrative reflects a sense Protagonist is highly Protagonist is
that one is fundamentally connected to others and completely
concerned with connection, the narrative is rich with disconnected,
intimacy, love, belonging, connection language. isolated, or
union, friendship, and rejected and strong
caring. disconnection
language is
prominent.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 15
Self- Narrative reflects a sense Protagonist has a strong Protagonist has
Actualization that one is aware of one’s sense of congruence with very weak self-
positive potential and is on a their self and a feeling of esteem and a
path toward meeting that fulfillment with their life. dissatisfaction
potential. Narrator has a with their life.
general sense of satisfaction
with their life course.
Closure Narrative reflects a sense Protagonist does not Protagonist is full
that past regrets, believe in regret— it is of regret and regret
disappointments, or not a useful construct that is a prominent
confusions have been serves them. Beyond theme in
acceptably integrated into regrets being “healthfully describing past
the narrator’s present life. incorporated,” they have experiences.
nearly been forgotten.
Exploratory Narrative evidences an Protagonist uses very Protagonists’
Processing articulated analysis or superficial narration with narration is highly
exploration of the meaning minimal to no exploratory in both
of events described in order exploration of meaning style and content,
to understand their impact in life events. positioning life
on narrator as a person. events as central to
self-understanding.
Note: Agency and communion (Adler, 2008), possible range of -2 to 2; Self-Actualization and
Closure (Reischer et al., 2021), possible range of -2 to 2; Exploratory Processing (Pals, 2006),
possible range of 1 to 4.
Qualitative topical content coding. A combination of inductive and deductive
approaches was used to identify the most common narrative interview content. Following coding
for narrative identity themes, all researchers drafted a list of topics (e.g., parenting, personality
change, body image) deemed likely to be found in narratives based on impressions of recalled
transcripts and the developmental literature. Two independent raters both re-read a subset (37%)
of transcripts, tracking topical content and amending the initial list through consensus. Each rater
then independently coded half of the remaining narratives for presence or absence of each topic;
topic categories were not mutually exclusive. Finally, a third independent rater distilled the topic
categories into nine overarching content domains. Content domains informed the selection of
well-being measures thought to be salient to participants.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 16
Self-Reported Well-Being Measures
Psychological Well-Being
The Psychological Well-Being Scale (PWB; Ryff & Keyes, 1995) is a 42-item measure of
six facets of psychological well-being: positive relations (e.g., “I know I can trust my friends and
they know they can trust me”), environmental mastery (e.g., “I have been able to build a home
and a lifestyle for myself that is much to my liking”), personal growth (e.g., “I have a sense that I
have developed a lot as a person over time”), self-acceptance (e.g., “In general, I feel confident
and positive about myself), autonomy (e.g., “My decisions are not usually influenced by what
everyone else is doing”), and purpose in life (e.g., “I have a sense of direction and purpose in
life”). Items are rated on a scale from 1 to 6, with higher scores indicating greater psychological
well-being. PWB was measured in both T5 (α=0.92) and T9 (α=0.93).
Loyola Generativity Scale
The Loyola Generativity Scale (LGS; McAdams & de St. Aubin, 1992) is a 20-item
measure of generativity—an individual’s concern for and active involvement in future
generations’ well-being. Generativity is rated on a scale from 0 to 3, with higher scores
indicating greater generativity (e.g., “I feel as though I have made a difference to many people”).
LGS was measured in both T5 and T9. Cronbach’s α=0.89 for both years.
Multidimensional Body-Self Relations Questionnaire
The Multidimensional Body-Self Relations Questionnaire (MBSRQ; Cash, 1990) is a
measure of evaluative, cognitive, and behavioral dispositions toward one’s own body. Three
subscales are used: Appearance Evaluation (7 items), Fitness Evaluation (3 items), and Health
Evaluation (6 items). Subscales are rated on a scale from 1 to 5, with higher scores indicating
more positive self-evaluation. The MBSRW was measured in T9 only.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 17
“FitHealthEval” (α=0.87) is a mean score of the Fitness Evaluation and Health
Evaluation subscales (Cash, 2000) representing personal assessments of physical fitness (e.g., “I
am very well coordinated”) and health (e.g., “I am seldom physically ill”).
Appearance Evaluation (“AppearanceEval”) (α=0.87) measures personal evaluation of
physical appearance (e.g., “I like my looks just the way they are”).
Quantitative Analysis Plan
We employed a mixed-methods approach to capture the characteristic ways participants
narrated their perceptions of aging and to examine relationships among narrative identity themes,
demographic factors, and well-being measures across two time points.
Confirmatory Analyses
We used two-tailed paired t-tests to test for differences over time and between race and
gender groups. To correct for three comparisons (time, race, gender) within each narrative theme,
we used the Bonferroni correction to set significance levels at p<.017. For the change over time
analysis, only the participants who responded to both T5 and T9 aging-related prompts (n=128)
were included.
Exploratory Analyses
Multiple linear regression was used to test race by gender differences in narrative themes
and predictive relationships between narrative themes and well-being measures. For each well-
being measure (PWB, LGS, FitHealthEval, AppearanceEval), five models were run, with each
model predicting the given measure from one narrative theme, controlling for race. To account
for five comparisons for each well-being measure, we used the Bonferroni technique to set a
significance threshold of p<.01.
Results
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 18
We examined 143 Black and White late-midlife participants’ perceptions of aging
through narratives collected approximately four years apart. Below, we describe the topical
content of participants’ narratives; participants’ narrative theme use across time, race, and
gender; and the relationships between narrative themes and well-being.
Topical Content of Narratives
Coders consensually identified 49 topics discussed across narratives. Topics were wide-
ranging, touching on personal processes (e.g., search for identity), external circumstances (e.g.,
political climate), interpersonal relationships (e.g., marriage and divorce), developmental
milestones (e.g., becoming grandparents), and physical changes (e.g., coping with acquired
Frequency of Narrative Content Domains Across All Narratives
Identity Development 55.72%
Family 47.60%
Generativity 38.01%
Health/Fitness 32.47%
Society 17.34%
Body Image 14.02%
Friendships 12.92%
Romantic Relationships 11.81%
Death 11.44%
Percentage of Participant Narratives
discussion of each content domain.
sniamoD
tnetnoC
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 19
Across both years, participants’ narratives included an average of 2.90 topics (SD=1.72)
across an average of 2.4 content domains (SD=1.37). The number of content domains discussed
was significantly fewer in T5 (M=2.10; SD=1.11) compared with T9 (M=2.74; SD=1.47),
t(251)=−3.98, p<.001. There were no significant differences by race or gender with regards to
total number of content domains addressed in each narrative. There were, however, significant
differences in the individual content domains discussed in participant narratives by year, by
Chi-Square Tests of Independence for Narrative Content Domains by Year, Gender, and Race
Content Domain Year Gender Race
Χ2(1, 143) p Χ2(1, 143) p Χ2(1, 140) p
Identity 5.72 .017 6.75 .009 7.09 .008
Development 63% T5, 49% T9 62% W, 46% M 66% Bl, 49% Wh
Family 2.32 .128 0.27 .601 8.01 .005
37% Bl , 54% Wh
Generativity 3.35 .067 4.97 .026 1.37 .241
33% W, 47% M
Health/ 29.23, <.001 .046 .831 0.81 .367
Fitness 17% T5, 48% T9
Society 15.89 .015 1.33 .247 0.14 .712
23% T5, 12% T9
Body Image 16.09 <.001 1.31 .252 1.29 .255
7% T5, 21% T9
Friendships 1.55 .213 1.30 .254 0.32 .568
Romantic 7.55 .006 7.55 .006 1.59 .207
Relationships 10% T5, 14% T9
Death 15.89 <.001 0.03 .860 3.59 .058
4% T5, 19%T9
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 20
gender, and race. The respective percentages for each variable are given below the significantly
different values (in bold). N=143, except for race (N=140), which excludes 3 participants who
identified as Other/Multiracial. W=women; M=men; Wh=White; Bl=Black.
As detailed in Method, content domains informed our selection of well-being measures
for use in later analyses. PWB (Ryff & Keyes, 1995) captures content related to personal growth
and change in relating to oneself, others, and the world (i.e., identity development, family,
friendships, romantic relationships, society domains); FitHealthEval (Cash, 1990; 2000) captures
content related to the health/fitness domain; AppearanceEval (Cash, 1990) captures content
focused on personal appearance (i.e., body image domain); and LGS (McAdams & de St. Aubin,
1993) captures content related to concerns and hopes for one’s legacy and future generations
(i.e., death and generativity domains).
Narrative Themes
We analyzed five narrative themes: agency, communion, self-actualization, closure, and
and low scores in each of the five themes.
Participant Narrative Excerpts Illustrating High and Low Narrative Theme Scores
Theme High Score Low Score
Agency “I just am not going to give up or “In earlier years I wouldn't have
give in to age you know. I think a [stayed at my job] being as unhappy as
lot of that's in your mind…I'm I am sometimes…I've definitely
going to fight it. You know, I'm grown…jaded. I…no longer have the
going to be active and be able to do idealistic I-can-save-the-world mindset
things as long as I can.” anymore…. Life has just probably
disappointed me in some
ways…There are certain experiences
I've had in living and certain ways
people have treated me that have
changed the way I feel…”
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 21
Communion “I’m seeing [that there’s] more “Aging is just part of life—but if I
understanding of people. I'm seeing would have had my family support
that there are a lot of people that system—like a husband, my children
care…Everybody got their hands around, my granddaughter—it
out. And it's not just to be taking, wouldn't have been so bad. But to be
it's accepting…Brotherhood, alone and to be ousted and [told]
friendship, it's all out there.” you're not good enough is a big
difference in aging…Knowing
…you've got to go through it
alone…To see my friends with their
families and to…see them being
accepted is a big difference.”
Self- “You're not about impressing “How I stayed the same, I'm still
actualization anybody anymore. You're who you scared of my own shadow.
are. And it really gives you a lot of [Laughing] I'm better now that I'm
freedom in a way....I mean it's like I older but I've always been kind of—I
don't have to prove myself. ... I'm always say I'm my own worst enemy
going to do what I'm going to do, so and that hasn't changed too much
and I'm going to, you know, make you know? I always look down on
my point. ... I can make things myself.”
happen 'cause I don't have to worry
about other things. [Aging] is kind
of empowering.”
Closure “I have become a lot wiser and a lot “It's like all downhill from [forty]. My
of it has to do with the experiences fiftieth birthday, I couldn't sleep….
that I've had. I love all of the Sixty is worse…Yes, I'm retired and
experiences that I have had.” make the best of it. Because you know,
like every year it's probably going to
get worse now so it's, it's really not
fun. It's scary, it's sad, you know,
knowing there's only so little time.”
Exploratory “I thought of myself first as a “I just live my life. I don't feel
Processing woman, and then African American. particularly introspective. So that --
Had I stayed on the South Side of so I don't fully buy into the whole thing
Chicago I would have been Black that you interpret your life through
first, and then a woman…That's these stories. … I don't think of my
made a huge difference on how I life as a story; I just do it.”
viewed my life and the choices
that I made.”
Note: Agency and communion (Adler, 2008), self-actualization and closure (Reischer et al.,
2021), exploratory processing (Pals, 2006).
Longitudinal and Demographic Differences in Narrative Themes
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 22
Narrative Change Over Time. Paired t-tests showed that of all five narrative themes,
only exploratory processing changed over time, increasing from M=2.36 (SD=0.76) in T5 to
M=2.74 (SD=0.72) in T9, t(127)=−4.24, p<.001. Results of all tests are shown in Supplementary
Race and Gender Differences in Narrative Themes. Because there were not significant
differences between narrative themes across years for four of five themes, we averaged
participant scores across years prior to testing for race and gender differences.1 Means and
standard deviations of narrative theme scores for the overall sample and by race and gender
race differences and gender differences for each narrative theme. We found significant
differences by race in agency, t(132.43)=3.24, p=.001; self-actualization, t(136.77)=4.66,
p<.001; and closure, t(132.03)=3.46, p<.001. In all cases, Black participants scored higher than
White participants on average. No significant gender differences were observed for any theme.
We also tested race, gender, and their interaction in models predicting each narrative
theme, and found the interaction term was significant for agency, β=0.23, t=2.24, p=.027. In this
model, the race term was no longer significant, t=0.142, p=.887. Black women scored the highest
of all four race by gender groups (M=1.19, S=0.64), followed by Black men (M=0.88, SD=0.79),
White men (M=0.85, SD=0.78), and White women (M=0.70, SD=0.92). No other interaction
Participant Mean Scores by Race and Gender for All Variables (Collapsed Across Timepoints)
1 Because of differences across time for exploratory processing, we did examine possible race and gender
differences within each year to ensure we were not obscuring findings; no race or gender differences were found
within either year.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 23
Measure Full Race Gender
sample
Black White Women Men
M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD
Narrative Themes
Agency 0.91 0.65 1.10 0.59 0.76 0.66 0.94 0.65 0.86 0.65
Communion 0.45 0.68 0.45 0.69 0.43 0.66 0.48 0.66 0.42 0.71
Self- 0.95 0.71 1.25 0.58 0.73 0.73 0.97 0.66 0.92 0.81
Actualization
Closure 0.69 0.73 0.92 0.66 0.51 0.74 0.76 0.61 0.58 0.89
Exploratory 2.54 0.56 2.53 0.59 2.56 0.54 2.52 0.57 2.58 0.53
Processing
Well-Being
PWB 4.90 0.60 5.14 0.48 4.71 0.62 4.94 0.58 4.82 0.63
LGS 2.08 0.45 2.25 0.42 1.95 0.42 2.11 0.44 2.03 0.47
FitHealthEval 3.44 0.69 3.65 0.61 3.27 0.71 3.43 0.69 3.45 0.71
AppearanceEval 3.41 0.77 3.68 0.68 3.21 0.77 3.47 0.75 3.31 0.78
Note: Significantly different scores are in bolded (all p≤.0001). Agency and communion (Adler,
2008), possible range of -2 to 2; self-actualization and closure (Reischer et al., 2021), possible
range of -2 to 2; exploratory processing (Pals, 2006), possible range of 1 to 4; PWB =
Psychological Well-Being Scale (PWB, Ryff & Keyes, 1995), possible range of 1 to 6; LGS =
Loyola Generativity Scale (LGS, McAdams & de St. Aubin, 1992), possible range of 0 to 3;
FitHealthEval = mean of Fitness Evaluation and Health Evaluation subscales of the
Multidimensional Body-Self Relations Questionnaire (MBSRQ, Cash 1990; 2000), possible
range of 1 to 5; AppearanceEval = Appearance Evaluation subscale of the Multidimensional
Body-Self Relations Questionnaire (MBSRQ, Cash 1990), possible range of 1 to 5.
Narrative Themes Predicting Well-Being
Well-Being Differences Across Time, Gender, and Race.
Time. We checked for differences in the two well-being outcomes collected at both T5
and T9. Because paired t-tests showed no differences by year, PWB, t(137)=1.69, p=.093; LGS,
t(141)=−1.19, p=.236, we averaged PWB and LGS scores across years for subsequent tests.
Race and Gender. We tested for systematic differences in well-being outcomes by
gender and race using independent samples t-tests. There were no significant gender differences:
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 24
PWB, t(102.86)=−1.12, p=.266; LGS, t(103.44)=−1.04, p=.303; FitHealthEval, t(102.77)=0.18,
p=.860; and AppearanceEval, t(101.52)=−1.21, p=.228. We found Black participants scored
significantly higher than White participants for all four measures: PWB, t(137.37)=4.62, p<.001;
LGS, t(124.54)=4.13, p<.001; FitHealthEval, t(131.54)=3.36, p=.001; and AppearanceEval,
t(130.43)=3.79, p<.001.
Relationships Between Narrative Themes and Well-Being. As before, we collapsed
narrative theme scores across years in models testing well-being outcomes to reduce the number
of tests performed.2 The a priori significance level was set at p<.01 to correct for multiple tests.
We modeled the relationship between each narrative theme and each well-being measure
using multiple linear regression. Because there was a significant difference between races for
every well-being outcome, we chose to include race as a covariate in all models. Models
relationships between variables for the entire sample by year in Supplementary Materials Tables
5 and 6.
places). PWB was predicted by agency, communion, self-actualization, and closure. Only self-
actualization predicted generativity. Both agency and self-actualization predicted FitHealthEval
and AppearanceEval. Exploratory processing did not predict any well-being measures. Race
remained a significant predictor of PWB and LGS in all models and AppearanceEval and
FitHealthEval for some models.
2 As before, we also tested models of exploratory processing controlling for race predicting each well-being outcome
for just T5 and for just T9; the results remained non-significant for all narrative theme terms.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 25
Results of Multiple Linear Regressions for Well-Being Measures Predicted by Narrative Themes
and Race
Theme PWB LGS FitHealthEval AppearanceEval
β β β β β β β β
theme race theme race theme race theme race
Agency 0.36*** 0.26** 0.15 0.29** 0.30** 0.19 0.22* 0.24*
Communion 0.24* 0.35*** 0.20 0.33*** 0.13 0.27* 0.12 0.30**
Self-Actualization 0.33*** 0.24* 0.22* 0.25* 0.27* 0.17 0.24* 0.21
Closure 0.32*** 0.27** 0.17 0.29** 0.21 0.21 0.19 0.25*
Exploratory Processing 0.18 0.36*** 0.13 0.34*** 0.03 0.27* 0.07 0.31**
Note: Models predicting PWB and LGS use scores averaged across T5 and T9; FitHealthEval
and AppearanceEval were only collected at T9. For each well-being measure, the first column
indicates the standardized beta for the given narrative theme term, and the second column
indicates the standardized beta for race in that same model. Race was coded as Black = 2, White
= 1; interracial/other race participants (n=3) were not included. Agency and communion
(McAdams 2005); self-actualization and closure (Reischer et al. 2021); exploratory processing
(Pals 2006); Psychological Well-Being (PWB, Ryff & Keyes, 1995); Loyola Generativity Scale
(LGS, McAdams & de St. Aubin, 1992); FitHealth Eval = Mean of Fitness and Health Subscales
and AppearanceEval = Appearance Evaluation subscale of the Multidimensional Body-Self
Relations Questionnaire (MBSRQ, Cash 1990).
*p<.01, **p<.001, ***p<.0001
Discussion
This study explored late-midlife adults’ lived experiences of aging using a narrative
identity lens. We sought to understand what topical content individuals in our sample narrated as
salient when reflecting on their personal aging processes; how narrative theme use might vary
across time, gender, and race; and how narrative themes might predict well-being outcomes. Our
findings offer several insights into the narrative construction of aging experiences and their
relationships to well-being in this developmental period.
Topical Content of Narratives
Qualitative coding of narratives showed participants covered a wide range of topics when
discussing the aging process and personal continuity/change over time. From most to least
frequent, the topical content domains were identity development, family, generativity,
health/fitness, society, body image, friendships, romantic relationships, and death. Individual
participants’ narratives tended to include numerous overlapping topics, reflecting the complex
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 26
nature of narrative identity development. In many cases, aging processes directly altered several
aspects of participants’ lives. For example, at T9, Roger (all names and identifying details have
been changed) reported that as he aged, he was no longer able to play tennis regularly due to his
physical decline and the deaths of peers/opponents (domains: death, health/fitness, friendships).
Participants’ perceptions of aging also shaped their behaviors. For instance, at T5 Sharon equated
getting older with becoming more herself and less concerned with the opinions of others; she
started dressing to please herself rather than a romantic partner (domains: identity development,
body image, romantic relationships). These examples underscore the manner in which narrative
identity formation is an ongoing process of selves shaping stories and stories shaping selves. As
individuals age, this reciprocal process continues to develop and deepen their narrative identity.
Aging Narratives Over Time
Exploratory Processing
Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that exploratory processing increased
significantly over the four-year study period. As participants aged into their 60s, they engaged in
more active analysis and meaning-making when narrating their aging experiences. We see
several possibilities for this increase. First, this change could reflect a normative aspect of
evolving narrative identity development, with the salience of certain narrative themes shifting in
later life stages (McAdams et al., 2022; Reischer et al., 2024). This mirrors the significant
increase in the mean number of content domains discussed from T5 to T9, which could indicate a
more comprehensive evaluation of aging over time.
Second, participants may have been thinking about two forms of “endings” in T9, which
could encourage exploratory processing. Death is more proximal at 65 and thus may more
readily come to mind. Additionally, the T9 prompt asks individuals to reflect on their experience
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 27
in the entire longitudinal study—nine years of participation in a study developed, in many ways,
to encourage exploratory processing.
Third, the T9 prompt specifically asked participants how they feel about aging,
potentially priming them to discuss and exhibit more instances of exploratory processing. On the
other hand, the T5 prompt, explicitly asks about change and stability, which was in turn
associated with more frequent discussion of identity development. Ostensibly, this might be
expected to encourage more exploratory processing; if this were the case, our finding that
exploratory processing increased from T5 to T9 would be all the more interesting.
Self-Actualization and Closure
Our finding that self-actualization and closure did not change over time contrasts with
our hypotheses as well as with Reischer et al.’s (2024) results on overlapping participants from
the same longitudinal study. This discrepancy suggests that our study’s questions about personal
continuity, change, and the aging process may reveal more stable self-actualization and closure
than Reischer et al.’s (2024) questions related to regrets, low points, spiritual experiences, hopes
for the future, and central life themes. Another possibility relates to our finding that death was
discussed more frequently in T9 than T5. Death is perhaps one of the more challenging of life’s
realities for which to find emotional resolution (Wong et al., 1994). The specter of death might
also raise the stakes when evaluating one’s achievements, life satisfaction, and authenticity.
These psychological challenges may lead to a dampening of expected increases in closure and
self-actualization, respectively, at T9.
Agency and Communion
Finally, we observed no change in agency and communion. This could align with the
common tenets of “successful” aging, which stress maintaining rather than expanding social
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 28
relationships (communion) and personal independence (agency) (Rowe & Kahn, 1997; 2015).
However, we could also expect to see decreases in both themes due to the increasing frequency
in deaths of loved ones and a decline in physical and cognitive capabilities. This reflects the
conflicting master narratives of successful aging (maintenance while aging) and typical aging
(loss while aging). The lack of change may be due to one or a combination of interpretations: on
average, participants in our sample 1) are aging “successfully” by the master narrative rubric,
and are outliers from the general populace; 2) meet successful aging standards because the
master narrative of typical aging is inaccurate; or 3) have been influenced by and are conforming
with the master narrative of successful aging—either in the personal interpretation of their lived
experience or in the content chosen to share with interviewers (Pasupathi & Adler, 2021). This
last interpretation is an example of the way in which master narratives directly impact personal
narratives and may be self-reinforcing (McLean et al., 2018; McLean et al., 2019).
In summary, participants’ mean scores for the majority of narrative themes did not change
between mean ages 60 and 65. This suggests that many, but not all, narrative themes may exhibit
stability as late midlife Americans narrate their experiences of aging into older adulthood.
However, given that exploratory processing was the only theme of five to change, this finding
may also be a “false positive.” Together, our results and plausible interpretations suggest a clear
need for further research into how narrative themes may change or remain stable over time.
Gender and Race in Aging Narratives
Comparing Themes by Gender
We found no significant gender differences among the five narrative themes. This aligned
with our hypotheses for self-actualization and closure but was contrary to our literature-driven
hypotheses about agency and communion (Andreoletti et al., 2015; Fivush & Grysman, 2022;
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 29
Fivush & Marin, 2018; Hsu et al., 2021). Our findings suggest that in late midlife, men and
women may construct their aging narratives in more similar ways than previously thought (Hsu
et al., 2021). For instance, the master narrative of women being more preoccupied than men with
the effects of aging, especially in terms of physical appearance (Singleton, 2023), doesn’t seem
to be entirely accurate. Women and men discussed body image and fitness/health in equal
measure on average. It is important to note we did not code for valence within content domains
and may be missing information that would further contextualize this finding. However, there
were no significant differences across gender in any self-report well-being measures, including
evaluations of physical health/fitness and appearance.
As our participant Sharon illustrated, rather than aging being an experience solely framed
in potential loss (of beauty, others’ attentions, power), for many women it can also be an
experience in gain (of confidence, independence, freedom). This shift in perspective may help
explain why we found no gender differences in our sample of late adults' agency and communion
theme scores, in contrast with previous studies on younger men and women. In our study’s
interviews, many women spoke of their newfound ability to focus on their own needs,
unencumbered by family duties, and their increase in civil liberties—such as being allowed to
open their own bank account—over time. This shift is certainly reflective of a cohort born in an
era when women’s role in society was rapidly shifting, but it is also likely representative of
societal factors and trends still relevant today. As structural constraints shift in society, so too
may master narratives come to reflect what were originally alternative narratives (Hutteman et
al., 2014; Syed & McLean, 2022).
While there were no significant differences across gender in narrative themes, there were
some differences in content domains. On average, women discussed identity development and
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 30
romantic relationships significantly more often, and generativity significantly less often, than did
men. These trends are exemplified in Sharon’s story as she discusses her journey of self-
discovery taking precedence over concerns with romantic partners; she seems more interested in
exploring the present than projecting into the future with explicit legacy-building. Again, the
master narrative of aging solely as something to be dreaded, especially for women, does not
stand up to close scrutiny. This misalignment of the gendered master narrative of aging with the
lived experiences of individuals demands further interrogation.
Comparing Themes by Race
In contrast to the lack of differences across gender for narrative themes, we found several
significant differences across race, with Black participants scoring higher than White participants
on agency, self-actualization, and closure. The higher scores on self-actualization and closure
suggest Black participants in our sample were more likely to describe their aging process as a
journey of growth and fulfillment of potential, with a greater sense of acceptance and integration
of past experiences over timing. These hypothesized findings were expected, given alignment
with Reischer et al. (2024). However, the difference in agency across race, which was not
hypothesized, is intriguing. In our sample, Black participants narrated their experiences of aging
with a stronger sense of control and self-determination compared with the White participants.
Black participants also discussed identity development significantly more than White
participants.
As with the study’s women, there may be a cohort effect with our sample of Black
participants. Their generation grew up during the Civil Rights Movement, witnessing substantial
positive changes for their community achieved through individuals asserting agency. Living
through such a transformative time may have encouraged development of narrative themes such
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 31
as self-actualization, closure, and agency. However, the struggles during the Civil Rights
Movement are representative of larger and still relevant societal issues. The experience of being
Black in America may foster a unique form of the aforementioned themes in the aging process,
possibly as a result of navigating and overcoming systemic challenges throughout the life course
(Fabius, 2016; Mayukha et al., 2024; Turner et al., 2022). Notably, Black women¾who face
systemic challenges associated with their race, gender, and intersectional identity (Crenshaw,
1991)¾drove women’s higher-than-expected agency scores in our study.
Relationships to Well-Being
The associations between narrative themes and well-being measures provide insight into
the potential adaptive value of certain narrative constructions of aging. Agency, communion,
self-actualization, and closure in aging narratives were positively associated with psychological
well-being, supporting previous research on the benefits of these and similar narrative themes for
mental health (Adler et al., 2016; Bauer et al., 2015). Interestingly, agency and self-actualization
were also associated with more positive evaluations of one’s physical health/fitness and one’s
appearance. This suggests that narrating one's aging story with themes of personal control and
sense of fulfillment may influence or reflect a more positive physical self-concept in late midlife,
aligning with aspects of the successful aging master narrative that emphasize maintaining
physical function.
Though communion was associated with psychological well-being, the lack of significant
associations between communion and the other three well-being measures was unexpected, given
extensive previous research demonstrating the importance of social connections for well-being in
older adulthood (Carstensen, 2006; Kannan & Veazie, 2023). This is particularly surprising for
generativity, which is centered on promoting positive interpersonal relationships (Erikson, 1959).
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 32
However, generativity was predicted by communion (controlling for race) at a p-value of p=.011,
just above the a priori significance level of p<.01, suggesting we may have been underpowered
to detect an effect.
Closure, too, was only associated with psychological well-being. We found this
surprising given that closely related psychological constructs, such as ego integrity—acceptance
of life as it has been lived—are seen as critical to well-being in older age (Erikson, 1959).
However, as in the case of communion and generativity, the relationships between closure and
these measures of well-being measures had p-values which suggest we may have been
underpowered to detect the effects of physical health/fitness (p=.012), appearance (p=.023), and
generativity (p=.045). We also note that study coders found it was more challenging to code
narrative content for the theme of closure when the content involved existential topics such as
mortality. It is possible therefore that these results highlight a need to adjust the coding manual
for use in similar contexts.
Exploratory processing was not associated with any of the measures of well-being. This
is in keeping with previous literature that shows that affective and motivational themes of a
narrative are more consistently predictive of well-being than themes of accommodative
integrative meaning such as exploratory processing (Adler et al., 2016).
Our finding that Black participants scored significantly higher on all well-being outcomes
underscores the importance of considering racial and cultural contexts in aging research, and
highlights the need for culturally tailored approaches to promoting well-being in diverse aging
populations. Moreover, it challenges the often implicit “Whiteness” of the successful aging
narrative and suggests that alternative cultural narratives of aging may be more adaptive for
some groups. That is, individuals whose narratives and identities are often outside the master
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 33
narrative (e.g., Black individuals) may benefit most from crafting alternative narratives for aging,
whereas individuals who are more frequently expected to align with the master narrative (e.g.,
White individuals) may struggle when their personal narratives deviate from the larger cultural
story.
Successful Aging
Our findings suggest a more complex picture than the master narrative of "successful
aging" which emphasizes maintaining physical and cognitive function, avoiding disease and
disability, and engaging in productive activities (Martinson & Berridge, 2015 Rowe & Kahn,
1997). While the topical content of our participants’ narratives aligns with this master narrative
in some ways (frequent discussion of loved ones, physical health, and mortality), it deviates in
others. For instance, society was a prominent content domain for individuals when discussing
aging. In contrast with the successful aging master narrative’s emphasis on the individual person
and their proximate relationships, participant concerns extended beyond this scope, highlighting
the continued impact that socio-cultural factors have on individuals as they age. This aligns with
Syed and McLeans’s (2022) discussion of the need to recognize the impact of structural factors
on individuals’ definition of and ability to attain “the good life.”
Additionally, individuals’ frequent discussion of identity development at both time points
suggests continued interest in self-development (rather than simply focusing on maintenance)
with age. We suggest the predictive value of self-actualization and agency for a majority of well-
being measures emphasizes the idea that an individual’s efforts towards achieving their personal
potential continues to be important as they age. Again, a more accurate depiction of successful
aging would seem to entail continued identity growth and expansion for an individual, rather
than the master narrative that reinforces cognitive and physical maintenance. As a person ages,
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 34
they may continue to explore, amend, and edit their definition of self and that more fluid mindset
may correlate with overall well-being. Further, these findings support alternative models of
successful aging that emphasize self-acceptance and self-transcendence as key tasks of older
adulthood.
Our findings have important implications for how we conceptualize and study what
constitutes “success” in aging. First, our findings indicate that the dominant master narrative of
successful aging in the United States may not accurately represent the lived experiences of all
individuals. Further, they suggest different racial groups (here, Black versus White adults) may
have different experiences of aging and varied adaptive strategies for coping with the many
changes and challenges which come with entering older adulthood. In general, our results call for
a more nuanced, culturally informed understanding of what constitutes "success" in the aging
process.
Limitations
Though substantial for a longitudinal study of narrative identity, our sample size was
relatively small, which may have limited our ability to detect smaller effects. The generalizability
of our findings is constrained insofar as that our cohort included Midwestern, metropolitan-
dwelling cisgender Black and White Baby Boomers.
Regarding study design, we were limited to drawing on data already collected, and
therefore two of our four well-being measures were only available at one time point.
Additionally, while our two narrative prompts overlapped in both content (continuity and
change) and underlying concern (reflections on personal experiences of aging), they were
different enough that it is impossible to tease out which aspects of our findings might be related
to the prompts themselves.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 35
Future Directions
Fruitful future research directions would include conducting longer longitudinal studies
that span more life stages to better capture changes in aging perceptions over time, and exploring
additional relevant narrative identity themes such as redemption and contamination.
In recent years, researchers have begun to explore narrative identity in the context of
disability (Adler et al., 2021; 2022). Older adults and disabled individuals constitute enormous,
overlapping swaths of the U.S. population (Pew Center, 2023), and the growing interest in these
populations among narrative identity researchers is promising. Further, as Goldstein (2023)
notes, the United States population is becoming more diverse as it ages. There is therefore a
growing need for similar studies across diverse cultural contexts and identity characteristics such
as marginalized age, race, gender, sexuality, and ability status.
Conclusion
The present study contributes to a better understanding of how adults construct narratives
about their aging experiences as they move from late midlife to early older adulthood, and how
narrative identity predicts well-being in this context. On an individual and societal level, the
recursive process of storying a narrative may effect change. Whether the change is positive or
negative depends upon the nature of the meaning made.
To promote individual well-being, clinicians and others working with aging adults might
attend to how certain narrative themes—especially self-actualization and agency—are employed
by aging adults; promoting positive narration of these themes may be beneficial for individuals’
psychological, developmental, and physical well-being. Further, organizations portraying
narratives of late midlife and older adulthood as part of policy and service aims might take care
to learn more about stories associated with well-being, both from the research literature and from
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 36
their own constituencies. Finally, our findings highlight the importance of participant and
methods diversity in aging research to develop more inclusive approaches to promoting healthy
aging.
If psychologists and evidence-driven institutions are to serve and support people through
the aging process, it is vital to encourage societal and individual narratives that frame aging “not
as coming to an end, but as a continuous opening of life.” Our findings suggest that individuals
may find a path toward greater flourishing in older adulthood when they continue to focus on
turning the pages of their life story, rather than solely preparing to close the book.
PERSPECTIVES ON AGING ACROSS TIME, GENDER, AND RACE 37