Comprehensive Review Article
Unique models of embodied cognition and eco-social niches are proposed to validate
multi-scale dimensional model hypothesis of social attunement and mis attunement
with a focus on autism spectrum disorders
Amit Kumar
Zkumar62@hotmail.com
Abstract:
The paper proposes a multitude of deterministic hypotheses for input into the multi-
scale dimensional model of social attunement and mis attunement for interpersonal
psychiatry with a particular focus on autism. This paper uses basic concepts of physics
motivated by the idea that the biology of the brain is impacted by the physics of the
moving and interacting physical objects as well as competitive economics to outline
multiple hypotheses for the development of hidden states and eco-social niche. The
theory paper starts with defining cognitive granularity and leverages it to build five
embodied cognition hypotheses that outline three distinct dyads with varying
sensorimotor skills of action control and action perception – Resource Proxy, Doer, and
Result Detection. Each of these dyads interact with the environment in physically
distinct but beneficial ways leading to iterative honing of the dyads discriminating
individual skills – dialects of internalization and externalization. These individual dyads
further form the basis of social attunement and mis attunement - dialects of individual
and the collective, which are outlined through three additional hypotheses to propose a
muti-dimensional model of social attunement and two more hypotheses proposed as a
model of social mis attunement. The social attunement hypothesis leverages the
economic supply/demand curve and Nash equilibrium as eco-social niches to model the
social attunement of the underlying dyads (Doer and Result Detection). Social mis
attunement hypotheses state that the collapse of the above eco-social equilibrium or the
lack of the dyad’s sensorimotor skills to partake in the equilibrium leads to the
psychiatric issues related to autism or psychosis. The above-mentioned hypotheses are
proposed to be inputs to the artificial intelligence and machine learning multi-scale
dimensional model.
Keywords: Autism Spectrum Disorder, Embodied Cognition, Action Perception,
Action Control, Eco-social niche, Hidden State
1. Introduction
Immense research, both genetic and clinical as well as numerous theories [9] on autism
have enhanced our understanding of the origins as well as the theoretical underpinnings
of autism multifold, but we are still many miles away from understanding the true
causes of Autism. The idea of this theory paper is to mesh existing research in Autism
with insightful hypotheses to open the doors for further research. Hypotheses proposed
in the paper are based on empirical observations as well as the synthesis of available
autism and cognition literature.
The paper elaborates further on the latest thinking on Autism, which is beyond the
boundaries of the individual mind:
Multi-scale, fine-grained analysis of social interaction might help us elucidate the
underlying behavioral and neural mechanisms both at levels of individual, but
also at the level of interacting bodies and minds [Boli, Dumas, Schillbach,2022, 1]
The paper starts by summarizing the key theories of Autism while providing an overview
of the proposed hypotheses as they relate to the new areas of Autism research, in
particular, the multi-dimensional space of the individual, collective as well as models of
attunement and mis attunement [1]. The are three parts to the hypotheses – one group
of hypotheses focuses on the variations in the hidden states of embodied cognition
across neurotypical and neurodivergent dyads to model the internal neural dynamics
(Group 1), second group is focused on the models of eco-social niche to model the
external forces (Group 2), and third focused on the attunement and mis attunement
among the latter models (Group 3). These hypotheses can serve as inputs to the multi-
scale dimensional model hypothesis of social attunement and mis attunement [1] and
thus serve the end of inter-personal psychiatry as well as a holistic model or theory to
explain the evolution and heterogenous features of autism.
2. Current research developments and existing theories of autism
spectrum disorder
Current autism research is heavily focused on identifying the genetic components of
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), with studies finding a significant role of genetic
variations [42,43] in a large percentage of cases, and is also exploring the potential
impact of environmental factors [44,45] on specific autism traits; researchers are also
investigating brain differences [46,47] in autistic individuals, including variations in
cortical thickness and synapse density, which could lead to better understanding of the
neurological basis of ASD; additionally, research is highlighting the need for diverse
genetic databases to accurately interpret data across different populations[48]. In
addition to genetic and brain imaging research, there is a significant focus on ASD as a
multi-person mis-attunement issue [1]. The crucial new development in psychiatry and
in particular autism is the move from single person diagnosis to a collective attunement
and mis attunement. So, there is a paradigm shift in how psychiatric issues will be
evaluated in the future i.e. interpersonal psychiatry [1], and this paper proposes testable
hypotheses to support this new development in the field of psychiatry, especially with
the advent and progress in artificial intelligence and machine learning.
Multiple theories of autism have been proposed over the years, which individually and
collectively do explain some ASD features, and attempts have also been made to
formulate a unified theory [49,50,51], but a more inclusive and testable theory that
explains the evolution as well as clinically reported heterogenous features is still not
formulated. Additionally, some of these theories contradict each other and do not offer
consistent experimental evidence.
Extreme Male Theory - Autism has historically been diagnosed four times more often
in men than in women. There are also certain cognitive domains that vary by sex:
Women tend to excel at empathizing and men tend to excel at systemizing. These two
principles form the foundation of psychologist Simon Baron-Cohen’s theory [52,53] that
autism represents an “extreme” form of the male brain.
Imprinted brain - Imprinted genes refer to genes expressed from one parent rather
than from both. According to the Imprinted brain theory [54] paternal gene expression
may cause a child to have a larger brain, develop more quickly, and demand more from
the mother. Maternal gene expression may cause a baby to have a smaller brain, develop
more slowly, and demand less from the mother.
The extreme male brain theory stands in opposition to the imprinted brain theory,
which stipulates that autism is the result of more paternal gene expression rather than
exaggerated male brain development. Some research has failed to find anatomical
evidence [55] that men with autism have extreme male brain development. One is
that sex differences may not exist or be as substantial as needed to support the theory—
they may be very small. Assessment tools may also center around topics that boys are
socialized to use, such as machines.
Social motivation hypothesis - The social motivation hypothesis [56] proposes that
autism may be due to differences in the brain’s reward system. Neurotypical individuals
find social interactions, such as eye contact and conversation, inherently valuable.
Autistic individuals find social interactions difficult or uninteresting. Some research
supports this hypothesis: Children with autism show less reward-related brain activity
when anticipating social information than neurotypical children do.
Weak central coherence - This theory suggests that people with ASD have difficulty
seeing the big picture and focus on parts instead of the whole. The weak central
coherence theory [57] of autism attempts to account for both deficits and strengths in
perceptual processes and refers to the phenomenon that diagnosed individuals show a
bias for featural and local information, failing to extract the gist or “big picture”. This
detail-focused cognitive style leads to potential superiority in local or detail-focused
processing. Performance on visuospatial, perceptual, and verbal-semantic tasks, which
need strong central coherence, is impaired in ASDs that support this theory (Ropar and
Mitchell, 1999; Happe and Frith, 2006).
Executive dysfunction theory - Executive functions include, planning and
organizing, initiating behavior or activity, switching focus, self-regulation and impulse
control (Boucher, 2009. Cumine et al, 2009). This theory therefore suggests that in
people with autism there is a degree of dysfunction in these processes, and this results in
some of the difficulties people on the spectrum experience with motivation, coping with
change, self-regulation and control as well as an impact on practical daily life skills that
rely on good self-organization and planning such as dressing, shopping, and cooking.
Intense world theory - The intense world theory [51] is that people with autism have
increased brain activity, which makes it hard to selectively pay attention to certain
things and not others. They may experience the world as more intense or overwhelming
than neurotypical people. For example, at a party it may be difficult for a neurotypical
individual to focus on the one person they’re speaking to and ignore everyone else. For
someone with autism, the sound of an air-conditioner could feel grating, or a sweater
could feel itchy. This idea would mean that two core features of autism—social
challenges and sensory sensitivity—may both be rooted in overactive brain responses.
Hyper-systemizing Theory - The hyper-systemizing theory [58] posits that people
with autism are hyper-systemizers; individuals who are motivated to identify lawful
regularities that govern the input-operation-output workings of a system. Hyper-
systemizing is posited to potentially contribute to savant skills in the domains of
calendrical calculation, mathematics, and music due to obsessive systemizing in that
domain.
Diametric mind theory - This theory [59] holds that autism and psychosis exist on
opposite ends of a spectrum. Autism leads to an understanding of the world in literal,
mechanistic terms, and a limited ability to understand others’ intentions and
perspectives. Psychosis, in contrast, results in the “overinterpretation” of other’s
intentions, misreading minds to such a degree that paranoia and delusion result.
Brain imaging demonstrates that autism and psychosis have opposite influences on
brain activity in regions that govern mentalizing and reorienting attention. Autism is
associated with decreased activity in those areas, and psychosis is associated with
increased activity in those areas.
Theory of Mind - The 'Theory of Mind' (ToM) model [60] suggests that people with
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have a profound difficulty understanding the minds of
other people ‐ their emotions, feelings, beliefs, and thoughts. As an explanation for some
of the characteristic social and communication behaviors of people with ASD, this model
has had a significant influence on research and practice. This deficit is often called
"mind blindness". The “false-belief task” is often used to probe children’s developing
Theory of Mind. After the first test of this ability in young children by Wimmer and
Perner (1983), numerous versions of the false-belief task have been used with
preschool-aged children.
Most of these theories have honed into some of the symptoms of Autism and proposed a
theory to model the symptoms. Except for Theory of the Mind, all theories are focused
on Autism as an individual or a single person problem, but recently there has been a
change in the research outlook by framing ASD as a multi-person attunement or mis-
attunement issue [1] and this paper is proposing unique models of embodied cognition
and eco-social niches to outline a broad based and unified theory of autism.
3. Unique models of embodied cognition and eco-social niches leading to
attunement and mis attunement
As we progress towards this new thinking and proposal of embodied cognition as well as
eco-social models, it is important to acknowledge that the above theories are of
immense importance and do provide the foundation for the next generation of theories
and models. The approach proposed in the paper is unique, as it not only outlines
hypotheses for the internal embodied cognition, but also external eco-social niches that
interact with each other in specific ways such that they can be modeled and serve as
proxies for attunement or mis-attunement of the component dyads as well as the eco-
diametric mind, executive dysfunction, and theory of mind are part of these hypotheses
but are connected in a unique way such that they can be tested using AI/ML models [1].
The dialectics of internalization and externalization [1] explores how internalization and
externalization are interconnected and essential for understanding the self and social
reality. This article defines three hidden internal states [2] - Result, Doer, Resource
Proxy or the internal neural dynamics that exert varying levels of sensorimotor control
i.e. action perception and action control [6,7] on the environment. My paper first
establishes five hypotheses, namely hypothesis 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 on the
psychophysiological internal structure i.e. how the uniqueness of internal states in turn
uniquely impacts the external environment i.e. external objects while using basic
physics concept and thus continues to further chisel the internal states through the
dialectal interaction continuing to reduce prediction errors through fine-tuned
sensorimotor control [4].
The concept of “The dialects of the individual and the collective” [1] further discusses
that:
The above-mentioned hierarchical structures of predictive processing should be
considered as collectively shaped. First, we dynamically ‘embody’ each other in
and through social interaction, enabling interpersonal attunement (e.g.
interpersonal belief resonance). In other words, by engaging in sensory-motor
couplings with others in social interactions, we have our bodily structures
mutually transformed beyond the here and now. Second, such structures,
arguably, unfold within nested time and space scales, from biology and cognition
all the way up to society. Taken together, humans actively co-construct and co-
regulate—in interaction with other organisms—their Eco social niches, so that
they increase survival chances of not just the individual, but also the social group
and the species as a whole. [Boli, Dumas, Schillbach, 2022, 3]
I draw on the above concept in this article to outline my next set of hypotheses relating
to the above three hidden states [3] - Resource Proxy, Doer, and Result Detection each
of which have a population of multiple dyads interacting in specific ways among
themselves and with the dyads from other hidden states. My paper establishes a co-
opetition eco social niche hypothesis, namely hypotheses 6,7,8 among these dyads by
leveraging the economic supply and demand curve [8] and Nash equilibrium [8, 9].
Hypotheses 2,3,4,5,6,7,8 taken together form the interpersonal attunement framework
that function in resonance to establish an eco-social niche.
The concept of “Interpersonal mis attunement in and through social interaction” [1]
further discusses:
So far, the paper has considered the importance of interpersonal attunement in
social interactions and the formation of the human self. Subsequently, placing the
focus on psychopathology, the paper extends the discussion from attunement to
potential mis attunement, discussing the dialectical mis attunement hypothesis.
According to this hypothesis, psychopathology can be viewed not as mere (mis-)
function within single brains, but also as a dynamic interpersonal mismatch (for
a comprehensive review of the phenomenon as well as the relevant
psychophysiological processes). The primary aim of such an approach is to move
beyond the individual in the study of psychopathology, yet without neglecting the
tightly connected psychophysiological processes at play. Of note, an interpersonal
mis attunement, as defined above, lies in the interaction between the two parties
and as such it constitutes a collective phenomenon non-reducible to either of
them. Here, it is important to underline that this kind of interpersonal mis
attunement should be treated as a phenomenon at the intersection of the
individual and the collective. [Boli, Dumas, Schillbach, 2022, 4-5]
To continue to draw from this mis attunement concept, I have outlined my final two
hypotheses (hypothesis 9 and 10), which outline the special characteristics of the
Resource Proxy dyads and extreme Result Detection dyads that causes mis attunement
of the eco-social niche outlined previously - Dialects of the individual and the collective
[1].
4. Cognitive granularity is defined as a variation in sensorimotor skills –
action control and action perception
I am introducing a new term called cognitive granularity, which defines the level of
external object affiliation a person has. An autistic person generally exhibits superior
systemizing skills [12] with respect to external objects or images and per my proposed
terminology that would be a person with high cognitive granularity. I am mapping the
spectrum of neurodivergent to neurotypical on a cognitive granularity scale. So, a
neurodivergent-autistic individual would be high on cognitive granularity scale, a
neurodivergent psychotic would be low on cognitive granularity scale, and neurotypical
would have an optimum level of cognitive granularity. I leverage the concept of
embodied cognition [5] which has roots in motor control and emphasizes that cognition
typically involves acting with a physical brain (shown as circles in the schematic below –
body is immersed leveraging a physics concept of gear belt pulley[12] i.e. circles in
are the other wheel connected through our limbs (not shown in the schematic). The
for developing the hypotheses and to develop an intuitive understanding of how nature
honed and specialized the hidden state neural dynamics across the dyads to create
external movement variations for either a physical environmental impact and/or
support the competitive eco-social niche.
5. Mental Hidden States [3] hypotheses that impacts the external
environment in specific ways
Uncovering hidden brain states and their dynamic spatio-temporal evolution in relation
to cognitive task demands remains an important unresolved problem in human
cognitive neuroscience research [14]. The hidden state hypotheses proposed in this
paper are based on facts available in literature for neurotypical males - superior object
control [15], brain optimized for intra hemispheric communication resulting in
enhanced perception and coordinated action[16], and asymmetric lateralization for
enhanced spatial visualization skills [17]; Neurotypical female - dance and locomotor
superiority [18,19] but less object control[20,21,19], bilateral lateralization[17] and also
optimized for inter hemispheric communication[16] thus better optimized for analyzing,
drawing conclusion and intuitive thinking, and high processing speed[22] ; ASD
features of object fixation [23], lining up objects or atypical object exploration [24],
reduced object action control [25], clumsiness [26], and atypical lateralization
patterns[27] impacting motor skills, language, but keeping spatial visualization skills as
intact. Considering all these data points from literature, I have consolidated all these
characteristics in a simplified, but insightful pattern of cognitive task demands, and
by the physics of the moving and interacting physical objects [2] thus giving us a peek
into the variability of the mind for a thorough analysis and validation through AI and
machine learning algorithms [1]. I have hypothesized that the hidden states [3] of neural
dynamics range from high to low motor control, which I am quantifying as high internal
motion, optimum internal motion, and low internal motion and each one has an
equivalent and directly proportional external motion coupling (similar to a gear belt
pulley for transferring motion and power between different components [13]), thus
extrapolating physics principles into the brain to act in specific and predictable ways on
the object in the environment, but extremes of which result in neurodivergent behavior.
The paper also proposes a connection between the proposed internal models or hidden
motion sickness proposes that motion sickness is a mismatch between sensory
information received from different parts of the body, like the inner ear (vestibular
system) detecting movement while the eyes see a stationary scene, creating a conflicting
signal to the brain [61,62,63]. Embodied cognition proposes that our brain constantly
builds an "internal model" of our body's movement based on sensory feedback, and
when this model is disrupted by conflicting information, it can trigger motion sickness
symptoms. No clear internal model [64] has been proposed that explains the occurrence
2, can be used as a basis for explaining the variations in motion sickness in relation to
the variation in internal motion. We know that females in general have a higher
susceptibility [65] to motion sickness and motion sickness susceptibility can be used as
a neurophysiologic index to establish a polar spectrum of personality difference [66].
Group 1: Embodied Cognition Hypotheses
Hypothesis 1: ASD hidden state hypothesis for action control – Resource
Proxy- neurodivergent autistic or high cognitive granularity dyad - green or right most
dynamics because of reduced motor control [27] resulting in a specific impact to
causing the object “stickiness” [23] due to the resulting ‘lower external motion’ as shown
with multiple objects stuck together thus leading to reduced object action control [25],
so Resource Proxy dyad, as the name suggests can be intuitively and characteristically
be envisioned as “one of the objects” in the environment, so is not acting on the actual
objects optimally as it lacks the motion needed for a strong coupling.
Hypothesis 2: Neurotypical female hidden state hypothesis for action
control – Result Detection- neurotypical female or low cognitive granularity dyad -
state of neural dynamics because of increased processing speed [22] resulting in a
environment, namely causing the object “run or slip” resulting in reduced [20,21] object
action control due to resulting ‘high external motion’ as represented by multiple
hexagon object sparsely spread out or rarified, so Result Detection dyad can be
intuitively or characteristically be envisioned as “agnostic of the object or removed from
the object” or has limited connection with the objects and reduced spatial visualization
skills [28].
Hypothesis 3: Neurotypical male hidden state hypothesis for action control
is hypothesized to have ‘optimum internal motion’ [15] neural dynamics or motor skills
[16] resulting in ‘optimized external motion’ or optimum action control [29] on the red
their own bodies [30, 31] during physical execution, so Doer dyad can be intuitively and
characteristically be envisioned as “one with the object in motion” or optimum object
coupling to deftly exert action on the object(s). The use of the term “optimum” neural
dynamics refers to the nature’s natural selection process that yields sustained beneficial
survival outcomes.
Hypothesis 4: Action Perception hypothesis – Due to the varying neural
dynamics of the brain in the 3 dyads, action perception is also variably encoded across
the above spectrum to enable the variation in the action control. Action perception is
directly proportional to the hidden state of “Internal Motion”, so Result Detection dyad
will have superior action perception [20] at the cost of reduced action control [20,21],
Resource Proxy dyad will have reduced action perception [11] as well, and Doer dyad
will have optimum action perception [16,24,29].
Hypothesis 5: Motion sickness hypothesis - Due to the varying neural dynamics
of the brain in the 3 dyads, motion sickness is also related to the internal model or
hidden state. Motion sickness is directly proportional to the hidden state of “Internal
Motion”, so Result Detection dyad has a greater susceptibility to motion sickness due to
the additive impact of external motion to an already high internal motion hidden state,
Resource Proxy dyad will have reduced motion detection, and Doer dyad will have
limited motion sickness.
We know from Active Inference [6,7] that action control and action perception work in
concert to minimize a shared functional known as variational free energy. So, based on
the above hypotheses, cognitive granularity is impacted by the variation in the
executive function of an individual on this spectrum is compromised (Executive
dysfunction theory) when cognitive granularity is on an extreme high or extreme low
scale, but the executive function is normal when the cognitive granularity is just
optimum.
Hidden External
Sensorimotor Leveraged
State environmental
Skill for the Eco-
Dyad hypothesis causal impact
Social
Action Action Internal of Hidden
Niche
Perception Control Motion State
“One with object”
Doer - Economic
Optimum Superior Optimum and optimum
Neurotypical male Supply Curve
external motion
Result
“Limited object
Detection - Economic
Superior Reduced High control” and high
Neurotypical Demand Curve
external motion
female
Resource Proxy “One of the
-Neurodivergent Reduced Reduced Reduced objects” and low N/A
Autistic external motion
Extreme Result
Detection -
Extreme Reduced Extreme N/A N/A
Neurodivergent
Psychotic
6. Co-evolution of the individual mental hidden states and the eco-social
niches hypotheses
These individual sensorimotor traits of action perception and action control in humans
have developed as a response to external environmental conditions and evolutionary
demands [4]. These external conditions may seem too extensive and numerous to
model, so the additional hypotheses (hypothesis 6,7, and 8) focus on three evolutionary
external needs or demands that may have impacted or influenced the evolution of
sensorimotor skills in the specific ways defined in the previous section. Many theoretical
papers talk about the interaction of the individual and the shaping of the collective
interactions [1, 15,33] to formation of societies [32]. The hypothesis 6 and 7 discriminate
this further by identifying a range of fine-tuned societal specializations motivated by
external demands – one is co-opetition based collective execution [10] societal
specialization formed by a collection of neurotypical male dyads and an another is the
neurotypical female collective dyad society specialized in the quantification or detection
of the results of collective execution dyads - a societal variation introduced in this paper
as a completely new concept to discriminate neurotypical female social organization as
distinct from neurotypical male collective organization. Per the hypothesis, together
these two specializations form the attuned collective eco-social niche, but the mis
attunement or exclusion of individual dyads from the above collective eco-social niches
may have caused another societal variation – need for a hardwired solo execution dyad
with modified neural dynamics (hypothesis 9). Resource Proxy is the solo only execution
dyad, Doer or neurotypical male is the collective execution dyad, and Result Detection
or neurotypical female is the dyad evolved for result quantification of Doer execution.
These names used for dyads are important as they emphasize the specialized division of
labor or evolution of neurodivergence to meet the demands of the environment. These
hypotheses are supported by the correlation of directional brain lateralization and social
hierarchy[17]. The Doer (neurotypical male) supply curve niche has an implicit
assumption of social hierarchy or execution inequality hence higher directional
lateralization [16,29]. The lack of social hierarchy implicit in the demand curve social
niche for Result Detection dyad corresponds to more bilateral brain lateralization [17] or
more inter hemisphere communication and connection enhancing characteristics such
as drawing conclusion, intuition, and analysis [41], but not particularly attuned to a
hierarchy based social system[34]. ASD or Resource Proxy dyad has atypical
lateralization [27], which impacts their social communication and language. The
neurotypical female’s enhanced capacity for drawing conclusions [41] is of special
significance, as it correlates directly to the Result Detection dyad’s capability of male
execution evaluation explained later and is key in supporting the demand curve eco
social niche that is proposed. Having defined the various external demands and the
specialized traits needed to meet those environmental demands, we need to
acknowledge that these gender sensorimotor and cognitive differences exist [35, 36, 37],
as evidenced by existing research in gender cognition.
Group 2: Eco social niche hypotheses
Hypothesis 6: Neurotypical male eco-social niche - Neurotypical males or Doer
dyads evolved through co-evolution of Nash Equilibrium [8,9,38] or co-opetition eco-
social niche by pleiotropically recruiting a group of Doer dyads with a sensorimotor
balance of both superior action control and optimum action perception (hypothesis 3, 4)
to form a supply curve [8] of these neurotypical males in collective execution.
Hypothesis 7: Neurotypical female eco-social niche - Neurotypical females or
Result Detection dyads evolved through co-evolution of the economic demand curve [8]
eco-social niche by pleiotropically recruiting Result Detection dyads with sensorimotor
polarization towards superior action perception (“agnostic of object”) for enhanced
result detection of males in action [39], but at the cost of a reduction of their own action
control skills [20,21] (hypothesis 2).
Group 3: Attunement and Mis attunement Hypotheses
Hypothesis 8: Attunement model hypothesis - The physical display of the
unequal neurotypical male execution balance forming a supply curve [8] through the
Nash Equilibrium [8,9,38] coopetition (hypothesis 6) intersects with demand curve [8]
of Result Detection dyads (hypothesis 7) setting the cut-off or optimum execution
quantification (equilibrium price-point) allowing the female to select the superior male
in execution [39] through advanced action perception or Result Detection skills
(hypothesis 4) leading to enhanced survivability through the multi-dimensional attuned
eco-social niche.
Hypothesis 9: Mis-attunement model hypothesis for ASD : Neurodivergent or
Resource Proxy dyad is the breakdown or mis attunement of the eco-social niche of
coopetition interplay (hypothesis 8) between a group of individuals, as some of the
individuals lack both optimal action perception (hypothesis 4) as well as action control
capability (hypothesis 1) or the theory of mind [40] thus resulting in the inability of the
group to achieve or sustain Nash Equilibrium and therefore the eco-social niche
collapses for them to a solo specialization of extreme object fixation (“one of the
objects”) or enhanced systemizing skills (Hyper-systemizing theory).
Hypothesis 10: Mis-attunement model hypothesis for psychosis: Individuals
with extreme Result Detection (hypothesis 2) have the neurodivergent-psychotic trait or
extreme action perception leading to imaginary perception or seeing things that may not
be real (Diametric Mind Theory).
7. Towards an inter-personalized psychiatry [1] for the autism feature
space
Approach to testing embodied cognition hypotheses-
Motion sickness is proposed (hypothesis 5) to be a symptom of the variability or
workings of the “internal mind” or the hidden state and can be used to test the proposed
embodied cognition hypotheses (Hypothesis 1 to 4). We know that females in general
have a higher susceptibility [66] to motion sickness, but more testing is needed in the
people on the autism spectrum to validate that motion sickness has a higher threshold
due the to lower internal motion state (hypothesis 1), so a greater level of external
movement is needed for the additive impact to trigger motion sickness. If this test
additional research and testing by working backwards towards the predictable
variations in the structure, size, and performance of brain’s motor components – motor
cortex, cerebellum, basal ganglia, thalamus, etc. [67] , while mapping these test subjects
the respective neurotypical or neurodivergent clinical characteristic as well motion
sickness susceptibility, thus confirming the embodied motion hypotheses.
Approach to testing eco-social niches as well as attunement and mis
attunement hypotheses:
Per the eco social hypotheses the economic supply demand curve [8] forms the multi-
scale dimensional eco-social niche [1] established through iterative fine tuning and
specialization of the sensorimotor skills required to be able to establish the equilibrium
with the environment [4]. The proposed generative modeling [1] can be leveraged to
model the above hypothesis –
Interpersonal attunement pointing toward a psychiatry that embraces the
individual in all its dimensions, in particular focusing on the interpersonal aspects
of mental health, which could be seen as pointing toward the development of
an inter-personalized psychiatry. The above-mentioned dialectical mis attunement
hypothesis has considered psychopathology as a process that unfolds between the
level of the individual and the collective and construes psychopathology at least in
part as a social interaction mismatch rather than a brain disorder per se.
Generative embedding data analysis approach is proposed that consists of two
steps, namely the generative modelling step, which aims at modelling mechanisms
of phenomena, and the discriminative step, which aims at capturing discriminative
information in the modelled data. The generative modeling step serves as a
meaningful dimensionality reduction from the measurement to a latent space (cf.
predictive processing and active inference). The discriminative step deploys
machine learning for group classification (e.g. autistic and non-autistic) and
feature selection (i.e. selection of crucial parameters for distinguishing between
groups). [Boli, Dumas, Schillbach, 2022, 7-8]
that can be modeled in the multidimension space to demonstrate attunement as well as
mis attunement. Nash Equilibrium model of supply curve will serve as one dimension as
highlighted in hypothesis 6 as the attunement model of individual Doer dyads
interacting in a balanced manner leveraging the individual sensorimotor variations for
collective execution. Similarly, the female demand curve eco-social model highlighted in
hypothesis 7 would serve as another dimensional model based on the Result Detection
individual dyads with superior execution action perceptions skills. Both these models
interacting together would serve as the multi-dimensional model, as per the social
attunement hypothesis 9, and a mis attunement between these models for dyads not
meeting the attunement criteria of action perception and action control as per
the machine learning algorithm should correspond to the solution spaces defined by
hypothesis 1 (neurodivergent-ASD) and hypothesis 10 (neurodivergent-psychotic) for
the extremes in sensorimotor skills, thus proving the validity of the eco-social niche
hypotheses.
The results of the two testing approaches together should lay the foundation for a
holistic explanation of internal and external factors at play in the evolution and
susceptibility of neurodivergence as well as a peek into the neuro dynamics and
component structure variations of the brain for evolving movement and cognition.
8. Conclusion
Humans evolved using the ‘Dialects of internalization and externalization’ i.e. through
an interaction with the environment leading to an iterative enhancement as well as
differentiation of the internal neural dynamics to match the evolutionary demands by
impacting the objects in discriminating ways leading to evolution of 3 differentiated
dyads – Resource Proxy, Doer, and Result Detection. These dyads have different
sensorimotor skills of action perception and action control to enable the beneficial
differentiation among the dyads. However, these discriminating skills also result in
whether these dyads are most suited to execute in isolation (Resource Proxy) or
collectively thus forming attunement niches, such as a supply curve niche optimized
through Nash Equilibrium (Doer) or a demand curve eco social niche (Result Detection)
– ‘Dialects of the individual and the collective’. Additionally, the mis attunement of
these eco-social niches or lack of the dyad capability to thrive in these niches leads to
neurodivergent behavior - Interpersonal mis attunement in and through social
interaction. We are proposing that in the drive to devise a multi-scale dimensional
machine learning model the authors of the paper [1] should evaluate the above-
mentioned hypotheses and consider for inclusion in the modeling which will result in a
positive move towards inter-personalized psychiatry. This research needs to also be
combined with additional research to validate the hidden state hypotheses using motion
sickness as a clue or peek into yet to be discovered internal models of the mind.
Glossary
Dyad refers to a pair of elements or individuals that are interconnected or interact
with each other. The term is often used in various fields, such as sociology,
psychology, and mathematics. Essentially, it emphasizes the significance of the
interaction and relationship between the two components.
ensorimotor skills refer to the abilities that involve coordination between sensory
input and motor output. These skills are crucial for performing tasks that require both
sensory perception (like seeing, hearing, or touching) and physical movement
Neural dynamics refers to the study of how neural activity changes over time,
encompassing the patterns of electrical and chemical signals in the brain. It explores
how neurons interact, how these interactions give rise to various brain states, and how
they contribute to cognitive processes, behavior, and sensory experiences
Hidden States: In a neural context, hidden states refer to internal representations
or configurations of neural activity that are not directly observable but influence
behavior and cognitive outcomes.
Gear belt pulley is a mechanical component used in machinery to transfer power
and motion between different parts of a system. It typically consists of a pulley (a
wheel with a groove for a belt) and gears, which help to adjust the speed and torque of
the driven components.
Supply Curve - Upward sloping curve represents the variable cost price of
companies operating at their optimum efficiency to maximize their capacity, while
stacked up against each other to meet the market demand. Implicit in the supply
curve is the intrinsic inequality or operational hierarchy of the competing companies,
which form an equilibrium to meet the market demand.
Doer Dyad– Neurotypical male that executes in a collective social niche modeled
after the Supply curve in a co-opetition mode, while efficiently leveraging the objects
in the environment to ensure outcomes greater than the constituent parts.
Demand Curve – The demand curve is a graphical representation that illustrates
the relationship between the price of a good or service and the quantity demanded by
consumers at various price levels. Market sets the price where there is a balance
between the demand and supply.
Result Detection Dyad– Neurotypical female that evolved with Demand Curve
features, thus having keen action perception skills to hone into the execution skills
demonstrated by the Doer or Neurotypical male on the supply curve.
Embodied cognition is a theoretical framework that posits that our cognitive
processes are deeply rooted in our physical experiences and interactions with the
environment. This perspective emphasizes that the mind is not separate from the
body; instead, bodily states, actions, and sensory experiences play a fundamental role
in shaping thought, perception, and behavior.
Executive function refers to a set of cognitive processes that are essential for
regulating thoughts, behaviors, and emotions in order to achieve goals. These
functions are crucial for planning, decision-making, problem-solving, and self-
control.
Action control refers to the processes involved in regulating and guiding our actions
and behaviors in response to internal goals and external stimuli. It encompasses
various cognitive and motor functions that enable individuals to plan, execute, and
adjust their actions effectively.
Action perception refers to the ability to understand and interpret the actions of
others through visual or sensory cues. This process involves recognizing movements,
gestures, and intentions, allowing individuals to predict what someone might do next.
Psychophysiological states refer to the interrelated states of psychological and
physiological processes in the body. These states encompass how mental processes,
such as emotions and thoughts, influence physiological responses, and vice versa.
Nash equilibrium is a concept in game theory that represents a situation in which
each player's strategy is optimal, given the strategies of all other players. In a Nash
equilibrium, no player has anything to gain by changing their strategy unilaterally,
meaning that each player's choice is in balance with the choices of others
Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence (AI) that focuses on the
development of algorithms and statistical models that enable computers to learn from
and make predictions or decisions based on data.
Eco-social niche refers to the specific environmental and social context in which an
individual or group exists, encompassing both ecological factors (such as habitat,
resources, and climate) and social dynamics (including culture, community
interactions, and economic conditions).
Active Inference: A normative framework that elucidates the neural and cognitive
processes underlying sentient behavior, beginning with first principles. This
framework posits that perception and action work in concert to minimize a shared
functional known as variational free energy
Latent (or Hidden) Variable: An internal variable within a generative model,
referred to as "latent" or "hidden" due to the fact that it cannot be directly observed,
but must be inferred.
Variational Free Energy: This is the functional (function of a function) that is
minimized within the framework of active inference. It is also widely utilized in
utilized in probabilistic modeling, statistical inference and machine learning.
Predictive Coding: A computational framework in neuroscience that provides a
possible neural implementation for the idea that perception consists in a process of
inference. In hierarchical predictive coding networks, inference is realized by
minimizing (precision-weighted) prediction errors across all hierarchical levels.
Generative Model: A statistical model designed to explain the generation of
observable content from unobservable, hidden (latent) causes. For instance, it clarifies
the process by which a visual object gives rise to an image on the retina. Generative
models serve a dual purpose: they allow the generation of novel, synthetic content and
support the inference of hidden causes from observable data. From a technical
standpoint, generative models encode the joint probability distribution governing
both observable and hidden causes.
Funding: The author declares no financial support for the research, authorship, or
publication of this article.
Author contributions: Conceptualization, A.K.; methodology, A.K.; validation, A.K;
formal analysis, A.K.; writing—original draft preparation, A.K.; writing—review and
editing, A.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Citation: Amit Kumar, Unique models of embodied cognition and eco-social niches are
proposed to validate multi-scale dimensional model hypothesis of social attunement and
mis attunement
Conflict of interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
Data availability statement: Data supporting these findings are available within the article
or upon request.
Institutional review board statement: Not applicable
Informed consent statement: Not applicable
Sample availability: The author declare that no physical samples were used in this study.
Supplementary materials: Not applicable
Copyright: © 2024 copyright by the authors. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC
1. Dimitris B, Guillaume D, Leaonard S. Interpersonal attunement in social interaction:
from collective psychophysiology to inter-personalized psychiatry and beyond. The
2. Reza S., Learning to Predict and Control the Physics of Our Movements, Journal of
Neuroscience 15 February 2017, 37 (7) 1663-
3. Giovanni P, Thomas P, Karl F. Active inference as a theory of sentient behavior.
4. Giovanni A, Roberto A, On the Nature of the Interplay of Perception, Action, and
5. Varela FJ, Rosch E, Thompson E. The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and
Human Experience. Psychological Medicine. 1991. 23: 308–532
6. Thomas P, Giovanni P. Understanding, Explanation, and Active Inference, Frontiers
in System Neuroscience, Volume 15-2021,
7. Parr, T, Pezzulo G, Friston K. Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind,
Brain and Behavior. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.2022
8. The Economy 2.0, Economics for a changing world, Unit 8, 8.3 Competitive
equilibrium and price-taking – Microeconomics (core-econ.org)
9. Charles H, Alvin R. The Nash equilibrium: A perspective, PNAS, 2004,
10. Capps, D. John Nash, Game Theory, and the Schizophrenic Brain. J Relig Health 50,
11. Dimitris B, Leaonard S. Observing and participating in social interactions: Action
perception and action control across the autistic spectrum, Developmental Cognitive
12. Baron-Cohen S. Autism: the empathizing-systemizing (E-S) theory. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 2009, 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04467.x
13. LibreTexts Engineering 11.2: Belt- and Gear-Driven Systems - Engineering
LibreTexts
14. Taghia, J., Cai, W., Ryali, S. et al. Uncovering hidden brain state dynamics that
regulate performance and decision-making during cognition. Nat Commun 9, 2505
15. Bolis D, Schilbach L. 2020 ‘I interact therefore I am’: the self as a historical product
of dialectical attunement. Topoi 39, 521-534. (doi:10.1007/s11245-018-9574-0)
16. Madhura I., Alex S., et al , Sex differences in the structural connectome of the human
brain, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A Doi: 10.1073/pnas.13169091102013 Dec
2;111(2):823–828.
17. Lesley R., Brain Lateralization and Cognitive Capacity, Animals (Basel). 2021 Jul
3;11(7):1996. doi: 10.3390/ani11071996
18. Carty, K., Darwin, H., Cornelissen, P. et al. Optimal asymmetry and other motion
parameters that characterise high-quality female dance. Sci Rep 7, 42435 (2017).
19. Yunfel Z., Weibing Ye. Et al, Gender Differences in Fundamental Motor Skills
Proficiency in Children Aged 3–6 Years: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis, Int
J Environ Res Public Health, 2022 Jul 7;19(14):8318. doi: 10.3390/ijerph19148318
20. Barnett, L. M., van Beurden, E., Morgan, P. J., Brooks, L. O., and Beard, J. R. (2010).
Gender differences in motor skill proficiency from childhood to adolescence. Res. Q.
Exerc. Sport 81, 162–170. doi: 10.5641/027013610x13088554297116
21. Dena C, Zhaoran Zhang, Se-Woong P, Dagmar S, (2019), Gender Differences in
Throwing Revisited: Sensorimotor Coordination in a Virtual Ball Aiming Task, Sec.
22. Karen S., Francesca F., et al, Examining Gender Differences in Neurocognitive
Functioning Across Adulthood, J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2019 Aug 5;25(10):1051–
1060. doi: 10.1017/S1355617719000821
23. Andrea M, Rebecca L, et al , Object interest in autism spectrum disorder Autism,
24. Sally O, Suzanne M, et al, Atypical object exploration at 12 months of age is
associated with autism in a prospective sample, 2010,
25. Colwyn T, Johnathan T, Autism as a development disorder in intentional movement
and affective engagement, Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience(8-9), 2013,
26. Emma G., Louis E., et al, From “one big clumsy mess” to “a fundamental part of my
character.” Autistic adults’ experiences of motor coordination, LoS One. 2023 Jun
2;18(6):e0286753. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0286753
27. Dorothea F., Thomas W., Atypical Brain Asymmetry in Autism—A Candidate for
Clinically Meaningful Stratification, Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience
and Neuroimaging, Volume 6, Issue 8, 2021,
28. Delphine C, Olivier R, et al, Sex hormones and mental rotation: An intensive
longitudinal investigation, Hormones and Behavior, Volume 63, Issue 2, 2013,
29. Chiara B., Lorenzo M., et al, Sex differences in brain homotopic co-activations: a
meta-analytic study, Brain Struct Funct 2022 Oct 21;227(8):2839–2855.
doi: 10.1007/s00429-022-02572-0
30. Michael S , Who you are, The science of connectedness
31. Aubrie S, Vincente R, Michael A, The Embodiment of Objects: Review, Analysis, and
Frontiers in Neuroscience, Sec. Neuroprosthetics Volume 13 – 2019
32. Boggio PS, Wingenbach TSH, et al , Social and Affective Neuroscience of Everday
Human interaction: From theory to methodology, 2020, Chapter 6, Action and Body
language understanding
33. Dumas G, Laroche J, Lehmann A. 2014 Your body, my body, our coupling moves our
bodies. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 1004. (doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.01004)
34. Marianne M., Female Dominance Hierarchies: Are they any different from males?
January 2002, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 28(1):29-39
DOI:10.1177/0146167202281003
35. Scott M, Michael-Paul S, et al, 2018, Sex differences in Visual Motion Processing,
36. Ivan S, Danniela O, et al Sex differences matter: Males and females are equal but not
the same, Physiology & Behavior, Volume 259, 2023,
37. Srikanth R, Yuan Z, et al, Deep learning models reveal replicable, generalizable, and
behaviorally relevant sex differences in human functional brain organization,
38. Cecilia L, Gerrit S, Daniel B, Nash equilibria in human sensorimotor interactions
explained by Q-learning with intrinsic costs, Scientific Reports, Article number:
39. John B, Eileen H, Jeffrey P, Female mate choice based upon male motor
performance, Animal Behaviour, Volume 79, Issue 4,2010,
40. Erik K, Nikolaus R, Arthur R. Applying “theory of mind”: Theory and experiments,
41. Elina T., Maxim L., Persistent gender differences in spatial ability, even in STEM
experts, Heliyon,Volume 9, Issue 4, 2023, e15247, ISSN 2405-8440,
42. Lauren R., Alicia G., Genetic Causes and Modifiers of Autism Spectrum Disorders,
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 2019 Aug 20;13:385.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00385
43. Matilde C., Timothy C., Stephanie A., Daniel G., The contributions of rare inherited
and polygenic risk to ASD in multiplex families, PNAS, July 28, 2023,
44. Karimi P., Kamali E., Mousavi M., Karahmadi M., Journal of Research in Medical
Sciences 22(1):p 27, | DOI: 10.4103/1735-1995.200272
45. Pugsley, K., Scherer, S.W., Bellgrove, M.A. et al. Environmental exposures associated
with elevated risk for autism spectrum disorder may augment the burden of
deleterious de novo mutations among probands. Mol Psychiatry 27, 710–730
46. Alex D., Albert B., The neuroanatomy of autism – a developmental perspective, 12
47. Matuskey, D., Yang, Y., Naganawa, M. et al. 11C-UCB-J PET imaging is consistent
with lower synaptic density in autistic adults. Mol Psychiatry (2024).
48. Kereszturi É. Diversity and Classification of Genetic Variations in Autism Spectrum
Disorder. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2023; 24(23):16768.
49. Sarovic D (2021) A Unifying Theory for Autism: The Pathogenetic Triad as a
Theoretical Framework. Front. Psychiatry 12:767075. doi:
10.3389/fpsyt.2021.767075
50. Noel, Jean-Paul et al., A theory of autism bridging across levels of description,
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, Volume 27, Issue 7, July 2023, Pages 631-641,
51. Markram K, Markram H. The intense world theory - a unifying theory of the
neurobiology of autism. Front Hum Neurosci. (2010) 4:224.
10.3389/fnhum.2010.00224
52. Baron-Cohen S. The extreme male brain theory of autism. Trends Cogn Sci. (2002)
6:248–54. 10.1016/S1364-6613(02)01904-6
53. Baron-Cohen S. Autism: the empathizing-systemizing (E-S) theory. Ann N Y Acad
Sci. (2009) 1156:68–80. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04467.x
54. Badcock C. The imprinted brain: how genes set the balance between autism and
psychosis. Epigenomics. 2011 Jun;3(3):345-59. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.19. PMID:
55. Rosalind Ridley, Some difficulties behind the concept of the ‘Extreme male brain’ in
autism research. A theoretical review, Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders,
Volume 57, 2019, Pages 19-27, ISSN 1750-9467,
56. Summer Bottini,Social reward processing in individuals with autism spectrum
disorder: A systematic review of the social motivation hypothesis, Research in
Autism Spectrum Disorders, Volume 45, 2018, Pages 9-26, ISSN 1750-9467,
57. Frith U. Autism: Explaining the Enigma. Oxford: Basil Blackwell; (1989)
58. Baron-Cohen S. Two new theories of autism: hyper-systemising and assortative
mating. Arch Dis Child. 2006 Jan;91(1):2-5. doi: 10.1136/adc.2005.075846. PMID:
16371371; PMCID: PMC2083102.
59. Linlin Fan, Cassi Springfield, Hans Klein, Robert A. Ackerman, Noah J. Sasson, Amy
E. Pinkham,Assessing the diametrical model of schizotypal and autistic traits in
emotion recognition and social functioning in a community sample, Schizophrenia
Research, Volume 261,2023,Pages 194-202,ISSN 0920-
60. Korkmaz, B. Theory of Mind and Neurodevelopmental Disorders of
Childhood. Pediatr Res 69, 101–108 (2011).
61. Reason JT, Brand JJ. Motion Sickness. London: Academic Press (1975
62. Reason JT. Motion sickness: a special case of sensory rearrangement. Adv
Sci (1970) 26(130):386–93.
63. Reason JT. Motion sickness adaptation: a neural mismatch model. J R Soc
Med (1978) 71(11):819–29
64. Nooij SAE, Bockisch CJ, Bülthoff HH, Straumann D. Beyond sensory conflict: The
role of beliefs and perception in motion sickness. PLoS One. 2021 Jan
19;16(1):e0245295. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0245295. PMID: 33465124; PMCID:
PMC7815099.
65. Graeber, D. A., & Stanney, K. M. (2002). Gender Differences in Visually Induced
Motion Sickness. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
66. Charles M., Bernard G., Motion Sickness Susceptibility and Patterns of Psychotic
Illness, Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1980;37(1):42-46.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1980.01780140044005
67. Koziol LF, Budding D, Andreasen N, D'Arrigo S, Bulgheroni S, Imamizu H, Ito M,
Manto M, Marvel C, Parker K, Pezzulo G, Ramnani N, Riva D, Schmahmann J,
Vandervert L, Yamazaki T. Consensus paper: the cerebellum's role in movement and
cognition. Cerebellum. 2014 Feb;13(1):151-77. doi: 10.1007/s12311-013-0511-x.
PMID: 23996631; PMCID: PMC4089997.