Academic novels on research integrity
a,b
Lex Bouter
Department of Epidemiology and Data Science, Amsterdam Universities Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Philosophy, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
E-mail address: lm.bouter@vu.nl
Postal address: Vrije Universiteit, Faculty of Humanities, de Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Disclosure statement: No potential conflict of interest
Funding: No funding is associated with the work featured in this article
Keywords: research integrity; research misconduct; questionable research practices; academic novel;
fiction
Abstract
Fiction books on aspects of research integrity can be a valuable supplement to normative guidelines on
how research should be done. They provide concrete examples of violations of codes of conduct. Their
narratives sketch fictional cases of research misconduct and questionable research practices, and the
circumstances under which they can occur. Novels can realistically depict the dilemmas scholars need
to navigate in an accessible way that readers can relate to both intellectually and emotionally. This may
help them to reflect on what a good researcher is and what academic scholars can do to stay close to
that ideal. A sample of 31 novels from the last 100 years is described with special attention to the
research integrity themes and the drivers of the depicted problems the books contain. These novels
may be used in research integrity training as a method to evoke individual reflection or to inspire group
discussion.
1 This article builds on a number of short reviews of research integrity novels I wrote for the website of the
Introduction
To understand how academia works and how research is done, one can consult a variety of sources.
Firstly there are the normative writings by philosophers of science and ethicists explaining how things
should be (e.g. Popper, 1963; Merton, 1942). Secondly there are sociological and anthropological studies
describing the actual day-to-day practices in research institutes (e.g. Latour, 1987; Latour and Woolgar,
1979). Thirdly we can refer to the biographies and autobiographies of famous scholars (e.g. Desmond
and More, 1991; Watson, 1968). A fourth way to explore the inside workings of academia is through
novels in which scholars and their work play a leading role. These academic novels are often compelling
and can be remarkably revealing (Showalter, 2005). Novelists go one step further than biographers by
creating their own reality, which is often intriguing and sometimes enthralling. On top of that, the
development of the storyline and the characters are not hindered by a need to describe real people or
actual events in a historically reliable manner. The academic novel is a very interesting genre of literature.
It reflects on what it means to be an academic scholar in fiction form.
Being a researcher has a distinctive moral aspect, which roughly consists of three domains: research
integrity, research ethics, and responsible research and innovation. These can be characterized as
follows. The first domain is research integrity, which concerns individual or collective behaviours of
researchers that determine validity (truth) of research or trust in science and between scientists.
Research integrity is about doing research well and not being distracted by other interests. How to
behave with integrity is spelled out in codes of conduct and in some countries in a legal framework as
well. The second domain is research ethics, which concerns the ethical considerations of research with
humans and animals. In other words research ethics is about what you can and what you can not do to
the humans and animals that participate in your research. It often has a legal foundation and a strong
regulation framework to ensure compliance. The third domain is responsible research and innovation,
which concerns the benefits and harms of research for society and the environment. What responsible
research and innovation entails is to a large extent depends on personal, political and religious
convictions, which may vary substantially between different individuals and different cultures.
Consequently it is difficult to codify responsible research and innovation, or to contain it in a legal
framework.
The moral aspect of being a researcher deserves attention in academic education and the training of
researchers. This article departs from the idea that besides textbooks, case histories and codes of
conduct, fiction can play an important role in that education. Fiction can be more realistic than textbooks
or case histories, because a good novel sketches credible human characters with all their complexities
and weaknesses. This can help readers to reflect both intellectually and emotionally on the dilemmas of
being an academic researcher. Earlier this argument has been made and a number of examples of
suitable novels have been presented for research ethics and responsible research and innovation (e.g.
Dilevko and Barton, 2014; Dresser, 2017; Dalton-Brown, 2022). In this article we focus on the usefulness
of novels for self-reflection of academic scholars and for courses on research integrity. Obviously there
is a substantial overlap between research integrity, research ethics and responsible research and
innovation, and that overlap is also evident in a number of the novels to be discussed. The trust in and
the trustworthiness of research and researchers suffer from violations in all three domains. Fiction also
underlines that the drivers of research integrity, research ethics and responsible research and innovation
are similar to a large extent: the individual virtuousness, the research climate in the lab, and the
systematic incentives shaping an academic career (Bouter, 2024a). Violations of research integrity may
concern fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism at the severe side of the spectrum and a wide range of
questionable research practices at the other end. Arguable these form a continuum and many codes of
conduct also label gross neglect as research misconduct and operationalize it as repeatedly or frequently
engaging in questionable research practices (Bouter, 2024b, 2024c).
Below 31 novels on research integrity from the last 100 years are presented in inverse chronological
order, with a specification for each of them about which aspect of research integrity is at issue, whether
also elements of research ethics and responsible research and innovation are included, and which
drivers of the depicted problems are mentioned or suggested in the narrative.
Mika Bandura – Animal university
This is a satire inspired by George Orwell’s Animal farm (Orwell 1946; Bandura 2019). The Arabian colt
Rembrandt is a master student at the Prestigious University for Animals (PUFA) when he discovers that
his supervisor has given him a fabricated data set to work on for his thesis. This prompts him to dig
deeper in the oeuvre of the wise pig at issue, professor Nash. Rembrandt discovers a wide range of
detrimental research practices, like more fabrication, gift authorships, plagiarism, cooked peer review,
massive conflicts of interest and journals refusing to retract fraudulent papers. He also finds out that
the Swine & Hog Agency in Mockenham (SHAM), where Nash claims that his data have been collected,
actually does not exist. Gradually Rembrandt becomes a whistle-blower and, in the end, he files a formal
research misconduct complaint.
The story is sad and funny at the same time, all too recognizable, and contains examples of power abuse,
unjustified appeals to confidentiality, legalistic tricks and severe intimidation. Both the Diederik Stapel
case (Levelt, Noort and Drenth Committees 2012; Sijtsma 2023) and the blacklist of predatory journals
by Jeffrey Beall (Beall 2012; Silver 2017) seem to have inspired the author. The reaction to Rembrandt’s
complaints is clearly driven by fear of institutional and individual reputation loss. Both the PUFA
president Bacon and its Research Integrity Officer (RIO) Stone do everything they can to downplay and
cover up the research misconduct. A tribunal chaired by Bacon is held on the case, but despite the
overwhelming evidence justice is not done. As so often in real life, the worst consequences are suffered
by the whistle-blower.
This book zooms in on fabrication, various breaches of publication ethics and abuse of hierarchical
power. It also points out that the fear for reputation damage can be a strong driver both for institutions
and individuals. Animal university emphasizes the importance of fair procedures and of protecting
whistle-blowers well.
Ian McEwan – Solar
A Nobel Prize winner with a number of disturbing personality traits is put in charge of a prestigious
sustainable energy project (McEwan 2020). By chance, he comes into possession of an important
discovery made by a younger colleague who has recently died. He is unable to resist the temptation to
present this as his own idea, and thus to fulfil the high expectations the world has of him – and he has
of himself. But the deceit is detected and much more goes wrong in his personal and professional life.
By sketching a narcissistic scholar and the temptations of achieving success through deception so well,
McEwan provides the reader with a humorous insight into the dilemmas at work on the knife-edge
between acceptable and unacceptable behaviour in science. Everything is so absurd and unrealistic that
it seems to be a made-up story. Which it is, of course, but soon you start to realize that the plot has
disturbing parallels with a number of real research misconduct cases that have come to light in recent
years.
Solar focuses on the most caustic form of plagiarism, namely theft of ideas. It also provides colourful
insight in how character flaws can lead to a sequence of wrong decisions in academic life.
Hub van Wersch – Grijpen naar lucht
The story concerns competition for a tenured professorship and breaches of research integrity in
anthropology (van Wersch 2019). The background narrative is the fascinating history of the biggest
strike ever: more than 250,000 textile workers in Mumbai refused to work for 18 months. It was
unsuccessful and it ended the industry locally. Academic intrigue and animosity between colleagues
active in the same field of inquiry are the heart of the narrative which is spelled out with many
recognisable details.
The main character stumbles over information that his competitor for a professorship has committed
plagiarism and has advised his students to engage in data fabrication. The plot consists of an
entertaining mix of the complications of conducting anthropological research in India, attempts to
influence the decision on the tenured chair, and instances of adultery. Time pressure, sloppy data
management and a crashed computer lead to a fabricated research report. Now both competitors have
engaged in research misconduct. This turbulent novel illustrates how dilemmas in both academic and
personal life can be mishandled under the influence of external pressures and character flaws.
This narrative on fabrication and plagiarism in anthropological research also contains many questionable
research practices due to time pressure and data collection under difficult circumstances. Oversized
ambition and fierce competition are credibly depicted as likely causes of the wrong decisions made.
Lucy Atkins – The night visitor
This is a well-written narrative of an intellectual theft followed by two instances of fabrication. That
becomes clear only in the final part of this intriguing novel. The plot is developed in a superb way and
readers are kept in suspense until the very end. Maybe you should stop here and first read the book
yourself.
Vivian was the graduate student of Olivia’s father, who didn’t treat Vivian well and got his tenure by
claiming her research on Archeocopris olivia. Much later, to assure continuation of her job as Oxford
professor, Vivian fabricated a Nature paper that posthumously destroyed the reputation of Olivia’s
father by maliciously unmasking him as a data fabricator (which he was not, he ‘just’ stole Vivian’s
discovery). Subsequently Olivia produces convincing evidence that shows that Vivian committed fraud,
leading to Vivian’s downfall and her forced early retirement.
Vivian quite obsessively wants to demonstrate that scholars can easily become frauds when wronged
severely and she fabricates a spectacular diary and contacts Olivia, who recently became a professor of
history. Olivia has no idea that Vivian, whom she never met and is now using another name, is the former
graduate student of her father, and writes a bestselling book based on the fake diary. After the festive
launch Olivia’s world falls apart when it becomes clear that she had ignored all signals of the diary being
made up. She had completely underestimated Vivian and her malicious intentions.
She faces a life of being obliged to follow the whims of Vivian, who already has the joint production of
a next book in mind. Olivia tries to solve the issue by pushing Vivian to her death from the cellar stairs,
but the police detectives are suspicious and discover Vivian’s diary in which she explains how she has
set her trap for Olivia .
Helene Uri – De besten onder ons
A sad epic about a university institute of linguistics (Uri 2012). About vanity, gossip and back-biting. And
about the sexual drivers of the dubious behaviour of some of the main characters. Thanks to intellectual
theft, an ambitious young researcher quickly gains renown in her field. Using all her charm and
attractiveness, she secures the assistance of a colleague to complete the stolen work. That colleague
unknowingly ensures that the real originator of the ideas is accused of plagiarism and loses her job.
In a shocking manner, the narrative reveals how little scientists understand their own motives and those
of others. Testosterone-fuelled naivety can do little in the face of unscrupulous strategic planning. This
is also a shocking example of how incompetently suspected breaches of scientific integrity are often
dealt with: by accepting unfounded opinions rather than investigating the facts thoroughly. In this case
with a career wrongfully destroyed as its end result.
Besides pointing out the need for a fair investigation when allegations of a breach of research integrity
are made, one may get the impression that competent confidential counsellors for both the accused
and the whistle-blower, could possible have avoided the collateral damage described in this novel.
Paul Brand – Impact factor
An exciting thriller about breaches of research integrity in their extreme form (Brand 2009). It’s a well-
written, recognizable sketch of the tensions and competition pervading the practice of science. But the
story is also depicting the intrinsic motivation and the pleasure of working on relevant puzzles with
clever colleagues, that characterize most academic scholars. The main character is a talented PhD
student, whom we follow from her first international conference.
This book reveals painfully what criminal excesses are possible when huge financial interests are at
stake, as in pharmaceutical research. And how vulnerable a culture of trust and collaboration is to the
theft of ideas by intelligent sociopaths. In passing, the reader also gains an insight into how leading
journals sometimes deal with fraud, or rather not deal with it. It all ends well, but you are still left with
the uneasy feeling that things could have gone off in a completely different direction.
The detrimental consequences of the understandable naivety of the main character, who is not yet
seasoned in steering free from the cliffs in academic life, may be considered as a strong argument for
mentoring of early career researchers. Obviously this will only work well when mentors are hand-picked
experienced scholars with a balanced character, who have no hierarchical relation to the mentee and
work in another (sub-)discipline.
Zadie Smith – On beauty
A sparkling epic on the rivalry between two families whose fathers and daughters are both tutors and
students, respectively, at the same New England college (Smith 2006). The two fathers are engaged in
a long and fierce academic battle about attribution of works of the Dutch painter Rembrandt van Rijn.
The one family is black, conservative and Christian, and comes from London. Its intimidatingly attractive
teenage daughter carves a trail of destruction by her amorous adventures with both the son from the
other family and his father. The latter is a white butcher’s son, also from London, married to a black
woman from the American South.
The storyline is both tragic and comic, the dialogues are superb and perfectly encapsulate the disruptive
influence of racist, conservative and liberal standpoints in the academic debate. But above all this book
is about the turbulent rites of passage in life. The teenagers are desperate to break away from their
parents and to find their own identity, whilst the adults are finding it difficult to make the transition to
a more reflective phase of life and to keep the relationship with their partner alive.
This book sketches a scene in which a fierce academic debate and intense competition between scholars
can lead to false allegations of breaches of research integrity. The narrative also provides an insight in
how confusing the mix of factors that drive the behaviour of academics can be.
Allegra Goodman – Intuition
A junior researcher produces spectacular results, leading to a publication in Nature, a huge grant for
further research, and plenty of publicity (Goodman 2006). The whole laboratory throws itself on the
topic, but a colleague is unable to reproduce the original results and finds indications that data was
selectively omitted from the first paper. She gradually assumes the role of whistle-blower. The Office
for Research Integrity concludes that there has been research misconduct, but on appeal this verdict is
overturned due to a legal technicality. Meanwhile, a senator has taken up the case as part of his crusade
against science. Right up until the last page, the reader does not know what really happened.
An impressive book. The story shows how ambition, outside pressure, sloppiness and lack of supervision
can tempt scientists into irresponsible behaviour. And also that there are many shades of grey in the
spectrum between absolute irreproachability and full-blown research misconduct. Under a magnifying
glass, it is all too easy to find irregularities in day-to-day research practice. But interpreting them
correctly is difficult. The clever thing about this novel is that the author is able to describe the motives
and emotions of the researcher, the whistle-blower and their supervisors in a credible manner. In the
end there are only losers and no winners, but the harm done to their reputations has little to do with
the facts of the case.
This novel about alleged falsification stands out especially by showing how legalistic tricks and political
motives can obscure the sight on what actually happened, which subsequently can lead to substantial
collateral damage. It also exemplifies how much clearer, attractive and instructive a novel can be
compared to a description of a real case (e.g. Kevles 1998; Reich 2009; Freckelton 2016).
Miquel Bulnes – Lab
A sad and hilarious account of daily life in a lab (Bulnes 2005). The story shows how moral shortcomings
and external pressure can lead to sloppy science and results that are not replicable. The main character
is a PhD student in the rush hour of life, trying to sort out how to survive in biomedical research and
which course to steer with his girlfriend. The rest of the cast consists of a narcissistic and overambitious
head of department and various alarmingly recognizable colleagues.
Things go wrong when a letter to the editor suggests research misconduct in a paper of the PhD student
with a bunch of honorary co-authors. In the turbulence that follows some of the uglier characters grasp
the opportunity to shift the power balance in their advantage.
Likely everyone with hands-on experience in investigating allegations of research misconduct knows
that a substantial proportion of the accusations are incorrect. Whistle-blowers can have many motives,
including labour disputes, professional jealousy and the wish to obstruct a competitor. When the
investigation substantiates the allegation these motives don’t matter, but they do when the allegation
was incorrect (Bouter and Hendrix 2017).
Harry Thompson – This thing of darkness
A novel about the young Charles Darwin as an amateur geologist joining the crew of the Beagle
(Thompson 2005). The ship’s long journey takes him to Patagonia, Tierra del Fuego, along the Chilean
coast and finally to the Galapagos Islands. This is science in action in the age of the great voyages of
discovery. Darwin’s blossoming friendship with the Beagle’s captain, Robert FitzRoy, and its later
disintegration, is the main thread running through the book. Their debates are fascinating and reveal
how personal character and social position can make their stamp on the research process.
The conflict between his religious view of the world and his observations made that it took decades
before Darwin dared to publish his theory of evolution (Darwin 1859). The turning point came when he
realized that another scientist was on the same track and close to publication. It is fascinating to read
about the personal and integrity dilemmas behind the birth of what is perhaps the most important
scientific theory in history.
This mesmerizing book shows how already in the era of the great discovery expeditions scholars
struggled with distractions from a singular focus on truth-finding. For Darwin these were his religious
convictions, his craving for recognition, and his fear of rejection by the narrow-minded British society.
Philip Roth – The human stain
A probing story about the fall of a professor of classics (Roth 2005). After a long and successful term as
dean, he returns to his old department to take up teaching again. Following a bizarre accusation of
racism, it turns out that some of his colleagues have an old score to settle. Amidst all this turbulence,
his wife dies and he decides to take early retirement. He begins an affair with a cleaner half his age and
clashes with his children. Finally, the couple is killed in a car crash in which the cleaner’s ex-husband
may have played a role.
This is a tragedy without winners, meticulously reconstructing how the main characters engage in
destructive behaviour. The professor turns out to be a light-skinned African American who decided as
young man to break with his family and go through life as white. The cleaner was abused by her
stepfather and ended up marrying a Vietnam veteran with post-traumatic stress disorder. The young
head of department fled her dominant mother, a French aristocrat, only to find herself in an alienated
and embittered life at a second-rate US college. All in all, these personal histories paint a dismal picture
of how things can go wrong in life.
The narrative is well-written and makes one think how thin the ice is on which we all walk. And about
how easily things can take a wrong turn, also in the life of a scholar with a solid reputation and a great
career. A few toxic colleagues, loss of a beloved partner and a few bad decisions in this case started the
downfall.
Han Voskuil – Het Bureau
Seven multipage volumes follow the career of a scholar who, despite his best efforts to avoid it, ends
up in an academic leadership position (Voskuil 1996 - 2000). The task is far beyond his capacities and he
ends up being entangled in his own fears and uncertainties. He can see that his staff is producing nothing
of much use, but the only response he can come up with is to work harder and harder himself. The frank
introspection with which the main character reviews his own shortcomings is both very perceptive and
surprisingly ruthless.
This is a disturbingly recognizable epic about what – and how much – can go wrong with leadership in
an academic environment. At the same time the narrative provides a beautiful description of the
evolution of the humanities between the 1960s and the 1980s. Above all, though, it are the dialogues
which make this cycle a masterpiece. There is also an excellent dramatization made for Dutch radio
consisting of 475 fifteen-minute episodes, which were later reissued as podcasts (NPO Luister 2024a,
2024b).
The honest introspection of the main character throughout his career raises many recognizable insights
and emotions, for both early career researchers and senior scholars. The novels were based on the
diaries the author filled during his academic career. Especially Voskuil’s humoristic descriptions of
academic conferences are painfully accurate and show what an excellent observer he was.
Carl Djerassi – Cantor’s dilemma
Cantor has a brilliant theory about how cancer develops (Djerassi 1991). His best research assistant is
assigned to provide the experimental proof and succeeds, resulting in a quick publication in Nature. But
other scientists are unable to replicate his findings. It turns out that the assistant had given nature a
helping hand, and may well also have done so on two other occasions. Cantor no longer trusts him and
devises a second experiment which he carries out himself, alone, with success. He and his research
assistant are jointly awarded the Nobel prize. The director of another laboratory, which is only able to
replicate the earlier experiment once Cantor’s former research assistant starts working there, realizes
what has happened and blackmails Cantor to secure a Nobel Prize nomination for himself.
Cantor’s dilemma is that he is no longer able to reveal the misconduct in the first experiment without
losing face – and the Nobel prize. Moreover, the results of the second experiment he conducted himself
support his theory. Meanwhile, the research assistant blames himself for bowing to the enormous
pressure he was under and wrestles with his undeserved honour. The story presents the dilemmas
facing the main characters in a credible manner and shows how ambition in an overcompetitive
academic domain can result in ‘industrial accidents’. In an afterword, the author suggests that
manipulating the data to fit the theory is a regular occurrence, typically preceding a paradigm shift of
the kind described by Thomas Kuhn (Kuhn 1962). Even Sir Isaac Newton and Gregor Mendel have most
likely been guilty of it.
This novel is not only about fabrication and its underlying drivers, like external pressure and a strong
wish to succeed. It also sketches how complex cases of research misconduct can be and how whistle-
blowers can suffer from their actions. The temptation to look the other way and not blow the whistle is
depicted realistically (Bouter and Hendrix 2017).
Pascal Mercier – Perlmann’s Schweigen
This is a disturbing story of a renowned, prize-winning scholar who has lost touch with his field (Mercier
2007). An invitational conference has been organized in his honour, at which he is to deliver the closing
address himself. Much is expected of him, but despite working on his contribution for months he has so
far not been able to put anything down on paper. However, it is too late to pull out now. He is unable
to acknowledge his problem and to admit that he is no longer at the front line of his discipline. Trapped
in his own reputation, he finds himself engaged in a lonely struggle and his panic increases as the
conference goes on. In the end he bases his paper on the one submitted by a Russian scholar who had
withdrawn his attendance. But then the Russian colleague unexpectedly turn up at the conference…
This book reveals the tragedy of a scientist with his best work behind him, who has also missed his
opportunity to move on to a role more suited to his new situation. It also explores some harmful aspects
of meritocracy and the often oversized egos of successful academics.
Mercier’s novel provides an impressive and frightening insight in how strong the temptation to cheat
can become for scholars when they can no longer live up to the expectations of their colleagues and
relatives.
John Kenneth Galbraith – A tenured professor
Thanks to his Index of Irrational Expectations, a Harvard professor is able to identify companies whose
share price is either too high or too low due to excessive optimism or pessimism (Galbraith 1990).
Instead of publishing his findings, he uses his model to amass a vast fortune. As agreed with his wife,
this wealth is used to fund good causes. For example, a campaign for more women in senior academic
positions, chairs of Peace studies at military academies, and initiatives to counter the huge corporate
influence in the political process. By taking over a major company, ‘Specific Electrics’, the professor is
even able to strike at the heart of the defence industry.
Naturally, all of this provokes a backlash in the form of accusations of insider trading and dubious
political motives. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) become more and more intrusive in their interest. There are hearings on Capitol Hill and legal
battles. The professor eventually throws in the towel and settles all the allegations against him, before
going back to the study of refrigerator pricing, albeit as a very rich academic. A wonderful satire, written
with restrained humour and plenty of inside information.
The novel makes one think about intellectual property and the use of research funded by public means
for private gains. The decision not to publish the findings is a clear example of a questionable research
practice and the philanthropical use of the profits does not seem to change that. Besides being a
narrative about research integrity, this novel clearly also concerns responsible research and innovation.
Saul Bellow – The dean’s December
An investigative journalist becomes professor and dean, but comes under heavy criticism for his recent
articles about corruption in Chicago and the racial basis of social inequality in the United States (Bellow
1982). Then he openly takes sides in a controversial court case concerning the violent death of a white
student. He is accused of racism, and the university authorities try to limit the damage to the
institutional reputation. When it becomes clear that the dean now intends to turn his attention to the
destructive and widespread impact of lead poisoning, he comes under pressure to avoid another
scandal.
This book highlights the difficulties of academic citizenship and shows how thin the line can be between
objective criticism and ideologically motivated activism. Science is not value-free. The story is told from
Cold War Romania, which the dean is visiting because his mother-in-law has reached the end of her life.
That perspective creates a distance from the daily grind of the workplace, and also reveals how the
individual’s behaviour is shaped by aspects of the society he lives in – a theme further developed by
exploring the different ways in which the dean and his childhood friend from the white underclass, now
a prominent newspaper columnist, look at the events of the story.
Bellow uses his impressive story-telling skills to make the reader feel how difficult it is to recognize and
handle non-financial conflicts of interest due to strong personal, political and religious convictions. In
the melee of these internal pressures, combined with reputational considerations by academic leaders
and racial tensions, academic freedom and research integrity are under strong pressure.
David Lodge – The campus trilogy
With its recurring characters, this trilogy provides a splendid depiction of academic developments in the
1960s, 70s and 80s, humorous in tone and full of accurate observations (Lodge 2011). In the first book,
Changing places, a British literary scientist and an American colleague take part in an exchange
programme. It is 1969 and students on both sides of the Atlantic are livening things up in their own way.
Inevitably, staff members are affected, too. In drily comic fashion, Lodge illustrates the huge differences
between universities in the old and new worlds, where both main characters have lost their anchors.
Emergent feminism and changing intergenerational relationships play their part, too.
The theme of Small world is the international congress circuit, homing in on the way academics use this
travelling circus to advance their professional and more personal ambitions. And how those ambitions
increasingly become intertwined. Meanwhile, a subplot raises the topic of plagiarism – in this case by a
reviewer of a draft publication – and the inadequate response to it. But the main focus is on the tension
between romance and sexuality. Which, amongst the literary scholars of the 1970s, translates into a
fierce debate on structuralism versus Freudian symbolism. Yet despite the weighty subject matter, this
is an entertaining and, in parts, intriguing book.
The final part of the trilogy, Nice work, brings us to the 1980s. Here the narrative explores the difference
between businesses and universities, again through an exchange programme. When a tutor of feminist
literary studies and the director of an engineering factory swap places, the cultural divide and mutual
preconceptions bring turbulence to both their lives. The attempt to run universities as businesses casts
a shadow forward into an age when even the humanities are expected to be entrepreneurial and to
valorise their work. With all the benefits and drawbacks it entails.
This trilogy shows how universities and scholars are deeply influenced by political and societal trends of
the time and place in which they find themselves. Only one of the three volumes describes a research
integrity issue, a case of plagiarism of ideas, but all three cover a wide range of perverse incentives and
ideological conflicts of interest.
Willem Frederik Hermans – Onder Professoren
A humorous portrait of Dutch university life in the 1970s, full of fanatical Marxists and Marcusians, and
suffering from the excesses of democratization and egalitarian terror (Hermans 1975). A shocking sketch
of stupid students, vain academics and imperious university leadership. All provincial to the bone. The
main protagonist wins a Nobel Prize, but is amazed to discover that the media are more interested in a
student occupation of his laboratory.
The details are very much determined by time and place, but the characters are timeless and
disturbingly recognizable. The Dutch novelist Willem Frederik Hermans was a lecturer at Groningen
University for a while, and to some extent this novel is a product of his frustration and rancour with that
experience. But this is also a majestic book containing some viciously realistic observations. The
dialogues between the Nobel laureate and his wife very much resemble those between Maarten and
Nicolien in Han Voskuil’s Het Bureau.
The novel underlines that what really happens in universities often differs substantially from
meritocratic and Popperian ideals. It also suggests that academic leaders set the tone, for better and
for worse, which determines the local research culture. That culture should first and foremost foster
responsible research practices. However, getting it right is not easy and also dependent of
circumstances that are beyond control.
John Williams – Stoner
A farmer’s son goes to university to study agricultural sciences (Williams 1965). But, once there, he
becomes fascinated by linguistics, gains his doctorate in that subject, and finds a job as a lecturer.
Outgrowing his own family background along the way, he marries the wrong woman. At work he proves
no match for his sophisticated colleagues and his career is unspectacular. But he believes in the
importance of his subject and endears himself to his students. Those around him barely acknowledge
that, however, and he leads a lonely life.
This book provides a revealing insight into the important role of intrinsic motivation in academia. That
can make people extraordinarily single-minded, to the extent that they sublimate their own interests.
This may appear admirable to outsiders, but it may be merely due to having a personality bordering on
the autistic.
This book points out in a powerful way that a well-functioning university needs not only brilliant
researchers, but also great teachers. Arguably, being a good role model for bachelor, master and PhD
students is one of the most important tasks of an academic scholar. It’s a sad story about the
consequences of the lack of recognition of many things that matter most.
Charles Percy Snow – The affair
The narrative concerns research fraud in the form of image manipulation long before the digital era
(Snow 1960). The alleged perpetrator is a young research fellow of an imaginary college in Cambridge.
The close college community forces the fellow to leave and succeeds in keeping the incident out of
publicity. When his supervisor passes away among the documents he leaves behind a similar instance
of image manipulation is found, although the evidence quickly disappears.
Due to the doubts this raises the case is re-opened twice, but the fellows of the college are deeply
divided. Long-lasting friendships are tested and some fall apart. The complex characters in the story are
sketched quite credibly. Although the amount of action is limited, the reader gets hooked by the
suspense and the excellent writing style. For those who are not a native speaker of English the subtle
indirectness of the dialogues might be somewhat intimidating, because it’s likely they will never master
the language at that level of perfection.
The story concerns a relatively straightforward case of fabrication and falsification, but the most
revealing aspect is how poorly a closed academic community responds to it. One cannot help wondering
whether scholars should handle cases of research misconduct completely within their own community
or need societal oversight.
Charles Percy Snow – The search
A penetrating epic from the 1930s (Snow 1934). Fascinated by science since childhood, the main
character grows up to become a promising researcher. He puts his career before the love of his life.
Nevertheless, a highly prestigious job slips out of his grasp when it is discovered that, in his haste to
reveal his findings, he has unintentionally made a painful error. Despite being entirely rehabilitated, he
withdraws from science disillusioned. When his great love’s far less talented husband secures a fantastic
academic position thanks to deliberate falsification of data, he decides not to reveal the fraud.
Although written almost a century ago, this story still resonates with its depiction of the pressure to
perform and the uncertainties scientists face in their professional and personal lives. Science is a
profession practised by ordinary people striving for success, recognition, social status and a good
income. But in a hard world in which only spectacular results count, the temptation to cut corners can
become too large to withstand. The protagonist’s doubts and anxieties will be depressingly familiar to
many academics in this day and age.
This novel describes an instance of intentional falsification and a painful case of unintentional error
followed by author-initiated retraction. Although that’s the right thing to do once the error is identified,
it yields no praise but leads to reputational damage and loss of self-esteem. Another theme is that of
misguided personal sacrifices some scholars engage in their attempt to optimize their career as
researcher.
Sinclair Lewis – Arrowsmith
Martin Arrowsmith studies medicine in the twenties of the last century, but gets hooked to doing lab
research (Lewis 1924). His role model and mentor is the German exile bacteriologist Max Gottlieb, from
whom he learns the trade of rigorous experimentation. Martin gets less interested in becoming a
physician and criticises medicine to be largely unscientific. His dilemma is that he wants to marry and
has to face the fact that doctors earn much more than scientists.
Arrowsmith becomes a country physician and develops a passion for public health. He fails in both –
mainly because he lacks the necessary interpersonal and political skills – and becomes a pathologist. He
still does some scientific research and switches to being a fulltime scientist when Gottlieb offers the
option. Martin almost is the first to describe bacteriophages, but a French colleague publishes first. Then
a plague strikes in the Caribbean. Martin struggles with making a choice between compassionate care
and rigorous experimentation. His beloved wife Leora dies from the plague and our hero falls apart.
Martin gets more isolated and ends up as a weird scientist in the woods of Vermont.
The narrative focusses on the differences between being a good physician and a good medical
researcher. It provides insight in the personality characteristics that makes one suitable for these
different professions. Both worlds come together when an epidemic hits and research comes under
huge pressure to cut corners and to compromise research ethics.
Final remarks
In a way all these novels sing the same song. Being an academic scholar entails dealing with internal
drives, external pressures and navigating dilemmas. The plots make clear that next to the moral
character of the individual scholar, there is a profound influence from both the local academic climate
and the often perverse incentives which determine the career of a scholar. A research climate that
invites to be open about doubts, dilemmas and errors and is characterized by lack of bullying, inspiring
role models and good supervision, seems to be crucial. Increasingly we have come to realize that
research concerns the work of collectives, not of individuals. Slowly we are learning that it makes sense
to hand out ‘career points’ for being a constructive and useful team member and for engaging in
responsible research practices that will not make one famous, like helping others, being a great teacher,
providing critical and constructive peer reviews, and being an excellent mentor and supervisor. Clearly
academic institutes have the duty to optimize the research climate and to minimize perverse incentives,
but they also need to provide training and facilities that empower researchers to behave well, organize
constructive audits, and have fair procedures for handling allegations of research misconduct
(Mejlgaard, et al. 2020).
The fiction books discussed in this compilation provide powerful insights in the dilemmas researchers
have to navigate in their work. Readers can relate to both the cognitive and the emotional aspects of
the narratives and this will likely help them to reflect on how to be a responsible researcher and how to
help others to steer free from the cliffs of falsification, fabrication and plagiarism, as well as questionable
research practices. Novels can play various roles in research integrity training, ranging from strongly
recommending them as a good way to reflect individually on what it means to behave with integrity as
a researcher, to making parts of these books an assignment for group discussions. Arguable novels on
research integrity can be a powerful educational tool, which would fit well in research integrity training
structured according to the recommendations by four recently developed guidelines (Labib et al. 2023).
Novels
Atkins, L. (2017). The night visitor. London: Quercus Editions.
Bellow, S. (1982). The dean’s December. London: Penguin Books.
Bindura, M. (2019). Animal university: how to get away with scientific misconduct. Chennai: Notion Press.
Brand, P. (2009). Impact factor. Amsterdam: Nieuw Amsterdam Uitgevers.
Bulnes, M. (2005). Lab. Amsterdam: Prometheus.
Djerassi, C. (1991). Cantor’s dilemma. London: Penguin Books.
Gailbraith, J. K. (1990). A tenured professor. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company
Goodman, A. (2006). Intuition. New York: The dial Press.
Hermans, W. F. (1975). Onder professoren. Amsterdam: De Bezige Bij.
Lewis, S. (2024). Arrowsmith. New York: Signet Classics.
Lodge, D. (2011). The campus trilogy. London: Vintage Books.
Volume 1: Changing places
Volume 2: Small world
Volume 3: Nice work
McEwan, I. (2011). Solar. London: Vintage Books.
Mercier, P. (1995). Perlmanns Schweigen. München: Albrecht Knaus.
Roth, P. (2005). The human stain. London: Vintage Books.
Scholz, C. (2002). Radiance. New York: Picador.2
Smith, Z. (2006). On beauty. London: Penguin Books.
Snow, C. P. (1934). The search. Kelly Bray: House of Stratus.
Snow, C. P. (1960). The affair. Looe: House of Stratus.
Thompson, H. (2006). This thing of darkness. London: Headline Book Publishing.
Description not yet added.
Uri, H. (2012). De besten onder ons. Breda: De Geus.
van Wersch, H. (2019). Grijpen naar lucht: fraude, moord en wetenschap.
Voskuil, J.J. (1996 – 2000). Het bureau. Amsterdam: Uitgeverij G.A. van Oorschot.
Volume 1: Meneer Beerta.
Volume 2: Vuile handen.
Volume 3: Plankton.
Volume 4: Het A.P. Beerta-Instituut.
Volume 5: En ook weemoedigheid.
Volume 6: Afgang.
Volume 7: De dood van Maarten Koning.
Williams, J. (1965). Stoner. London: Vintage Books. De Bildt: Haes producties.
Other references
Beall, J. (2012). Predatory publishers are corrupting open access. Nature 489: 179.
Bouter LM, Hendrix S. (2017). Both whistle blowers and the scientists they accuse are vulnerable and deserve protection. Accountability in
Research 24: 359-66.
Bouter, L. (2024a). Why research integrity matters and how it can be improved. Accountability in Research 31: 1277-1286.
Bouter, L. M. (2024b). Research misconduct and questionable research practices form a continuum. Accountability in Research 31; 1255–
1259.
Bouter, L. (2024c).Tackling research misconduct. British Medical Journal 386: q1595.
Dalton-Brown, S. (2022). Personalizing the dilemma: research ethics in fiction. Research Ethics 18(2): 114-125.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species. London: John Murray.
Desmond, A., J. More, J. (1991). Darwin. London: Penguin Books.
Dilevko ,J., Barton, R. 2014. Teaching the ethics of scientific research through novels. Journal of Information Ethics 23(1): 65–82.
Dresser, R. (2017). Insights from fictional research subjects. Clinical Trials & Research Ethics, Hastings Bioethics Forum. January 11, 2027.
Freckelton, I. (2016). Scholarly misconduct: law, regulation and practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kevles, D. J. (1998). The Baltimore case: a trial of politics, science and character. New York: WW Norton & Company.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B., Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life: the deconstruction of scientific facts. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Labib, K., Evans, N, Pizzolato, D., Aubert Bonn N., Widdershoven G., Bouter, L., Konach, T., et al. (2023). Co-creating research integrity
education guidelines for research institutions. Journal of Science and Engineering Ethics 29: 28.
Levelt, Noort and Drenth Committees. (2012). Flawed science: the fraudulent research practices of social psychologist Diederik Stapel.
Mejlgaard, N., Bouter LM., Gaskell G., Kavouras P., Allum, N., Bendtsen, A.,K., Charitidis C., A., et al. (2020). Research integrity: nine ways to
move from talk to walk. Nature 586: 358-60.
Merton, R. (1942). Science and technology in a democratic order. Journal of Legal and Political Sociology 1: 115-126.
Orwell, G. (1946). Animal farm. New York: The New American Library.
Popper, K. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: the growth of scientific knowledge. London: Routledge.
Reich, E. S. (2009). Plastic fantastic: how the biggest fraud in physics shook the scientific world. New York: Palgrave and Macmillan.
Showalter, E. (2005). Faculty towers: the academic novel and its discontents. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Sijtsma K. (2023). Never waste a good crisis: lessons learned from data fraud and questionable research practices. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Silver, A. 2017. Controversial website that lists ‘predatory’ publishers shuts down. Nature News, January 18, 2017.
Watson, J. (1968). The double helix: a personal account of the discovery of the structure of DNA. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.