Institutions and Cooperation:
A Meta-Analysis of Structural Features in Social Dilemmas
1 2 2
Shuxian Jin , Giuliana Spadaro , & Daniel Balliet
University of Sussex
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
This paper has been accepted for publication at the Journal of Personality and
th
Social Psychology (June 30 2024). Please cite this version as:
Jin, S., Spadaro, G., & Balliet, D. (in press). Institutions and cooperation: A
meta-analysis of structural features in social dilemmas. Journal of Personality
Please address correspondence to:
Shuxian Jin, School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1
9QH, United Kingdom, Email: shuxian.jin@sussex.ac.uk
Author Note:
The pre-registration, full syntax and data are provided online on the Open Science
Council Starting Grant (ref. 635356) and a European Research Council Consolidator Grant
(ref. 864519) awarded to Daniel Balliet, and a fellowship from China Scholarship Council
(201806200119) awarded to Shuxian Jin.
©American Psychological Association, 2024. This paper is not the copy of record and
may not exactly replicate the authoritative document published in the APA journal. The
final article is available, upon publication, at: 10.1037/pspi0000474
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 2
Abstract
Cooperation underlies the ability of groups to realize collective benefits (e.g., creation of
public goods). Yet, cooperation can be difficult to achieve when people face situations with
conflicting interests between what is best for individuals versus the collective (i.e., social
dilemmas). To address this challenge, groups can implement rules about structural changes in
a situation. But what institutional rules can best facilitate cooperation? Theoretically, rules
can be made to affect structural features of a social dilemma, such as the possible actions,
outcomes, and people involved. We derived 13 pre-registered hypotheses from existing work
and collected six decades of empirical research to test how nine structural features influence
cooperation within prisoner’s dilemmas and public goods dilemmas. We do this by meta-
analyzing mean levels of cooperation across studies (Study 1, k = 2,340, N = 229,528), and
also examining how manipulations of these structural features in social dilemmas affect
cooperation within studies (Study 2, k = 909). Results indicated that lower conflict of
interests was associated with higher cooperation, and that (1) the implementation of sanctions
(i.e., reward and punishment of behaviors) and (2) allowing for communication most strongly
enhanced cooperation. However, we found inconsistent support for the hypotheses that group
size and matching design affect cooperation. Other structural features (e.g., symmetry of
dilemmas, sequential decision making, payment) were not associated with cooperation.
Overall, these findings inform institutions that can (or not) facilitate cooperation.
Keywords: Institutions, Rules, Cooperation, Social dilemma, Meta-analysis
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 3
Institutions and Cooperation:
A Meta-Analysis of Structural Features in Social Dilemmas
Humans are an ultra-social, cooperative species. People cooperate to realize a wealth
of benefits in different activities in daily life, such as trade, conserving resources, and work
within organizations. Cooperation involves individuals making decisions that benefit a
collective at a personal cost. Although cooperation can often occur in situations in which
people have corresponding interests (Columbus et al., 2021), not all situations are so
conducive to cooperation. Cooperation can be difficult to achieve as there exists a conflict
between individual and collective interests (i.e., social dilemmas; Dawes, 1980). Social
scientists have long claimed that people will fail to cooperate when it is not in their self-
interest to do so (Hardin, 1968; Olson, 1965). The temptation to maximize self-interest in
social dilemmas can lead people to defect and thereby result in detrimental collective
outcomes.
Over the past few decades, researchers across disciplines have been seeking solutions
to solve social dilemmas (Chaudhuri, 2011; Kollock, 1998; Ostrom, 2005; Ostrom et al.,
1994; Simpson & Willer, 2015). Prominent theories in social and behavioral sciences, such as
game theory (Colman, 1995) and interdependence theory (Kelley et al., 2003), have
emphasized how the structure of situations can be altered to reduce the conflict of interests
people experience in social dilemmas. Thus, an appeal to self-interest can actually be a key
solution to solving social dilemmas. Indeed, an extensive history of research has studied how
imposing rules that create structural changes to social interactions, namely, institutional
solutions, can reduce the conflict of interests people experience in social dilemmas (Kollock,
1998; Messick et al., 1983; Samuelson & Messick, 1986).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 4
In doing so, researchers have adopted a rigorous and standardized experimental
approach to study cooperation, via social dilemma paradigms that can model the complexity
of daily life interdependent situations (Murnighan & Wang, 2016; Spadaro, Tiddi, et al.,
2022). There are at least seven aspects of a social dilemma in which structural changes can be
applied to fundamentally alter the dilemma and affect cooperation (Ostrom, 2005). Each of
these aspects can include one or more structural features that can vary across studies. To
illustrate, while designing the social dilemmas, researchers can determine the set of
participants (e.g., group size), the specific positions (roles) of participants (e.g., sequentiality
of decision making), the set of allowable actions (e.g., whether communication is possible),
the potential outcomes (e.g., participant payment), the level of control (e.g., asymmetry of
dependence), the costs and benefits assigned to different actions (e.g., punishment, rewards),
and whether the situation occurred once or a number of times for the same set of participants
(e.g., stranger versus partner matching). Thus, how researchers have constructed social
dilemmas in past studies has created variation in these structural features of social dilemmas,
which can be used to test theory about the institutional configurations that affect cooperation.
The present research, reports two meta-analyses that consider how nine structural
features of social dilemmas can shape cooperation in the most commonly studied social
dilemmas (Prisoner’s Dilemma, Public Goods Dilemma). In Study 1, we meta-analyzed how
variation in structural features of social dilemmas across studies covaried with the level of
cooperation between studies. In Study 2, we meta-analyzed effect sizes obtained from within-
study manipulations of these structural features. We conduct these analyses to achieve four
goals: (1) test hypotheses about how structural features of social dilemmas affect cooperation;
Over the past six decades, most research has studied cooperative behavior in three prototypical social
dilemmas: prisoner’s dilemmas (PD; Rapoport et al., 1965), public goods dilemmas (PGD; Ledyard, 1995) and
resource dilemmas (RD; Kopelman et al., 2002). This research tradition began in the 1950’s with a focus on
behavior in the PD, later expanded to include the PGD and RD, and has experienced an exponential rise in
studies in recent years. More information about how cooperation research changes over time can be found in the
living reviews from the Cooperation Databank (Balliet et al., 2023, May 24).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 5
(2) understand which structural feature(s) most strongly influence cooperation; (3) study
whether certain structural features interact to shape cooperation; and (4) analyze how several
methodological features of games (e.g., deception, lab/online studies, binary/continuous
choices) and samples (e.g., gender, age, and the academic discipline of student samples)
affect the outcome of studies. Thus, we provide a comprehensive and systematic analysis of
the impact of different structural features on cooperation, which goes beyond previous studies
that either tested limited structural variables in isolation (e.g., Andreoni & Gee, 2012; Au &
Chung, 2007; Bochet et al., 2006; Budescu et al., 1990, 1995; Wu et al., 2016) or synthesized
findings on each structural variable separately (e.g., Balliet, 2010; Balliet et al., 2011; Sally,
1995). In doing so, the present research compares the relative importance of different
structural features in affecting cooperation, which can inform institutional solutions to
facilitate cooperation.
Social Dilemmas and the Hurdle of Conflicting Interests
Many social situations can involve a conflict of interests – that is, the best outcome
for one person is not the best outcome for others. These situations present to individuals a
social dilemma (Dawes, 1980; Van Lange et al., 2014), in which individuals always receive a
greater outcome by defection regardless of their partner’s behavior. However, if each
individual pursues their self-interest and chose not to cooperate, the outcome for the entire
collective will be worse than if everyone chose to cooperate. Different social dilemma
paradigms have been developed to model everyday life social situations in which people face
conflicting interests between themselves and others, including the prisoner’s dilemma (PD)
and the public goods dilemma (PGD).
A prototypical PD involves two players, each of whom can decide independently
whether to cooperate or defect (Rapoport et al., 1965). A classic example of the PD is an
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 6
arms race between two countries (e.g., the Cold War). A PGD usually involves multiple
players, each of whom possesses a resource that can be contributed to a “public good” that
benefits all group members (Ledyard, 1995). Common public goods in society include roads,
educational institutions, and charities (Gächter & Herrmann, 2009). The two paradigms both
offer choices to cooperate or defect (with the latter representing the rational strategy, yet
producing inefficient collective outcomes, Gangadharan & Nikiforakis, 2009), and share
comparable payoff structures. In fact, making a completely cooperative or defective decision
in a binary choice set can be regarded as equivalent to contributing the maximum or
minimum possible amount to the public good. Moreover, a prototypical PD can be extended
to involve multiple players (Fox & Guyer, 1978; Hamburger, 1973) and continuous choices
representing different levels of cooperation (Van Lange, Klapwijk, et al., 2011), which is
congruent to a linear PGD.
Two widely-adopted indices can formulize the degree of conflicting interests in social
dilemmas. Firstly, Rapoport (1967) proposed the index of cooperation that
(𝑅𝑅−𝑃𝑃)
𝐾𝐾 = (𝑇𝑇−𝑆𝑆)
represents the magnitude of the conflict of interests for two-person PDs, and Komorita et al.
(1980) extended this formula to be applied to n-person PDs. Secondly, in the linear
continuous PGD, the marginal benefit of the public good relative to the private value and the
number of participants in a group can represent the incentive to contribute (i.e., marginal per
Two types of PGD can be distinguished based on how the public good is achieved (Abele et al., 2010). In a
linear continuous PGD, each of the n players has an initial endowment and can choose how much to keep for
themselves versus contribute to the public good. Contributions are multiplied by a constant parameter m (1 < m
< n), which subsequently determines the value of the public good, and then is equally divided among all group
members, regardless of their contribution. In a typical step-level PGD, on the other hand, the public good can be
provided only when the contributions reach a certain threshold, after which any additional contribution does not
add value to the public good. The public good is then equally divided among group members independent of
anyone’s initial contribution. In each PGD, the best individual outcome is obtained by not contributing to the
public good, but still receiving benefits from the public good. Yet, everyone receives a worse outcome if
everyone decides to keep the endowment for themselves, compared to when everyone makes a full contribution
to the public good.
In the continuous-choice version, players can transfer any portion of their endowment to the partner. The
transfer is multiplied by a constant parameter m (1 < m < n) and added to the partner’s endowment.
R is the reward outcome for mutual cooperation, P is the punishment outcome for mutual defection, T is the
temptation outcome for defecting while the other cooperates, and S is the sucker outcome for cooperating while
the other defects.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 7
capita return, MPCR; Isaac et al., 1984). The free-rider problem can be more severe in
situations with a stronger conflict of interests, because of the reduced incentives to cooperate
and the elevated personal benefits of free-riding (Abele et al., 2010; Balliet & Van Lange,
2013). Therefore, when decisions to cooperate are affected by self-interest, situations
involving stronger conflicting interests can reduce cooperation (Bolton & Ockenfels, 2000;
Charness & Rabin, 2002; Fehr & Schmidt, 1999). We expect less cooperation in situations
with a higher degree of conflict of interests (Hypothesis 1). In support of this hypothesis,
previous research found that people are less cooperative in PDs with more conflicting
interests (Smith & Bezrukova, 2013; Vlaev & Chater, 2008; Zettler et al., 2013), and that a
decrease of MPCR (i.e., more conflicting interests) reduces contributions to public goods
(Isaac & Walker, 1988; Jin et al., 2024; Nosenzo et al., 2015; Saijo & Nakamura, 1995).
Institutions, Rules, and Structural Features that Affect Cooperation
Institutions are considered the “rules of the game” which can shape how interactions
unfold in everyday life (Hodgson, 2006; North, 1990). More specifically, institutions are the
“rules, norms, and strategies adopted by individuals” within a collective (Crawford & Ostrom,
2005, p. 137). At the societal level, institutions have been established to coordinate collective
efforts and foster cooperation (Hindriks & Guala, 2021; Ostrom, 1990). Within research on
social dilemmas, researchers manipulate various structural features to craft these situations,
and thereby artificially design different rules of the game to study cooperation. For example,
researchers can decide to limit group size of the social dilemma to three or six, (dis)allow
communication within the group, and enable either single or repeated interactions among the
same group members. By creating rules that define roles and outcomes, constrain and enable
certain behaviors, the researchers can change the structure of the game in ways that
(potentially) facilitate cooperation (Hindriks & Guala, 2021; Ostrom, 2005).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 8
Ostrom and colleagues (1994) have utilized game theory to analyze the basic aspects
that construct a game form. According to their framework, there are at least seven aspects
that compose and define a social dilemma, including the set of participants, the specific
positions (roles) of participants, the set of allowable actions, the potential outcomes, the level
of control, the costs and benefits assigned to different actions, and whether interactions are
overview). Next, we describe these aspects of a social dilemma, how past research has made
decisions that affect variation in these aspects of social dilemmas, and theory that forwards
hypotheses about how such variations can affect cooperation. In doing so, we can test
hypotheses regarding the effects of different structural features on cooperation and illuminate
the key features of social dilemmas that groups, policymakers, and managers within
organizations can modify to promote cooperation in everyday life.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 9
Basic Structure of a Social Dilemma, Structural Features, and Examples of Rules that Create Structural Changes to a Social Dilemma
Structure of the
Definition Structural Features Examples of the rules in a public goods dilemma
social dilemma
Four (eight) people can contribute to provide a public
Participants The set of participants in a situation. Group size
good.
Positions The specific positions to be filled by participants. Sequential decisions People make simultaneous (sequential) contributions.
The set of allowable actions and their linkage to People can (not) communicate to each other before
Actions Communication
outcomes. (during) making the contributions.
The potential outcomes that are linked to individual People receive (hypothetical) payment linked to
Outcomes Payment
sequences of actions. benefits from the public good.
The level of control each participant has over People have larger (equal) amount of initial
Control Symmetry
choice, including own and others’ outcomes. endowments to contribute.
The costs and benefits—which serve as incentives People (don’t) pay a cost for not contributing and
Costs/benefits Sanctions
and deterrents—assigned to actions and outcomes. (don’t) receive a benefit from making contributions.
Whether a situation will occur once or repeatedly People interact only once (repeatedly) with the same
Interactions Matching design
for the same set of participants. group members while providing the public good.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 10
Set of Participants: Group Size
Social dilemmas can be experienced in groups of different sizes: students can work in
dyads or small groups to complete an assignment, citizens can pay taxes to maintain public
services, and nations can set policies to prevent climate change. Rules about participants can
determine the group size for specific social dilemmas, such as altering the size of work teams
in organizations, or setting boundaries on how many people can use a common resource in a
community.
There are several reasons why group size could affect cooperation in social dilemmas.
Group size can covary with the incentive for cooperation, that is the individual and group
payoffs for contributing to the public good (Bonacich et al., 1976; Wu et al., 2020). In larger
groups, there is often a lower individual payoff of cooperation, and a higher temptation to
free-ride on the group. This could produce a decline in cooperation with increasing group size.
Moreover, increases in group size has been found to reduce self-efficacy (Kerr, 1989), make
people feel less responsible for group performance (Forsyth et al., 2002), and perceive greater
anonymity (Van Vugt & Samuelson, 1999) – each of which could also explain a reduction in
cooperation within larger group sizes. For all of these reasons, group size is expected to be
negatively associated with cooperation (Hypothesis 2).
Interestingly, previous research has found mixed results on how group size relates to
cooperation, with some studies reporting that cooperation declined in larger groups (e.g.,
Brewer & Kramer, 1986; Komorita & Lapworth, 1982), some studies observing an increase
in cooperation in larger groups (e.g., Isaac et al., 1994; Nosenzo et al., 2015), and others
studies showing no relation between group size and cooperation (e.g., Kerr, 1989). These
mixed findings may be reconciled by considering the individual gains relative to the costs of
cooperation in different game contexts. Barcelo and Capraro (2015) propose that larger
groups are more inclined to cooperate when the individual benefit for cooperation increases
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 11
linearly with the size of the group, whereas group size negatively influences cooperation
when the individual benefit for cooperation remains constant. In the present study, we are
able to test the relation between group size and cooperation while controlling for the degree
of conflicting interests, which as discussed above could explain the effect of group size on
cooperation.
Position of Participants: Sequential Decisions
Social dilemmas can involve people making decisions simultaneously (i.e., at the
same time without knowledge of the other person’s choice) or sequentially (i.e., decisions are
made in a sequential order, often with knowledge of the earlier persons’ choice). Rules can be
established to specify the (relative) positions people have when facing social dilemmas. For
example, people in a work group can decide whether to simultaneously work on a project or
sequentially make contributions, and a charity can organize fundraising activities to either
allow for simultaneous donations or sequential donations disclosing the previous donations.
Abele and Ehrhart (2005) argued for differences in cooperation between group
members who move sequentially and simultaneously. In a sequential decision making
protocol, people make their decision in a temporal order, which allows people to exploit the
first mover. As a consequence, a first mover may expect this response and choose to defect
preemptively. Therefore, simultaneous choices in social dilemmas may more likely result in
mutual cooperation, compared to sequential decision making. Simultaneous decision making
also has the potential to enhance the sense of shared fate, perceived entitativity, cohesion
among people, and/or quasi-magical thinking (e.g., Abele & Ehrhart, 2005; Brewer &
Kramer, 1986; De Cremer & Van Vugt, 1999; Shafir & Tversky, 1992), which may thereby
increase cooperation. Previous research had participants move simultaneously or pseudo-
Quasi-magical thinking describes a cognitive bias where individuals irrationally believe their thoughts or
actions might influence unrelated outcomes (Shafir & Tversky, 1992). When choices are made simultaneously,
without knowledge of others’ actions, quasi-magical thinking might lead individuals to optimistically believe
that their cooperative choice will influence others to do the same, despite no causal connection. This belief,
albeit irrational, may foster cooperation in the absence of direct evidence from others’ choices.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 12
sequentially (one after the other, but without knowledge of the other’s decision), and found
that the average contributions of the simultaneous movers is greater than either the first and
second movers in a sequential decision making setting (Abele & Ehrhart, 2005). Therefore,
we expect more cooperation when people make simultaneous versus sequential decisions
(Hypothesis 3).
Possible Behaviors: Communication
Social dilemma can involve people interacting with specific behaviors, such as
communication, permitted or constrained. Rules can determine whether and how
communication occurs within interactions. For example, community meetings can be held
regularly to allow people to exchange ideas in solving local collective action problems; the
team leader can send unidirectional information to members or involve team members in
bidirectional communication to discuss tasks allocation.
Communication has long been recognized as one of the most effective solutions to
promote cooperation in social dilemmas (Balliet, 2010; Ostrom et al., 1994; Sally, 1995).
The very act of discussing the dilemma can increase cooperation, relative to the absence of
communication (e.g., Bouas & Komorita, 1996; Dawes et al., 1977; Kerr & Kaufman-
Gilliland, 1994; Orbell et al., 1988; Ostrom & Walker, 1991), or even imagining to
communicate (Meleady et al., 2013). Further, this positive impact of communication on
cooperation occurs regardless of whether communication is face-to-face, or by sending
messages online (Chen & Komorita, 1994). There exist several possible explanations for the
effect of communication on cooperation, including increasing expectations of others’
cooperation (i.e., trust), promoting a group identity, and establishing norms of cooperation
(Balliet, 2010; Kerr et al., 1997). Past research suggested that communication about the
dilemma can afford prosocial norms, particularly the norm of promise keeping, which is
conducive to cooperation (Bicchieri, 2002; Bicchieri & Lev-on, 2007). Therefore, we expect
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 13
more cooperation when there is communication compared to no communication (Hypothesis
4a).
However, contrary to bidirectional communication, unidirectional communication
does not allow for immediate, direct responses to others’ remarks, which may produce
misunderstanding and restrict the emergence of norms of behavior. Therefore, cooperation
may be higher under settings that allow for bidirectional communication than in settings with
only unidirectional communication (Hypothesis 4b). Additionally, communication may have
greater impact on cooperation within situations that would more likely elicit competition,
such as situations with stronger conflict of interests and more temptation to free-ride. We
predict that the positive impact of communication on cooperation will be stronger when there
is a larger, compared to smaller, degrees of conflict in the social dilemma (Hypothesis 4c).
Potential Outcomes: Payment
Social dilemmas can vary in what kind of outcomes participants experience. Rules can
be applied to affect how participants are paid for their participation and decisions made in the
study. For example, participants in studies have been compensated through a flat fee for their
participation in the study (i.e., show-up fee) and/or a payment based on their performance in
the game. Monetary payment are widely used in experimental studies in the social sciences,
while there also exits other types of incentives such as course credit, gifts and vouchers.
Payment can sufficiently motivate participation (Bonner et al., 2000; Friedman et al.,
1994), and also enhance the internal validity of studies (Hertwig & Ortmann, 2001). However,
rules that determine each type of payment may affect cooperation within studies. It has been
argued that offering show-up fees could lead to biased samples because volunteer participants
might be inherently more cooperative (Thielmann et al., 2020; Van Lange et al., 2007).
Indeed, research has found that individuals who assign more weight to other’s outcomes are
more likely to volunteer for studies (Van Lange, Schippers, et al., 2011). Therefore, we
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 14
predict higher cooperation in studies where participants receive no show-up fee, compared to
when they receive compensation for participation (Hypothesis 5a).
Performance-based payment related to the outcomes of the social dilemma may be
negatively related to cooperation, because cooperative behavior is more costly in situations
with real versus hypothetical payoffs. Individuals can approach a social dilemma with an
intrinsic motive to cooperate (e.g., prosocial value orientation), but payment may provide an
“extrinsic motivation” to behave less cooperatively (Frey & Goette, 1999; Gneezy &
Rustichini, 2000). Following this reasoning, we predict less cooperation when people receive
performance-based compared to hypothetical incentives (Hypothesis 5b). To date, prior
research has found inconclusive results about how incentives affect cooperation (e.g.,
Columbus et al., 2022; Engel, 2011; Johnson & Mislin, 2011; Romano et al., 2021; Sally,
1995; Zelmer, 2003). Evidence from online experiments showed that individuals behave
more prosocially while making hypothetical than incentivized decisions in dictator games, yet
no such difference was observed in public goods games or trust games (Amir et al., 2012).
Moreover, we predict that performance-based incentives will increase defection in one-shot
social dilemmas, but promote cooperation during iterated interactions (Hypothesis 5c). This is
because engaging in some cooperation, at least in early stages of the game, can benefit
oneself in the long-run across iterated interactions (Van Lange, Schippers, et al., 2011). In
addition, we will also explore whether rules about the type of incentive used for a game
payment (i.e., monetary/non-monetary; lottery/non-lottery payment) affects cooperation (see
SI for more information).
The Control Afforded to Participants: Symmetry
Social dilemmas can vary in the relative extent of control participants have in
determining their own and other’s outcomes in the dilemma, and to what extent their own
outcomes are affected by others’ behavior (i.e., social power; Balliet et al., 2017). Rules can
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 15
be applied to affect the asymmetries in the control that individuals have over one another’s
outcome. For instance, members of organizations are often assigned different roles (e.g.,
leader and follower) to divide labor and achieve joint tasks; within family units, parents
typically manage significant financial responsibilities, whereas children are allotted a limited
allowance. Multiple sources of asymmetrical dependence have been studied in the social
dilemma literature; for example, group members were assigned unequal endowments to
contribute to the public good, group members received different benefits from a public good,
and group members were given specific roles determining how decisions are made, such as
leaders and followers within a group (Nieper et al., 2019; Van Lange et al., 2013). These
differences in resources, payoffs and roles are different operationalizations of power
(a)symmetry.
Halevy and colleagues (2011) proposed that asymmetrical dependence, power, and
hierarchy in a group, reduces conflict within a group and promotes voluntary cooperation of
individuals, since hierarchy is functionally adaptive and can enhance a group’s success.
Group members with lower power tend to cooperate with higher-powered members, since the
latter controls more resources and low-power members can pay less for cooperating relative
to their higher-power counterparts. This dynamic may be further complemented by high-
power members reciprocating this cooperation, as this may not only enhance their reputation
and maintain group stability but also strategically invest in a social structure where their
authority and influence are reinforced. This perspective also aligns with the morality-as-
cooperation theory, which posits that the display of dominance and submission are perceived
as morally good in human social life, signaling individuals’ adherence to a hierarchical
structure (Curry et al., 2019). Thus, we predict higher level of cooperation in asymmetric,
compared to symmetric, groups (Hypothesis 6). Yet, empirical research has found
contradictory results: Asymmetric, compared to symmetric groups, have been found to
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 16
display (a) less cooperation (e.g., L. R. Anderson et al., 2008; Cherry et al., 2005; Fung & Au,
2014; Marwell & Ames, 1979, 1980), (b) greater cooperation (e.g., Bergstrom et al., 1986;
Chan et al., 1996), or (c) no impact on cooperation (e.g., Levati et al., 2007; Molho et al.,
2019; Warr, 1983).
Costs/Benefits Assigned to Actions: Sanctions
Social dilemmas exhibit variability in the extent and manner by which costs and
benefits are assigned to specific behaviors. Rules can be enacted that allow for the possibility
to sanction specific behaviors, including posing rewards and punishments, and potentially
regulate individuals in their pursuit of self-interest and solve the free rider problem. In society,
formal institutions have been developed to punish norm-violations in social dilemmas, such
as imposing fines for littering and not paying taxes. We have also observed examples of
rewarding cooperation in everyday life, such as providing public recognition for generous
donations to charity or for outstanding organizational citizenship behavior. Past research on
cooperation sometimes allowed people to punish or reward their fellow group members (Fehr
& Gächter, 2002), or had a centralized institution that administered sanctions based on rules
(e.g., the lowest contributing members pay a fine; Yamagishi, 1986, 1988b).
Sanctions provide individuals with incentives that affect the outcome structure within
a social dilemma. The presence of sanctions can reduce the discrepancy between self-interest
and collective interest, which is expected to enhance cooperation. Previous research has
consistently found greater levels of cooperation in social dilemmas when people receive
rewards for cooperation and/or punishment for free-riding, compared to the absence of
sanctions (e.g., Balliet, Mulder, et al., 2011; Fehr & Gächter, 2002; Mulder, 2008; Ostrom et
al., 1992; Parks, 2000; Rand et al., 2009; Yamagishi, 1986). We therefore predict that people
display more cooperation when there are sanctions, compared to no sanctions (Hypothesis 7a).
Furthermore, sanctions may be more effective in promoting cooperation when people play
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 17
with the same partners for several trials, because people can learn the group’s cooperative
norms and form expectations of others’ cooperation accordingly (Balliet, Mulder, et al., 2011;
Fehr et al., 2002; Pruitt & Kimmel, 1977). We expect that sanctions will be more effective in
promoting cooperation during iterated, compared to one-shot, dilemmas (Hypothesis 7b).
Strategic Interaction: Stranger versus Partner Matching
Social dilemmas can vary in the nature and complexity of strategic interactions among
individuals involved. Rules can be created to determine how and with whom people make
decisions in social dilemmas. For example, organizations can initiate short-term or long-term
projects, form or dissolve project teams, which may influence staff members’ anticipation
about possible future interactions with their co-workers. Past research on cooperation has
varied on how individuals are matched with their group members. In partner-matching,
individuals often interact with the same partner(s) for multiple rounds; while in stranger-
matching, individuals play with the same partner(s) only once, no matter whether there is one
or multiple rounds, each with different partner(s).
In stranger-matching social dilemmas, individuals are always better off by defecting
regardless of their partners’ strategies (Dawes, 1980). However, under repeated interactions
with the same partner(s), individuals may experience benefits from mutual cooperation and/or
generate beliefs about their partners cooperative behavior in early stages of the game
(Andreoni, 1988; Kreps et al., 1982). In this setting, the more beneficial strategy is to
cooperate in earlier rounds, but to free-ride later in the game. According to interdependence
theory, repeated interaction with the same partner(s) may encourage individuals to consider
their long-term self-interest, which in turn promotes cooperation at the outset of the recurring
engagement (Kelley et al., 2003). We therefore predict that people display more cooperation
in partner matching, compared to stranger matching (Hypothesis 8). Interestingly, while some
prior research found higher cooperation in social dilemmas that had partner-matching
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 18
compared to stranger-matching (e.g., Croson, 1996; Mengel & Peeters, 2011; Nihonsugi,
2016; Van Lange, Klapwijk, et al., 2011), other research has reported no difference between
these conditions (e.g., Andreoni, 1988; Brandts & Schram, 2001; Palfrey & Prisbrey, 1996;
Weimann, 1994).
A Rule Unique to Experimental Social Dilemmas: Deception
In the implementation of social dilemma paradigms, there are certain rules of the
game that are unique to experiments, and do not necessarily generalize to social dilemmas
outside the lab. Nonetheless, the study of these rules can inform how experimental designs
affect cooperation. One such rule is the use of deception within studies, that refers to
researchers intentionally providing misinformation to participants about the study (Hertwig &
Ortmann, 2008). For instance, individuals may receive pre-programmed feedback about their
partner’s decisions in previous rounds of the social dilemma; and the experimenters can make
participants believe that they are interacting with “real” partners, while actually they are
interacting with computers or there is no interaction at all.
Experimental economists recommend avoiding the use of deception because it may
affect participant behavior via both first-hand (i.e., on deceived participants) and second-hand
exposure (e.g. through teaching, media reports, etc.; Hertwig & Ortmann, 2008). Yet,
psychologists have defended the use of deception on grounds that it has limited consequences
on attitudes (Christensen, 1988; Kimmel, 1998) and behaviors (Bonetti, 1998; Hertwig &
Ortmann, 2008; for a different position, see Hilbig et al., 2022). Previous evidence from
economic games has been inconclusive about the effect of deception on decision making and
behavior. Jamison et al. (2008) found that deception did not affect individual’s behavior in a
trust game at time one, but having experienced deception reduced return rates and
participants tended to not take the games seriously in a subsequent study. In contrast, Barrera
and Simpson (2012), using a similar design, examined the effect of direct and indirect
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 19
exposure to deception and found that deception reduced the reputation of psychologists but
did not affect the validity of the results. Here, we do not forward a directional prediction, but
will test whether there is a difference in cooperation, when deception is applied versus when
it is not used in a study.
Overview of the Present Studies
Theory and research have identified several structural features of social dilemmas that
can affect cooperation. These features can be altered in ways that address the free-rider
problem and foster cooperative behavior. In the history of research on social dilemmas,
researchers have crafted different social dilemmas by setting the rules for the interaction,
we synthesize six decades of empirical evidence on social dilemmas, and utilize variation in
how these dilemmas have been constructed to test 13 pre-registered hypotheses about which
hypotheses).
To achieve these goals, we collected 60 years of studies reported in documents written
in Chinese, English, and Japanese and which used prototypical paradigms to measure
cooperation. In Study 1, we used meta-regression to analyze how structural variation across
social dilemmas covaries with the amount of cooperation observed across studies. Overall,
we included 1,527 studies with 2,340 unique cooperation rates, comprising a total of N =
229,528 participants in the meta-regression. In Study 2, we provided an additional test of the
hypotheses using a more traditional, within-study meta-analytic approach. Specifically, we
used the Cooperation Databank to identify studies that measured or manipulated all of the
predictor variables specified in our hypotheses. We were able to conduct 10 independent
The Cooperation Databank (CoDa) contains a machine-readable history of cooperation research to search and
select studies for on-demand meta-analysis (Spadaro, Tiddi, et al., 2022). The CoDa research platform
variables with cooperation, visualize these study results, and perform (1) meta-analyses, (2) meta-regressions, (3)
estimates of publication bias, and (4) statistical power analyses for future studies.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 20
meta-analyses to test 10 out of the 13 hypotheses about structural features. In total, these
meta-analyses included 390 studies with 909 unique effect sizes (i.e., Cohen’s d).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 21
Overview of the Preregistered Hypotheses
Variable # Hypothesis
Structural features
Conflict of interests 1 Cooperation is higher in situations with a lower degree of conflicting interests.
Group size 2 Cooperation is lower in situations with larger group sizes.
Sequentiality 3 Cooperation is higher in situations that allow for simultaneous (versus sequential) decision-making.
Communication 4a Cooperation is higher in situations that allow for communication (versus no communication).
Communication type 4b Cooperation is higher in situations with bidirectional (versus unidirectional) communication.
Show up fee 5a Cooperation is lower when individuals receive compensation for participation (versus no show-up fee).
Game payment 5b Cooperation is lower when individuals receive performance-based (versus hypothetical) incentives.
Symmetry 6 Cooperation is lower in situations with symmetric (versus asymmetric) structure.
Sanctions 7a Cooperation is higher in situations with the presence of sanctions.
Matching design 8 Cooperation is higher when individuals interact with the same partner(s) repeatedly (versus only once).
Interactions
Communication × Conflict 4c The positive effect of communication on cooperation is stronger in situations with stronger conflicting interests.
Game payment × Matching 5c Performance-based incentives lower (increase) cooperation in stranger-matching (partner-matching) design.
Sanctions × Matching 7b Sanctions more strongly promote cooperation in partner-matching vs. stranger-matching designs.
Note. Conflict = Conflict of interests, Matching = Matching design.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 22
Study 1: How Do Structural Features Covary with Cooperation Across Studies?
Methods
Transparency and Openness
We describe our search strategy, inclusion criteria, coding of effect sizes and variables,
and inter-rater agreement in the study, and we follow Journal Article Reporting Standards
were analyzed using R, version 3.6.0 (R Core Team, 2020). Prior to data analyses, the overall
objectives, hypotheses, inclusion criteria and analytic strategy of the study were pre-
Information (SI) for deviations from pre-registration).
Search for Studies
The search for eligible studies were based on a systematic literature search performed
for the Cooperation Databank (CoDa; Spadaro, Tiddi, et al., 2022) . CoDa comprises the
entire history of lab and field research on human cooperation using social dilemmas. The
studies were retrieved through systematic searches for English-language documents in
September and October 2015, as well as in January 2018, using PsychInfo, Web of Science,
Google Scholar, and online University library repositories. Chinese-written documents were
searched in November and December 2017 using CNKI, Wanfang Data, and CQVIP.
Japanese documents were searched from July to December 2018 using CiNii and Google
Scholar.
The English search string included the following key terms: Public goods dilemma*,
Public good*, Public good* game*, Prisoner’s dilemma*, Voluntar* contribut* experiment*,
Voluntary contribution mechanism, Social dilemma, Mixed-motive game, Mixed-motive
game*, Cooperation game, Resource dilemma*, Conditional cooperation, Interpersonal
More details about the search for literature and studies included in CoDa are reported in Spadaro, Tiddi, et al.
(2022).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 23
bargaining AND Experimental games, Matrix games, Cooperation AND Experiment,
Common pool game, Give-some dilemma, Take-some dilemma, Give-some game, Take-
some game. Equivalent terms were used for Chinese and Japanese searches (see Chinese and
Japanese search string in SI). Overall, these searches yielded 2,665 English documents, 71
Chinese documents and 119 Japanese documents.
Additional articles were retrieved through a backward search of the social dilemma
literature by checking the references of published reviews, meta-analyses and books. Finally,
the CoDa team sent out announcements requesting published data to several scientific
communities (e.g., European Association of Social Psychology (EASP), Society for
Judgement and Decision Making (SJDM) and on Twitter). These approaches yielded another
125 documents, 30 of which were published data and 95 of which were unpublished raw data
used in previous meta-analyses. After these documents were assessed for eligibility, we
identified 1,813 full text documents including data relevant for the present meta-analysis.
Inclusion Criteria
To be included in the meta-analysis the following criteria had to be fulfilled:
1. Cooperation was either measured with a prisoner’s dilemma (PD) or with a linear
public goods dilemma (PGD). We include slight variations of these dilemmas (e.g.,
asymmetrical payoff structure), but exclude PDs and PGDs with nonlinear payoff
structure and intergroup games (see Bornstein, 2003).
2. Cooperation was assessed in interactions with strangers. Thus, studies involving
interactions among participants with an interaction history outside of the experimental
session (e.g., friends, relatives, or acquaintances) were excluded. If acquaintance
In addition to English-language documents, the CoDa team has also retrieved documents in Chinese and
Japanese. This decision was driven by two key factors. Firstly, a significant volume of research applying social
dilemma paradigms in Chinese and Japanese was not published in English. Only in recent years has there been a
shift towards English-language publications in these regions. Secondly, the CoDa team has established strong
collaborative relationships with Chinese and Japanese researchers specializing in social dilemma studies. These
connections have been essential in facilitating access to a broader range of social dilemma literature and thereby
enriching the Cooperation Databank with a broader and more diverse sample of empirical studies.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 24
between participants has been included in an orthogonal design, we only included the
treatments involving interactions among strangers.
3. The sample had a mean age equal to or above 18 years.
4. There had to be sufficient data available (either in the document/corresponding
supplemental materials or provided upon request) to code for the mean level of
cooperation over all trials of the game or during the first trial.
In total, the implementation of the inclusion criteria resulted in 1150 documents
containing 1,527 studies and 2,340 unique cooperation rates (N = 229,528) published
Coding of Effect Sizes
The effect size used for Study 1 is the cooperation rate (i.e., raw proportion of
𝑐𝑐
𝑝𝑝
cooperation), which comprises the proportion of cooperative choices in dichotomous-choice
games and the proportion of the total endowments contributed in continuous-choice games.
Specifically, the proportion of contributions was computed (1b) by dividing the maximum
amount of endowments that participants could contribute into the mean contributions, and
scaling it by the range of choice options. Cooperation rates range from 0 to 1, with 0
indicating no cooperation at all and 1 indicating maximum possible cooperation.
(1a)
𝑝𝑝 , 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 ,
(1b)
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
𝑐𝑐 𝑀𝑀 − 𝐸𝐸
𝑝𝑝 = �
, 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜,
𝑈𝑈𝐿𝐿 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
where is the proportion of coo𝐸𝐸per−ati𝐸𝐸ve choices in dichotomous-choice games, is the
𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀
mean of contributions, is the upper limit of the choice options, is the lower limit of
𝑈𝑈𝐿𝐿 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
𝐸𝐸 𝐸𝐸
the choice options.
We performed logit transformation of the cooperation rates (2a-2b) to analyze the
𝑝𝑝
heterogeneity of these cooperation estimates using meta-regression (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001).
Specifically, we obtained 735 studies with 1,086 cooperation rates (N = 94,554) for PDs, and 792 studies with
1,254 cooperation rates (N = 134,974) for PGDs. See introduction section for reasons for aggregating the results
from PDs and PGDs.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 25
Cooperation estimates (i.e., logit-transformed cooperation rates) were then converted back to
proportions for interpretation after analyses.
(2a)
𝑝𝑝
𝑒𝑒
log , 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜,
(2b)
1 − 𝑝𝑝
𝑐𝑐
𝑙𝑙𝑓𝑓𝑙𝑙𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑝𝑝 =
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
𝑀𝑀 − 𝐸𝐸
𝑒𝑒
log , 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜.
𝑈𝑈𝐿𝐿
⎩ 𝐸𝐸 − 𝑀𝑀
Variance for the cooperation estimates was computed using the formulas below (4a-
4c, see SI for more details about the derivation of formula 4b). When studies using a
continuous-choice game failed to report the standard deviation of mean contributions (k =
669 missing SD), then we proceeded with imputation by using the median value of the
coefficient of variation (3) calculated beforehand based on all the other studies that
𝑣𝑣
𝑑𝑑
reported the standard deviation (Mdn = 0.527, k = 755).
(3)
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆
𝑣𝑣
𝑑𝑑 = ,
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
(𝑀𝑀 − 𝐸𝐸 )
(4a)
1 1
⎧ + , 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜, (4b)
𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝 𝑐𝑐(1 − 𝑝𝑝)
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 1
(4c)
𝑣𝑣 = 2 × 2 , 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜,
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 𝑐𝑐
(𝑀𝑀 − 𝐸𝐸 ) 𝑐𝑐(1 − 𝑝𝑝 )
𝑣𝑣 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
⎪ 𝑑𝑑
2 , 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑤𝑤𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜ℎ 𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑐𝑐𝑙𝑙 𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆,
𝑐𝑐
⎩𝑐𝑐(1 − 𝑝𝑝 )
where is the standard deviation of mean contributions, is the sample size, and is
𝑣𝑣 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑐 𝑑𝑑
the median of the coefficient of variation .
𝑣𝑣
𝑑𝑑
Coding of Structural Variables
The coding of variables was performed by the CoDa team comprising domain experts
knowledgeable about social dilemmas and meta-analysis. Each team member underwent a
rigorous standardized training procedure before coding studies. All studies included in CoDa
were coded along a set of variables related to paper meta-data, sample characteristics, study
characteristics, and quantitative study results. We selected relevant variables from CoDa to
test our hypotheses. The coding protocol and descriptive statistics (including the number of
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 26
To estimate inter-rater agreement, we relied upon the efforts pursued to ensure data
quality in CoDa. Ten percent of the documents in CoDa were re-annotated by a second
annotator and compared with those of the original annotators to assess inter-rater reliability
by computing Krippendorff’s α (Hayes & Krippendorff, 2007; Krippendorff, 2011) and the
percentage of agreement (i.e., agreement rates, AR, for categorical variables only; see
Spadaro, Tiddi, et al., 2022 for more details). Results showed that most variables, especially
the outcome variables used for computing effect sizes (e.g., proportion of cooperation),
scored a high and/or adequate level of inter-rater agreement (α ranged from 0.79 to 1; AR
Conflict of Interests. To measure the magnitude of conflict, we computed the K
index for standard two-person PDs (5a), n-person PDs, continuous PDs (e.g., give-some
dilemma), as well as PGDs with linear payoff structure (5b).
(5a)
𝑅𝑅 − 𝑃𝑃
⎧ , 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑓𝑓𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑜 𝑃𝑃𝑆𝑆,
(5b)
𝑇𝑇 − 𝑆𝑆
𝐾𝐾 =
𝐶𝐶 − 𝑆𝑆
, 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑐𝑐 − 𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐, 𝑑𝑑𝑓𝑓𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑃𝑃𝑆𝑆 𝑎𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑑𝑑 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑆𝑆,
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑀𝑀
⎩𝑂𝑂 − 𝑂𝑂
where is the reward outcome for mutual cooperation, is the punishment outcome for
𝑅𝑅 𝑃𝑃
mutual defection, is the temptation outcome for defecting while the other cooperates, and
𝑇𝑇 𝑆𝑆
is the sucker outcome for cooperating while the other defects; is the payoff for all choosing
𝐶𝐶
to cooperate, is the payoff for all choosing to defect, is the highest payoff in the
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
𝑆𝑆 𝑂𝑂
matrix, and is the lowest payoff in the matrix.
𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑀𝑀
𝑂𝑂
When the distribution of a variable is seriously skewed (e.g., specific categories are highly common), the
percentage of agreement tends to reflect the actual level of inter-coder agreement (Jones et al., 1983; Orwin &
Vevea, 2009). In Study 1, skewed variables such as publication status, symmetry and sequentiality displayed
medium levels of Krippendorff’s α, but agreement rates higher than 90%, suggesting a high rate of agreement.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 27
In linear PGDs, marginal per capita return (MPCR) was often applied to reflect the
incentive to contribute. However, since MPCR typically covaries with the size of the group,
its use can lead to confounding when attempting to isolate and test the effect of conflicting
interests and group size on cooperation respectively in the current study . To address this,
we transformed the MPCR into the K index, which serves as the primary operationalization
of the conflict of interest. This was achieved by computing each parameter in formula 5b
using MPCR values (see SI for more details about the transformation). The K index ranges
from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating less conflict of interests between self and others in
the social dilemma (M = 0.44, SD = 0.172).
Group Size. Group size was coded as the number of people affected by the choices in
the game. Given that most cooperation rates were from relatively small group size (e.g., range
distribution.
Sequentiality. Sequentiality was coded reflecting whether group members made their
decisions simultaneously or sequentially. Most of the cooperation rates were from studies that
involved simultaneous decisions (k = 2,140), while only a few had sequential interactions (k
= 144).
Communication. Studies were coded for whether participants were allowed to
communicate with group members either before or during the interaction. Most of the
cooperation rates were from studies that did not allow communication (k = 2,096), while
some studies allowed communication (k = 208). We further distinguished between two types
of communication, including uni-directional (i.e., participants could communicate to their
partners but not vice-versa, k = 50) and bi-directional communication (i.e., participants could
communicate with partners, and partners could respond to that communication, k = 157).
We additionally examined the potential interaction between MPCR and group size in predicting the level of
cooperation in linear PGDs, but did not find evidence for this interaction (b = –0.016, p = .409, see SI for more
information).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 28
Payment. We coded two categories of payment, namely show-up fee and game
payment. A majority of the cooperation rates were from studies that compensated participants’
show-up (k = 1,170), while some did not (k = 231). Likewise, in most studies participants
were incentivized for game performance (k = 1,911), and only a minority of studies involved
hypothetical payments (k = 177). We further distinguished between different types of game
payment, including (1) receiving non-monetary payment (e.g., candies, school supplies, gift
cards for specific goods, k = 116), compared to monetary payment (k = 1,792), and (2)
receiving lottery payment (e.g., a lottery would determine who was paid, or which decision
outcome was paid, k = 219), compared to non-lottery payment (k = 1,687).
Symmetry. Symmetry was coded to indicate whether the structure of the game was
the same across participants. Most of the cooperation rates were from studies that involved
symmetric games (k = 2,145), and only a minority of studies included games that involved
asymmetry (e.g., payoff matrix, initial endowment size, or any other aspects of the game
structure) (k = 147).
Sanction. Sanction was coded to identify whether punishment and/or reward
mechanisms were implemented in the study. Most of the cooperation were from studies that
did not include sanctions (k = 2,013), while some studies implemented sanctions (k = 287).
Matching Design. We coded matching design for cooperation rates from studies
where participants played the game with the same person(s) only once or switched partners
after each trial across many trials (i.e., stranger-matching; k = 886), and where participants
interacted with the same partners repeatedly for several trials (i.e., partner-matching, k =
1,418).
Deception. We coded for whether there was any deception used in the study (e.g.,
false feedback). A study was also indicated to include deception when participants believed
that they were playing with real others, but in fact an experimenter strategy was used during
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 29
the study . Most of the cooperations rates were retrieved from studies without deception (k =
1,753), but some studies did involve deception (k = 551).
Coding of Sample and Control Variables
We included a few sample and methodological variables in the models to statistically
sample’s mean age in years, ranged from 18 to 55 (M = 24.99, SD = 6.663). Gender was
coded using the proportion of male participants in the sample, ranging from 0 to 1 (M = 0.5,
SD = 0.242). For student samples, we coded academic discipline of the sample when this
information was reported (i.e., economics: k = 102, psychology: k = 353, other disciplines: k
= 608, non-student samples: k = 307).
For methodological considerations, we coded the experimental setting in which the
study was conducted. The studies were mostly conducted in laboratory settings (not at a field
site, k = 2,061), and only a minority were online studies (e.g., MTurk, k = 104) or in other
settings (e.g., class, lab in the field, k = 162). We coded for trial of cooperation, with the
majority of cooperation rates reported across all trials (k = 2,280) and only a few extracted
from the first trial (k = 60). We further categorized the studies based on their publication
status, primarily comprising published studies (k = 2,185) and a smaller number of
unpublished documents (k = 155). Choice type was coded to capture the decision scale
afforded by the game structure. The studies involve participants making either continuous
decisions (k = 1,233), and dichotomous choices (i.e., cooperate or defect, k = 1,107). We
further coded the year when the data was collected, which ranged from 1958 to 2017,
including nearly 6 decades of empirical evidence (M = 2002, SD = 14.078).
We conducted additional analyses to test the hypotheses on a subset of studies where participants interacted
with real partners and without any experimenter pre-programmed partner strategy. Results largely replicated
those from the main model (i.e., Model 1a, see SI for more information).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 30
Descriptive Statistics and Inter-Rater Reliability of Continuous Variables
Variable k M SD Mdn Range Missing α a
K index (conflict of interest) 2055 0.44 0.172 0.42 0–1 285 0.91
Group size 2334 4.35 9.510 3 2–324 6 0.97
Age (Mean) 581 24.99 6.667 22.11 18–54 1759 1
Gender (Male %) 1293 0.50 0.242 0.5 0–1 1047 0.92
Year of data collection 2298 2002.25 14.082 2007 1958–2017 42 0.98
Proportion of cooperation
0.95
Mean of contributions
0.97
Standard deviation of contributions
0.94
Note. k = Number of cooperation rates, Missing = Missing cases, α = Krippendorff’s α,
inter-rater agreement was assessed in aggregate level regardless of dilemma types, outcome
variable coded for dichotomous-choice games, outcome variables coded for continuous-
choice games.
Descriptive Statistics and Inter-Rater Reliability of Categorical Variables
Variable Values Levels k Missing α AR(%)
Structural variables
Communication
No 0 2096
Yes 1 208 1
Mixed 2 35
Communication type
No 2 2096 0.68 96.6
Uni-directional 0 50
Bi-directional 1 157
Mixed 3 36
Incentives
Game incentive Hypothetical 0 177
Incentivized 1 1911 246
Mixed 2 6
Game incentive type:
Ⅰ. lottery vs. non-lottery Hypothetical 2 177 0.77 92.1
Lottery 0 219
Non-lottery 1 1687
Mixed 3 11
Ⅱ. non-monetary vs. Hypothetical 2 177 246
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 31
monetary Non-monetary 0 116
Monetary 1 1792
Mixed 3 9
Show up fee No 0 231
Compensated 1 1170 925 0.73 84.9
Mixed 2 14
Matching design Stranger 0 886
Partner 1 1418 3 0.81 90.2
Mixed 2 33
Sanction
No 0 2013
Yes 1 287
0 / /
Mixed 2 40
Sequentiality
Sequential 0 144
Simultaneous 1 2140 0 0.66 93.6
Mixed 2 56
Symmetry Asymmetric 0 147
Symmetric 1 2145 11 0.59 94.6
Mixed 2 37
Sample variables
Academic Discipline Economics 0 102
Psychology 1 353
970 0.7 79.1
Other 2 608
Non-student 3 307
Control variables
Choice type
Dichotomous 0 1107
0 / /
Continuous 1 1233
Deception
No 0 1753
Yes 1 551 12 0.74 89.1
Mixed 2 24
Experimental setting Lab 0 2061
Online 1 104 13 0.75 93.5
Other 2 162
Trial of cooperation All 0 2280
0 0.69 94.9
First 1 60
Publication status No 0 155
0 0.66 98.5
Yes 1 2185
Note. k = Number of cooperation rates, Missing = Missing cases, α = Krippendorff’s α, AR =
Agreement rate, Sanction and choice type were not included in the first round of coding
performed in the cooperation databank, resulting in a lack of information of inter-rater
agreement for these variables.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 32
Analytic Strategy
Following our pre-registration plan, we used a three-level mixed-effects meta-
regression to test hypotheses about how different structural variables are associated with the
cooperation estimates (i.e., logit-transformed cooperation rates). We selected a mixed-effects
model because it takes both fixed effects and random effects into consideration. Predictor
variables are included as fixed effects to the model to account for the between-study
heterogeneity (Raudenbush, 2009). The inclusion of random effects allows for inferences to
be made about the entire population of studies, and so beyond the studies included in the
meta-analysis (Hedges & Vevea, 1998). Importantly, 26% of the studies included in the meta-
analysis contributed more than one cooperation rate (i.e., 399 of 1527 studies) . To address
possible dependencies among these cooperation estimates, we conducted a three-level meta-
analysis with unique cooperation estimates nested within studies. Three sources of variance
were therefore modelled following this approach: (1) Level 1: sampling error, (2) Level 2:
variance between cooperation estimates, and (3) Level 3: variance between studies (Cheung,
2014; Van den Noortgate et al., 2013).
We tested our pre-registered hypotheses in meta-regression models with structural
variables, sample variables, and control variables included as predictors of the cooperation
estimates. We fitted the meta-regression model to our data using restricted maximum
likelihood estimation (REML), which corrects for negative bias in variance components and
overfitting (Raudenbush, 2009). Heterogeneity across cooperation estimates were assessed by
2 2
Cochran’s Q and I statistics. We applied a pseudo-R statistic to estimate the predictive
During the study annotation process, a two-fold data wrangling approach was applied to code studies that
have manipulated one or more structural/sample variables of interest in the present study (e.g., sanctions, group
size, gender). First, if cooperation rates for each level of the structural/sample variable can be obtained from the
original study, we coded cooperation rates for each level. Second, if cooperation rates at each level of the
structural/sample variable were unavailable, we used the overall cooperation rates of the study and labelled that
structural/sample variable as mixed design (for categorical variables, e.g., sanctions), or as the median of the
multiple values (for continuous variables, e.g., group size). This approach could have resulted in dependence
among those cooperation rates extracted from the same study.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 33
power of a model and the extent of heterogeneity in the cooperation estimates that was
explained by adding a specific predictor variable (López-López et al., 2014). Model
comparisons were conducted via likelihood ratio tests. Analyses were conducted in R (R Core
Team, 2020) using the rma.mv function of the metafor package (Viechtbauer, 2010).
We applied multiple imputation for dealing with missing data in predictor variables
using the mice package (m = 20; Van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011). Specifically,
imputations were generated according to the default methods in mice, which are predictive
mean matching (pmm) for continuous variables (e.g., group size) and polytomous logistic
regressions (polyreg) for categorical variables higher than 2 levels (e.g., communication). To
address the multilevel structure of the data, we included the cluster variable (i.e., study ID) as
a predictor for other variables during imputation. For the functions that do not support
multiple imputation (i.e., tests for multicollinearity, MetaForest analysis ), we applied single
imputation with the missForest package, which performs nonparametric missing values
imputation using random forest (Stekhoven & Bühlmann, 2012).
The risk of bias was assessed in two ways. First, the publication status of studies was
included as one of the control variables in the meta-regression model predicting cooperation
estimates. Second, funnel plots were applied to examine whether studies with smaller sample
sizes systematically generated larger cooperation estimates than larger studies (Macaskill et
al., 2001). Funnel plot asymmetry was further evaluated through a modified Egger’s
regression test (Egger et al., 1997). Specifically, we conducted a three-level meta-regression
of cooperation estimate on sample size (weighted by the inverse of the variance of the
cooperation estimate). This modified approach allows us to (1) detect selective reporting in
Following our pre-registration, we applied MetaForest as an exploratory approach to identify variables that
are associated with cooperation estimates. This technique uses a machine learning algorithm “random forests” to
assess the importance of several variables in meta-analysis, and can be applied to small sample meta-analyses
with relative large number of predictor variables (Van Lissa, 2020). Variable importance metrics reflected that
year of data collection, conflict of interest (K index), mean age, group size, communication and sanction were
the most important variables that contribute to the predictive power of the final MetaForest model (R = .120,
oob
R = .169, see SI for more information).
cv
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 34
the presence of dependent effect sizes (Rodgers & Pustejovsky, 2021), and (2) improve
accuracy in detecting publication bias when using logit transformations of the proportion as
outcome measure (Macaskill et al., 2001).
Results
Overall Mean Cooperation Rates and Heterogeneity
The overall cooperation rate observed across all the studies is 0.486 (95% CI= [0.477,
0.494], 95% PI = [0.190, 0.792]), suggesting that people contributed, on average, about half
of their endowment to the public good, or that about half of the sample made a fully
between the cooperation estimates (Q(2339) = 76025.25, p < .001). To determine whether the
within-study variance (level 2) and between-study variance (level 3) in cooperation is
statistically significant, we conducted two separate one-sided log-likelihood-ratio tests,
comparing the model freely estimating variance at the level 2 and level 3 to models
constraining either within-study variance or between-study variance (i.e., manually fixing
either variance component to zero). Results of these analyses identified significant variability
among cooperation estimates within studies (χ (1) = 7836.63, p < .001) and between studies
We further examined the amount of variance in the cooperation estimates that
occurred for each of three levels (i.e., between studies, within studies, and sampling error).
The I statistic indicated 46% of variance in cooperation estimates could be due to between-
study heterogeneity, while 51% of the variance in estimates of cooperation were due to
Therefore, meta-regression can be performed to examine which variables explain the
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 35
heterogeneity among cooperation estimates within and between studies. Besides, we
examined the possibility of publication bias using the funnel plot and modified Egger’s
regression method (see SI for more information about publication bias test), and found little
publication bias in our sample.
Note. Cooperation rates were plotted as independent observations. Number of cooperation
rates (k) are provided in parentheses.
Evaluating the Sources of Heterogeneity in Cooperation Estimates
Model df AIC BIC II LRT p
Three-level model 3 5276.33 5293.60 –2635.16
Within-studies variance constrained 2 13110.96 13122.47 –6553.48 7836.63 < .001
Between-studies variance constrained 2 5646.71 5658.22 –2821.35 372.38 < .001
Note. The statistical significance of the variance components is assessed by constraining the
component to zero, and then examining the statistical significance of a log-likelihood (II)
ratio test (LRT) comparing the constrained model to the unconstrained three-level model.
Hunter and Schmidt (1990) proposed that the influence of potential moderators should be examined if less
than 75% of the variance is due to sampling error.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 36
Meta-Regression Predicting Variance in Cooperation Estimates
Inter-Correlations between Predictor Variables. We first examined the zero-order
S1), with a few exceptions which were to be expected based on the coding scheme.
Specifically, the highest correlations between predictor variables were found among the
communication related variables (e.g., between communication and communication type) and
among the game payment related variables (e.g., payment and payment type) (r = .55~.86).
Therefore, when we test hypotheses about how communication and game payment relate to
cooperation, we included these highly correlated variables in separate models. Results from
the generalized variance inflation factors (GVIF, Fox & Monette, 1992) indicated that there is
little multi-collinearity among the predictors in the meta-regression models (see SI for more
information).
Meta-Regression Models. We utilized a multiple meta-regression model to test
several hypotheses about how specific variables would explain variance in the cooperation
estimates. This approach controls for potential confounds, while examining the relation
between a single specific variable (e.g., group size) and the cooperation estimates. The main
effects of structural variables and three interaction terms (i.e., game payment × matching
design, sanction × matching design, and communication × K index) were also included in the
models. We also entered several additional variables to each model as controls, including
sample variables (i.e., age, gender, academic discipline), paper meta-data (i.e., publication
status, year of data collection) and additional information about the study methods (i.e.,
online study vs. lab experiment, cooperation rates from all trials vs. the first trial, and
dichotomous vs. continuous choice).
We first report results from a main model (i.e., Model 1a) that tested most of the pre-
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 37
significant portion of variance in cooperation (R = .13, Q(2301) = 63361.1, p < .001).
Regarding the structural influences on cooperation, as expected, we found a positive
association between the K index and cooperation estimates (b = 0.887, p < .001, H1) . That
is, studies involving a stronger conflict of interests were related to lower cooperation. We
found higher cooperation estimates in studies that allowed communication, compared to
studies that restricted communication opportunities (b = 0.866, p < .001, H4a). We also found
higher cooperation estimates when sanctions were implemented within studies, compared to
studies without sanctions (b = 0.310, p < .001, H7a).
Contrary to predictions, group size was not associated with cooperation (p = .164, H2).
Similarly, we found that sequential decisions (p = .366, H3), symmetric game structures (p
= .522, H6), and partner matching (p =.074, H8) were not associated with cooperation
estimates across studies. Moreover, we found that cooperation estimates did not vary across
studies according to whether payment was used in the study. Specifically, compensation for
participation (p = .712, H5a) and payment for the participants’ game performance (p = .149,
H5b) were unrelated with cooperation estimates. We explored whether the use of deception
within studies was associated with cooperation and found higher cooperation within studies
that used deception, compared to studies without deception (b = 0.135, p = .002).
We further tested three two-way interactions between structural features predicting
cooperation estimates. In line with our hypotheses, there existed a significant interaction
between the presence of sanctions and partner matching (b = 0.208, p = .026, H7b),
suggesting that sanctions were more effective in promoting cooperation in studies that
We additionally tested Hypothesis 1 that conflicting interests would reduce cooperation by using another
operationalization of the degree of conflicting interests (i.e., step-level PGD versus continuous PGD).
Specifically, we conducted a similar multiple meta-regression model on the dataset that combined step-level
PGDs (k = 267) and continuous PGDs (k = 1,219). Consistent with Hypothesis 1, dilemmas characterized by
lower level of conflict (i.e., step-level PGDs) were associated with higher cooperation estimates compared to
studies that involved a higher level of conflict (i.e., continuous PGD; b = 0.285, p < .001, see SI for more
information).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 38
slope analysis). Moreover, communication interacted with the K index to predict cooperation
in the expected direction (b = –0.697, p = .021, H4c). The presence of communication had an
even stronger impact on promoting cooperation within studies that involved a larger conflict
payment and matching design did not predict cooperation (p = .066, H5c).
Regarding the sample characteristics, cooperation estimates were neither predicted by
mean age of the sample (p = .222) nor proportion of male of the sample (p = .223). Among
student samples, identifying the students as either studying psychology or economics was not
associated with variance in cooperation across studies (p = .258) . Similarly, three of the
control variables, including the experimental setting (p = .095), trial of cooperation (p = .624)
and publication status (p = .501), were not associated with cooperation estimates. Yet, we
found significantly higher cooperation estimates within continuous-choice games relative to
games that only allowed for binary decisions to cooperate-or-defect (b = 0.118, p = .007), and
within games conducted in more recent years (b = 0.005, p = .002).
To explore whether cooperation differs between student and non-student samples, we recoded academic
discipline into whether the study involved a student sample or not. We replaced academic discipline in the main
model (i.e., Model 1a) with (non-)student sample and re-ran the meta-regression model. Results showed that the
level of cooperation did not differ between student and non-student samples (b = 0.044, p = .431, see SI for
more information).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 39
Meta-Regression Results (Model 1a)
Model 1a
Variables
b SE 95% CI
Control variables
Experimental setting-online 0.140 0.081 [–0.020, 0.299]
Trial of cooperation-first 0.054 0.110 [–0.161, 0.270]
Publication status-yes –0.047 0.069 [–0.182, 0.088]
Choice type-continuous 0.118* 0.043 [0.034, 0.201]
Year of data collection 0.005* 0.002 [0.002, 0.008]
Sample variables
Age (Mean) –0.005 0.003 [–0.011, 0.002]
Gender (Male %) –0.094 0.065 [–0.222, 0.033]
Discipline-psychology 0.089 0.069 [–0.046, 0.224]
Structural variables
Conflict of interests (K index) 0.887* 0.091 [0.708, 1.065]
Group size –0.045 0.032 [–0.107, 0.017]
Sequentiality-simultaneous 0.059 0.065 [–0.068, 0.187]
Communication-yes 0.866* 0.143 [0.585, 1.147]
Show up fee-yes 0.011 0.043 [–0.073, 0.094]
Game payment-yes –0.135 0.087 [–0.305, 0.036]
Symmetry-symmetric 0.047 0.073 [–0.096, 0.190]
Sanction-yes 0.310* 0.078 [0.156, 0.463]
Matching design-partner –0.223 0.116 [–0.451, 0.004]
Deception-yes 0.135* 0.042 [0.053, 0.217]
Interactions
Communication-yes*K index –0.697* 0.277 [–1.241, –0.153]
Game payment-yes*Matching design-partner 0.237 0.119 [0.004, 0.470]
Sanction-yes*Matching design-partner 0.208* 0.093 [0.026, 0.390]
Model statistics
Q (df) 63361.1 (2301)*
residual
F (df1, df2) 10.24 (38, 2301)*
moderators
0.44
I : between-study level (%) 53.62
I : within-study level (%) 43.61
R .1252
continuous variables, all others are dummy variables. The comparison group for publication
status, sanction, communication, show up fee, game payment, and deception was “No”, for
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 40
choice type was “dichotomous”, for experimental setting was “lab”, for trial of cooperation
was “all”, for discipline was “economics”, for matching design was “stranger matching”, for
symmetry was “asymmetric”, for sequentiality was “sequential”.
* p < .05
Note. (a) We split the data into four subgroups and plot the meta-analytic estimates of
cooperation rates in each subgroup. Matching = Matching design. (b) We split the data into
two subgroups (i.e., with or without communicaion), meta-regressed cooperation estimates on
K index, and computed the predicted cooperation rates when the value of K index equals to 1
SD above and below the mean. SD = Standard deviation.
Models to Test Additional Hypotheses. We evaluated three additional models
(Model 1b~1d) to test some specific hypotheses about the structural influences on
cooperation (i.e., communication type, non-monetary vs. monetary payment, non-lottery vs.
model the main effects of each variable and the predicted interactions. In Model 1b, we
distinguished between two kinds of communication: (1) bi-directional communication in
which both people can communicate and (2) uni-directional communication in which the
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 41
participant is only able to communicate to their partner (but not vice-versa). We found
support for the hypothesis that bi-directional communication promotes greater cooperation
than uni-directional communication (b = 1.165, p = .001, H4b). Lastly, in Model 1c and 1d
we explored whether different types of participant payment within the game affected
cooperation. Specifically, game payment was re-coded to allow for the comparison between
lottery and non-lottery participant payment (Model 1c). In a separate model, this same
variable was re-coded to examine the effect of non-monetary versus monetary participant
payment on cooperation (Model 1d). Evidence from both models investigating payment
revealed no association between the kind of participant payment within the game and
cooperation (p = .737 and p = .751 respectively).
Predictive Power of Variables. In meta-regression, the pseudo R statistic is
computed to assess predictive power of the model, by re-estimating the amount of
heterogeneity after adding predictor(s) to the model (López-López et al., 2014). To determine
the relative importance of each structural variables in predicting cooperation, we first
included control and sample variables to the meta-regression model. Next, we only selected
structural variables that were found to significantly associate with cooperation in Model
1a~1e, entered each of them into the model in a stepwise manner, and computed the changed
pseudo R due to adding a specific structural variable. That is, we estimated the predictive
power of each structural variable that can significantly predict cooperation by assessing the
amount of heterogeneity it can explain in models, when controlling for variables such as
paper meta-data, methodological variables, and sample variables (Model 2a~2f). We found
that the K index explained 1.8% of the variability among cooperation estimates across studies
accounted for 3.4% and 3.6% of the heterogeneity among the cooperation estimates,
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 42
These results imply that communication, sanction and the degree of conflicting interest (i.e.,
K index) are among the most important structural features that predict cooperation in social
dilemmas.
Study 2: How Do Structural Features Covary with Cooperation Within Studies?
We used an alternative meta-analytic approach to test our hypotheses, specifically
examining within-study effect sizes that estimate how a measured or manipulated variable
relates to cooperation (i.e., correlation coefficient and standardized mean difference). This
approach allow us to observe the effect of each structural feature on cooperation from studies
that most likely kept other aspects of the game structure constant and thus provides a
robustness test to the hypotheses. In Study 1, several structural features that were predicted to
affect cooperation did not have a statistically significant relation with cooperation. It is
possible that the heterogeneity between studies could mask any small effect size of a specific
structural feature. However, when structural features are manipulated or measured within
studies, this method reduces error variance and provides a more optimal setting to detect
small effect sizes. Thus, this additional approach can strengthen our conclusions about the
possible institutional solutions that (do not) promote cooperation.
Methods
In the Cooperation Databank, researchers have annotated all the included studies
using social dilemmas (1958–2017) for the variables that have been manipulated or measured
to predict cooperation (Spadaro, Tiddi, et al., 2022). The CoDa research application and
annotated by these researchers and enabled performing on-demand meta-analyses for most
variables we tested in the models in Study 1. Therefore, we used the CoDa research platform
to select studies that have used one of the three prototypical social dilemmas to measure
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 43
cooperation (i.e., prisoner’s dilemma, public goods dilemma, resource dilemma ), and that
have measured or manipulated one of the structural variables. When several effect sizes were
available after selection (k ≥ 10), we conduct a meta-analysis estimating the average effect
size representing how a specific structural feature (e.g., punishment, communication, group
performance of these meta-analyses). Overall, we conducted 10 meta-analyses to estimate the
population level effect size, using restricted maximum-likelihood estimator (k = 909). As
some studies reported multiple effect sizes, these models all used a three-level structure to
cluster the effect sizes within their study. We additionally ran four moderator analyses to test
the hypothesized interactions between specific structural variables. Publication bias was
assessed using the rank correlation test and Egger's regression test for funnel plot asymmetry.
Results
The results of these meta-analyses mainly replicated our findings from the meta-
found that people tend to display less cooperation in experimental treatments involving
stronger conflict of interests than in experimental treatments characterized by a weaker
degree of conflicting interests (d = –0.489, 95% CI = [–0.626, –0.352], 95% PI = [–1.371,
0.393], H1). Sanctions can be operationalized as either punishment or reward. Meta-analytic
results revealed that people engaged in more cooperation in treatments that included
punishment (d = 0.602, 95% CI = [0.491, 0.714], 95% PI = [–0.637, 1.841], H7a) and reward
A resource dilemma (RD) refers to a situation in which group members decide how much to withdraw from a
common resource pool (Komorita & Parks, 1995; Ostrom et al., 1994). The resources each member takes from
the common pool is no longer available to other group members. If all group members take as much of the
resource as possible, the common pool will be quickly depleted over time. However, if each member constrains
their self-interest to consume as much as possible and instead make socially optimal harvests, the resource will
be replenished and maintained over time. Besides PDs and PGDs, studies that have used RDs to measure
cooperation were included in the meta-analyses in Study 2, because RDs also model social situations where
people face conflicting interests between themselves and others. However, studies used RDs were not included
in the meta-regression in Study 1 due to methodological considerations, i.e., indices that operationalize the
degree of conflicting interest such as K index cannot be computed and included in the meta-regression model as
a predictor variable among RDs.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 44
(d = 0.459, 95% CI = [0.186, 0.732], 95% PI = [–0.876, 1.794], H7a), compared to a baseline
treatment . Similarly, we found more cooperation when communication was allowed
between participants in the game, compared to when there were no opportunities for
communication (d = 0.464, 95% CI = [0.340, 0.587], 95% PI = [–0.692, 1.620], H4a).
We further tested the potential moderators (i.e., matching design, conflict of interests,
relation between punishment and cooperation was stronger in partner matching, compared to
one-shot interactions (b = 0.276, p = .029, H7b), though the effect of reward on cooperation
did not differ between stranger and partner matching (b = 0.360, p = .227, H7b). The relation
between communication and cooperation became stronger in dilemmas with lower K index
(i.e., higher conflict of interests, b = –1.016, p = .002, H4c). In three instances, we also
replicated the failure to support several hypotheses. For example, we did not find support for
the hypothesized effect of sequentiality (d = –0.107, 95% CI = [–0.314, 0.101], 95% PI = [–
1.299, 1.086], H3), and symmetry (d = 0.012, 95% CI = [–0.063, 0.086], 95% PI = [–0.483,
0.506], H6) on cooperation. Also, the association between game payment and cooperation
was not moderated by whether the study used a partner- or stranger-matching design (b =
0.115, p = .618, H5c).
Overall, conducting several meta-analyses of within-study effect sizes, we replicated 8
of 12 conclusions from the meta-regression approach in Study 1. However, in four cases we
observed different results using the within-study meta-analysis approach compared to the
meta-regression approach. We found support for the hypothesis that people cooperate less in
larger, compared to smaller, groups (d = –0.350, 95% CI = [–0.489, –0.212], 95% PI = [–
1.361, 0.660], H2), and that participants cooperated more when playing with the same
partners repeatedly, compared to one-shot interaction with strangers (d = 0.459, 95% CI =
The baseline treatment is defined as a treatment compared against any treatment coded as punishment
treatment in CoDa. This means that the baseline treatment is equal to the punishment treatment, except for the
availability of punishment.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 45
[0.112, 0.806], 95% PI = [–0.623, 1.541], H8). In contrary to the predictions, we found
higher level of cooperation when participants received show-up fee compared to no
compensation for participation (d = 0.197, 95% CI = [0.048, 0.346], 95% PI = [–0.099,
0.492], H5a), and when participants received monetary or non-monetary game payment
compared to hypothetical payment (d = 0.152, 95% CI = [0.002, 0.301], 95% PI = [–0.270,
0.573], H5b). Besides, we examined specific sample characteristics and found that age (r =
0.074, 95% CI = [0.025, 0.123], 95% PI = [–0.084, 0.232]) was positively associated with
cooperation while gender (d = 0.009, 95% CI = [–0.044, 0.063], 95% PI = [–0.427, 0.445])
cooperation.
Note. Matching protocol = Matching design, k = number of effect sizes, n = number of
studies, d value = Treatment 1 – Treatment 2, Incentivized includes monetary and non-
monetary game payment. We meta-analyzed the effect of structural variables on cooperation
in CoDa, except for variables that (1) were not represented in the within-study CoDa
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 46
annotation (i.e., deception), and that (2) did not have enough effect sizes to perform meta-
analysis (i.e., continuous PGD vs. step-level PGD).
General Discussion
A unique feature of human cooperation is the extent to which it occurs among non-
genetically related individuals, who have no history of interaction or knowledge of each
other’s reputation – that is, impersonal cooperation. Institutions are one feature of society that
enable humans to achieve this kind of cooperation in large scale societies (Henrich et al.,
2010; Powers et al., 2021). Institutions involve setting the rules of the game, which can
fundamentally change the structure of the game, reduce the conflict of interests people
experience, and promote cooperation. Institutions can target different aspects that compose a
social dilemma, including the set of participants (e.g., group size), their positions (e.g.,
sequential decision making), the possible actions (e.g., communication), the potential
outcomes (e.g., payment), the level of control (e.g., asymmetry of dependence), the costs and
benefits imposed to different actions (e.g., sanctions), and whether interactions are repeated
for the same set of participants (or not) (e.g., matching design) (Ostrom et al., 1994). In the
present meta-analyses, we examined impersonal cooperation using social dilemma paradigms,
and analyzed how variation in the rules applied by the researchers to construct social
dilemmas were associated with variation in cooperation across treatments and studies.
Specifically, we conducted a meta-regression of nine structural features of social
dilemmas predicting 2,340 mean rates of cooperation obtained from 1,527 independent
studies (1958–2017) in Study 1. We also compared the conclusions of this approach with the
results from over 10 independent meta-analyses of studies that measured or manipulated each
of the structural variables within a study, involving a total of 909 effect sizes (Study 2).
Overall, we observed a medium amount of cooperation across prisoner’s dilemmas and
public goods dilemmas (i.e., 48.6%). A previous meta-analysis of social dilemmas found a
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 47
similar average rate of cooperation (i.e., 47%, Sally, 1995). These findings indeed confirm
that these situations are dilemmas, and clearly there is no skew in behavior towards either
complete cooperation or defection. In fact, there is a great amount of variation in cooperation
across the social dilemmas, which can be partly explained by the differences between studies
and between treatments within studies. Despite the temptation to defect in social dilemmas,
we found that several rules used to define structural features of the social dilemmas could
appeal to self-interest, mitigate the conflict of interests, and promote cooperation. We also
discovered that several structural features that were proposed to affect cooperation, in fact,
had no influence on cooperation.
We rely on results from both meta-regression and independent meta-analysis
approaches to test the effect of structural features on cooperation. The meta-regression
examines the variance in cooperation that one structural feature could explain while
concurrently accounting for other relevant structural features and control variables. This
approach may yield a more conservative analysis, yet it allows us to identify the most
influential structural features in affecting cooperation. The independent meta-analyses
aggregates studies that manipulated a specific structural feature and examined its effect on
cooperation. This approach is more able to detect smaller effect sizes that could have been
masked by heterogeneity across studies included in the meta-regression analysis. To interpret
the findings, structural features that demonstrate significant effects in both analytical
approaches are considered as the most effective structural solutions to promote cooperation;
structural features that are supported only within an independent meta-analysis (i.e., small to
medium effect sizes), but not in the meta-regression, are considered less effective structural
solutions; and structural features that do not exhibit a significant influence on cooperation in
each hypothesis found support from our two meta-analytic approaches.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 48
Support for Hypothesis Using Meta-Regression and Meta-Analysis Approaches
Meta-regression Meta-analysis
Variable H# Pred. of cooperation of effect sizes obtained
estimates within studies
Structural features
Conflict of interests 1
+ Y Y
Group size 2
– N Y
Sequentiality 3
+ N N
Communication 4a
+ Y Y
Communication type 4b
+ Y N/A
Show up fee 5a
– N C
Game payment 5b
– N C
Symmetry 6
– N N
Sanctions 7a
+ Y Y
Matching design 8
+ N Y
Interactions
4c
Communication × Conflict – Y Y
Game payment × Matching
5c
+ N N
7b
Sanction × Matching + Y Y
Note. Pred. = Prediction, Communication type (Uni-directional versus Bi-directional),
Conflict = Conflict of interests, Matching = Matching design, H# = number of hypothesis,－/
＋ = expected direction of the prediction, Y = supported, N = not supported (non-significant
results), C = not supported (contrary to the prediction), N/A = analysis not available;
interaction between reward and matching design was not supported.
Reducing Conflict of Interests in Social Dilemmas
Although each social dilemma contains a conflict of interest between the individual
and the collective, social dilemmas can vary in the degree of conflicting interests. In some
situations, there is a stronger temptation to defect and free-ride on other’s cooperation, but in
others self-interest is nearly aligned with the collective interest. Since the beginning of
research on social dilemmas, researchers found that reducing the degree of conflicting
interests can increase cooperation (Deutsch, 1949; Rapoport, 1967). This subsequently led to
attempts to identify solutions to resolving the free-rider problems by using rules to modify
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 49
social dilemmas in a way that reduces the conflict of interests and make cooperation more
aligned with self-interest (Kollock, 1998; Powers & Lehmann, 2013).
In the present studies, we operationalized the degree of conflicting interests between
studies with the K index (i.e., higher K index indicates less conflict of interest, Rapoport,
1967) and additionally by comparing step-level PGDs and continuous PGDs (Abele et al.,
2010). As predicted, there was less cooperation in social dilemmas characterized by stronger
conflicting interests (i.e., in studies with lower K index and within continuous versus step-
level PGDs, H1). We further analyzed studies that manipulated the degree of conflicting
interests within the study, and found that cooperation was higher in experimental conditions
with less, compared to higher, conflict of interests.
These findings provide support for the role of self-interest in predicting whether
people cooperate or defect in social dilemmas (Kelley & Thibaut, 1978), and suggest that a
fundamental route through which to increase cooperation is by reducing the conflict of
interests in a situation and making cooperation appeal to the self-interest of individuals.
While this can be easy to achieve in artificial laboratory studies, this is a formidable task to
groups, leaders, and policy makers, and decades of research has been conducted to
understand the institutions that can be created to shift the incentive structures and behaviors
of individuals facing social dilemmas. The present meta-analysis identifies which
institutional rules are more or less effective in promoting cooperation.
Effective Structural Solutions to Social Dilemmas: Communication and Sanctions
We found that the most effective structural solutions involved making certain
behaviors possible within the dilemma (i.e., allowing for communication) and assigning costs
and benefits to specific behaviors (i.e., rewards for cooperation and punishment for non-
cooperation). These conclusions were supported by findings from both Study 1 and 2.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 50
Communication
We found that the presence of communication was positively associated with
cooperation and explained 4% of the variance in cooperation among PDs and PGDs (H4a).
This result was replicated in our meta-analysis using within-study effect sizes, which again
found a positive effect of the presence versus absence of communication (d = 0.46).
Communication was one of the earliest studied solutions to social dilemmas (Deutsch, 1958),
and has been replicated in experiments where communication among participants was
allowed before or during the social dilemma (e.g., Balliet, 2010; Bicchieri & Lev-on, 2007;
Ledyard, 1995; Sally, 1995; Shank et al., 2019). Communication allows people to make (non-
binding) commitments that they will cooperate (Kerr et al., 1997), which can promote trust
and allow for coordination. Bicchieri (2002) suggested that communication about the social
dilemma can focus individuals on prosocial norms (e.g., norm of promise keeping), which are
conducive to cooperation. Interestingly, communication about norms can help sustain
cooperation through not only the verification of prosocial norms, but also reminding
individuals of the potential reputational damage of non-cooperative behavior (Shank et al.,
2019).
Furthermore, we found that bi-directional communication is associated with higher
level of cooperation compared to uni-directional communication (H4b). In fact, merely
discussing a prosocial norm might not be enough to foster cooperation within a group, it is
also crucial that people form expectations about other’s cooperation (Bicchieri & Lev-on,
2007). Importantly, previous research found that perceived consensus can strengthen the
effect of a norm on behavioral intentions (Kusumi et al., 2017). Compared to uni-directional
communication, bi-directional communication allows people to both receive information and
respond to others. This can generate mutual expectations of cooperation and perceived
consensus of prosocial norms among individuals and therefore result in more cooperation.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 51
We found that communication was more effective in promoting cooperation in
situations involving relatively stronger conflicting interests. Within social dilemmas that
contain more conflict of interests, people are less likely to cooperate and expect less
cooperation from others (Balliet & Van Lange, 2013), which may reflect a higher need for
mutual trust and coordination to address the free-rider problem. Previous research has found
that communication gives people the chance to make commitments and promises (Bicchieri
& Lev-on, 2007), and increases group members’ experience of common fate (Bouas &
Komorita, 1996), consensus favoring cooperation (Dawes et al., 1977), and trusting and
trustworthiness (Ben-Ner & Putterman, 2009). Thus, the communication effect can become
stronger when people face higher degrees of conflict in social dilemmas.
Sanctions
Both game theory and interdependence theory suggest that sanctions (i.e., reward,
punishment) could be an effective promoter of cooperation in social dilemmas, because it
provides incentives for individuals to engage in cooperative behaviors in their pursuit of self-
interest. Indeed, we found that the presence of sanctions is associated with a higher level of
cooperation in social dilemmas, explaining approximately 2%~3% of the variance in
cooperation (H7a). Moreover, meta-analytic results analyzing studies that manipulated the
presence of sanctions within studies revealed that both punishment (d = 0.60) and reward (d =
0.46) are effective in enhancing cooperation.
Analyzing the effect of specific implementations of sanctions (e.g., sanctioning agent,
sanctioning effectiveness) goes beyond the scope of the current meta-analyses. However, we
additionally tested whether the mere presence of sanctions interacted with other rules to
promote cooperation. Specifically, we found that sanctions more strongly increase
cooperation when participants repeatedly interacted with the same partners, compared to one-
shot interactions with strangers (H7b). This result replicated the findings from a previous
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 52
meta-analysis, which found that both reward and punishment are more effective when these
sanctions are present over time during repeated interactions with the same group members
(Balliet et al., 2011). This finding may be explained by participants becoming more
cooperative by either directly experiencing punishment or reward (Skinner, 1953) and/or
observing others receiving rewards and punishments (Bandura, 1977). Partner matching may
also allow groups to use sanctions to develop trust that others will cooperate, as well as
expectations about group behavior and social norms (Balliet et al., 2011). Indeed, sanctions
have been found to be more effective during repeated interactions with the same partner (or
group), compared to repeated interactions with a different partner (or group), which suggests
that developing trust and norms within a stable group may play an important role in
determining the effectiveness of sanctioning institutions.
Communication versus Sanctions
The present study offers a unique opportunity to compare the magnitude of the effect
of communication and sanctions on cooperation. Importantly, we found that communication
and sanctions have approximately equivalent main effects on cooperation, either by
comparing the explained variance by each of these variables (4% vs. 2%~3%, respectively)
or by examining the magnitude of the effect of communication (d = 0.46), punishment (d =
0.60), and reward (d = 0.46). Though there are slight differences between the effect sizes, we
can conclude that communication and sanctions are both key institutional solutions and are
observed to have similar effectiveness in increasing cooperation in social dilemmas. Indeed,
previous research has identified these as some of the most promising solutions to deal with
social dilemmas experienced by organizations and communities. For example, Ostrom and
colleagues (1994) have provided both experimental findings and evidence from field studies
in different contexts and communities, which all converge to a single conclusion: a richer set
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 53
of institutional solutions that enable communication and/or allow for the sanctioning of non-
cooperation can generate better collective outcomes.
Though the present meta-analysis allows us to compare the effect of communication
and sanctions on cooperation, it remains unclear which solution is more efficient in promoting
cooperation. Prior research found that compared to communication, punishment did increase
contributions but had little net effect on efficiency because of its cost (Bochet et al., 2006).
However, both communication and sanctions can be costly to group members and therefore
poses a second-order social dilemma (Ostrom et al., 1994; Yamagishi, 1988a). Research has
also found that in the presence of communication, adding a (costly) punishment option did
not additionally increase cooperation that much (Bochet et al., 2006), and did not lead to as
long-lasting cooperation as communication without punishment (Janssen et al., 2010). Future
research could compare whether communication and sanctions are equally efficient
institutions at enhancing cooperation when people must pay an equivalent cost to either
communicate with group members or sanction group members. Besides, future field research
can measure the cost and efficiency of the implementation of various policies relating to
communication and sanctions to affect cooperation in social dilemmas in the field.
Less Effective Structural Solutions: Smaller Group Size and Partner Matching
We found less consistent support for other rules used to construct social dilemmas,
such as adjusting group size, and allowing for repeated interactions with the same partner. In
Study 1, we found that variation in these features of social dilemmas were unrelated with
variation between estimates of cooperation. However, in Study 2, the meta-analyses that
analyzed the within-study manipulations of these features of situations found that both
displayed the predicted influence on cooperation.
This discrepancy in the results could have occurred because these features of social
dilemmas have a weaker influence on cooperation than communication and sanctions. In the
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 54
meta-regression predicting the cooperation estimates, there are many differences between the
studies (and their treatments) which could affect cooperation, and it could be that this
variation in cooperation produces error that masks the small effects of these features of the
social dilemmas. However, when studies are designed to specifically test how a feature of the
situation relates to cooperation, then only one feature of the social dilemma differs between
experimental treatments (e.g., group size), and this method is ideal for testing small effect
sizes. Indeed, when considering the results of the meta-analyses, each of these effect sizes
were smaller than those observed for either communication or sanctions.
Group Size
Group size was predicted to have a negative effect on cooperation. In the meta-
analysis of studies that manipulated group size within a study (i.e., d values), we found less
cooperation in relatively larger, compared to smaller, groups (H2). Increased group sizes are
associated with lower self-efficacy (Kerr, 1989), lower sense of responsibility (Forsyth et al.,
2002), greater perceived anonymity (Van Vugt & Samuelson, 1999), and greater perceived
risk of encountering at least one defector (Barcelo & Capraro, 2015; Capraro, 2013), all of
which could account for a decrease in cooperation in larger groups. In the meta-regression,
however, we found that differences in group size between studies (and treatments) were not
associated with cooperation.
Meta-regression could have been a more suitable approach to examine the association
between group size and cooperation, relative to the meta-analysis using within-study effect
sizes. This is because group size can covary with the incentives for cooperation and thereby
alter the degree of conflicting interests across situations (Bonacich et al., 1976; Wu et al.,
2020). For example, Barcelo and Capraro (2015) examined the effect of group size on
cooperation in two economics games where the incentives to cooperate either increased or
decreased with expanding group size, and found that larger groups were more cooperative in
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 55
the public goods game (where individual gains increased with group size), but less
cooperative in the n-person prisoner’s dilemma (where individual gain remained constant as
the group size increased). Within the meta-regression analysis, we statistically controlled for
the conflict of interests within the social dilemma, which could be confounded with group
size. However, a general limitation of this entire body of evidence, is that most of the studies
included very small group sizes. Future research can better control for confounds when
manipulating group size, and also observe cooperation within larger groups.
Matching Design
People were more cooperative when they interacted with the same partner(s) for
multiple trials, compared to only once (d = 0.46, H8) . When the social dilemma changes
from stranger to partner matching, then people will weigh the benefit of exploiting others in a
single round against the cost of maintaining mutual cooperation in future rounds, and this can
help to align self-interest with cooperation (Andreoni, 1988). From the perspective of
interdependence theory, repeated interactions with the same partner may enhance concerns
for a partners’ interests, afford goals that value future outcomes, and encourage strategic
considerations (Kelley et al., 2003). Indeed, previous evidence showed that compared to
stranger matching, people involved in partner matching tend to form higher expectations
about a partner’s cooperation and make greater contributions to the public good (Nihonsugi,
2016). Moreover, reputational concerns and social norms can develop over time and maintain
cooperation during repeated interaction with the same partner(s) (Axelrod, 1984; Nowak &
Sigmund, 2005; Ostrom, 2014).
Yet, the meta-regression results showed that repeated interaction with the same
partners was not associated with higher cooperation estimates. In the meta-regression,
matching design only captures whether people were playing with the same partner across
Though we found relatively large effect size here, there is a wide range of the 95% confidence interval (see
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 56
trials within a treatment or study. However, it remains unclear whether participants received
feedback about others’ behavior from previous trials, including the outcomes for the self and
others, which could be a key feature determining the influence of matching design (Mengel &
Peeters, 2011). Future research may examine the boundary conditions of the impact of
matching design on cooperation (e.g., with/without feedback about other’s previous behavior)
and the potential differences in dynamics of cooperation over time under stranger and partner
matching designs.
Non-Effective Structural Solutions to Social Dilemmas
Several structural features were found to have little, if any, impact on cooperation.
These included features that affect the symmetry of the social dilemma structure,
sequentiality of decision making, and payment associated with outcomes.
Sequentiality
The current meta-analysis did not find evidence supporting the hypothesis that there
would be more cooperation when people make their decisions simultaneously than
sequentially (H3). A game theoretical perspective would suggest that sequential moving may
decrease cooperation, since self-interested individuals tend to avoid being exploited by others
and reduce cooperation under low expectation about other’s cooperation. Furthermore,
simultaneous decision makers tend to perceive higher sense of groupness and engage in more
cooperation, compared to sequential movers (Abele & Ehrhart, 2005). However, previous
research has found that both free-riders and conditional cooperators exist among participants
in experimental games, and conditional cooperation can arise especially when participants are
inequity averse (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Fischbacher et al., 2001). Indeed, sequentiality
allows for the signaling and communication of the previous mover’s prosociality within each
round of interaction, which may elicit cooperative responses among those conditional
cooperators. It may also be possible to develop sequential reciprocity if participants engage in
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 57
dynamic interactions and are provided with feedback about other’s behavior. Future research
may explore whether complete versus incomplete information about what former mover(s)
have decided in a sequential game would play a role in the relation between sequential versus
simultaneous decisions and cooperation.
Symmetry
We did not find support that asymmetric groups would be associated with more
cooperation, compared to symmetric groups (H6). From the perspective of the functional
model of hierarchy, hierarchical differentiation can promote cooperation and performance
(Halevy et al., 2011). Yet, it also posited that hierarchy comes in different shapes and forms,
and interdependence among members, perceived legitimacy of the hierarchy (e.g., Gross et
al., 2016), and the misalignment of different bases of the hierarchy (e.g., power and status,
Anicich et al., 2016) may moderate the effect of hierarchy on group functioning and
performance (Halevy et al., 2011). In the present meta-analysis, hierarchical differentiation
was operationalized as asymmetries in different aspects of a social dilemma structure, such as
the initial endowment size, payoff matrix and role in the game. Possibly the different
operationalizations of power could each afford some distinct psychological processes to
affect behavior. For example, inequality in the initial endowment reflects the asymmetry in
control over resources (i.e., power), but may also evoke perceptions of fairness that can
impact cooperation. The reference point for fair contributions tend to be clearer under equal
endowments (e.g., everyone contribute 50%), compared to unequal endowments (e.g., equal
contributions in proportion or absolute amount). This lack of clarity may lead to biased
reasoning and self-serving perceptions of fairness, potentially hindering cooperation within
groups with asymmetric endowments. Future research may examine the different types of
asymmetries in social dilemmas and the specific and shared psychological processes by
which various types of asymmetry influence cooperation.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 58
Payment
First, we found that compensation for participation was not associated with
cooperation in the meta-regression, and showed a small positive relation with cooperation in
the independent meta-analysis, which is not in line with our prediction (H5a). A potential
explanation is that compared to those who have not received a show-up fee, individuals who
receive such a fee may perceive they have already secured a gain, making them less risk-
averse, and thus be more inclined to cooperate. Second, we found that cooperation did not
vary between situations in which monetary/non-monetary payment were provided versus
hypothetical outcomes using the meta-regression approach (H5b). According to our meta-
analysis of studies that manipulated hypothetical versus real payments, there was a negligible
increase in cooperation among participants who received a game payment. We did not find
support for the hypothesis that performance-based payment would interact with matching
design to affect cooperation (H5c). Furthermore, among the incentivized games, we did not
observe differences in cooperation between different payment types, such as monetary versus
non-monetary payments and lottery versus non-lottery payment. These findings replicate
previous studies which found that cooperation did not vary between monetary and other
rewards (Zelmer, 2003), or between random incentivized and full payment treatments (Clot et
al., 2018). The evidence regarding the effect of real versus hypothetical payments on
cooperation was inconsistent with previous research (e.g., Locey et al., 2011; Vlaev, 2012).
These inconsistent findings underscore the need for future experiments to test theories and
hypotheses concerning the necessity of incentives to be used to study cooperation.
Methodological Implications
The current meta-analysis also investigated how several methodological features of
the social dilemma paradigms, including the sample characteristics, were associated with
cooperation.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 59
Deception
We found that studies which used deception were associated with higher level of
cooperation, though deception only explained a tiny amount of variation in cooperation
across studies (0.4%). Generally, the use of deception in experimental games – although
necessary to obtain control in certain experiments – has been argued to affect how
participants behave during experiments (Bonetti, 1998; Jamison et al., 2008; Levitt & List,
2007). A potential explanation is that participants may become suspicious about the
experiment due to either direct or indirect exposure to deception (Ortmann & Hertwig, 2002),
and therefore take the experiment less seriously (Jamison et al., 2008) and tend to behave in a
socially desirable way (i.e., making cooperative decisions). The current analyses only
considered whether deception was used in the experiment, but not whether deception was
used within the participant pool. Therefore, our study is unable to examine whether the effect
of deception was due to its direct use within the study or indirectly through exposure to
deception in previous studies. An important direction for future research is to better
understand the consequences of the use of deception within experiments, both within studies
and participant pools.
Sample Characteristics
We found no support that female (vs. male) and psychology (vs. economic) students
would engage in more (less) cooperation in social dilemmas – as these sample characteristics
were not associated with differences in the cooperation between studies, and these effects
were neither detected by meta-analyzing within-study effect sizes. Indeed, prior meta-
analyses found no difference in cooperation between men and women (Balliet et al., 2011;
Spadaro, Jin, & Balliet, 2023). We additionally compared student sample with non-student
sample, and found no difference in the amount of cooperation observed across samples (see
SI). This finding is in line with a recent study which found that behaviors are similar across
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 60
student and non-student samples, and that generalizable inferences about human behavior can
be made from standard student-based experiments (Snowberg & Yariv, 2021). Though there
is mixed evidence about the relation between age and cooperation (e.g., Romano, Bortolotti,
et al., 2021), we detected a positive association between age and cooperation, albeit with a
relatively small effect size, while meta-analyzing within-study effect sizes. We further
identify that sample characteristics, including age, gender and academic discipline, were
relevant predictors of the cooperation estimates using the adapted random forests algorithm
for meta-analysis (i.e., MetaForest), a method which can account for possible non-linear
relations (see SI). These findings suggest that sample features may not have a simple linear
relation with cooperation, and future research is encouraged to explore possible non-linear
relations.
Control Variables
We controlled for several additional methodological differences between the social
dilemmas (i.e., experimental setting, trial of cooperation, choice type), whether the
paper/study had been published or not, and the year of data collection. Importantly, we found
no differences in cooperation between lab and online studies. This replicates previous work
which has found similar patterns of cooperation between the lab and online studies (Horton et
al., 2011), and suggest online social dilemmas experiments can be an equally valid method to
study cooperation (Arechar et al., 2018). Besides, we found the amount of cooperation
observed in a study did not differ between whether the study was published or not, which
suggests this finding may not be affected by publication bias. The level of cooperation
between studies did not differ according to whether the data were observed during the first
trial or across all trials of the social dilemma, but we did observe more cooperation in
continuous-choice social dilemmas, compared to when participants made dichotomous
choices to either cooperate or defect. We did not put forward an a priori hypothesis about the
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 61
effect of choice type on cooperation. And prior research on the trust game has observed a
different result: First mover’s in the trust game made less investments (i.e., cooperation)
within continuous-choice trust games, compared to dichotomous-choice trust games (Schniter
et al., 2013). Future research can explore the potential effect of choice type in social
dilemmas to understand which type of the action space affords greater cooperation.
Lastly, we found that the level of cooperation observed across studies displays an
increase over the past several decades. Recently, Yuan, Spadaro and colleagues (2022)
applied cross-temporal meta-analytic techniques to social dilemmas studies conducted in the
United States and found the level of cooperation has increased in American society in the last
60 years. The same increase in cooperation was found across the last several decades of
research within studies conducted in China (Yuan, Wu, et al., 2024). One possible
explanation of this trend in cooperation is the rise in urbanization and relational mobility
within American and Chinese societies, which could be associated with higher trust and
cooperation among strangers (Thomson et al., 2018).
Strengths and Limitations
There are a few strengths and limitations of the present studies worth mentioning.
First, we used a total sample of 2,340 cooperation estimates obtained from 1,527 studies
comprising 229,528 participants in the meta-regression. This large scale meta-analytic dataset
increased the precision of the population cooperation estimation (Cohn & Decker, 2003) and
lowered the risk of overfitting while conducting the meta-regression analysis (Higgins &
Thompson, 2004). However, we also observed large heterogeneity among the estimates of
cooperation. This was reflected in the wide range of the prediction intervals, which suggest
there is a broad range of possible true outcomes of cooperation within any single study, and
questions the value of the overall estimated amount of cooperation (IntHout et al., 2016).
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 62
Second, the present studies applied complementary analytic approaches to replicate
our findings using different techniques, including meta-regression modeling in Study 1 and
traditional meta-analytic methods in Study 2. We used both forced entry and machine-
learning based exploratory methods (see MetaForest analysis in the SI) to build multiple
meta-regression models. Our forced entry models were based on predefined and theory-led
decisions, which included sample, methodological variables and paper meta-data as controls
while examining the association between structural features of social dilemmas and
cooperation. However, due to highly standardized social dilemma paradigms used in past
research, some values were frequently used for parameter setting in the experiments while
others were less commonly used. Indeed, we observed little variation in several features of
social dilemmas, such as sequentiality (91% simultaneous decision-making), symmetry (92%
symmetric games), communication (90% without communication opportunities) and sanction
influences. To address this limitation, we additionally conducted meta-analyses that analyzed
within-study manipulations of the structural features to test the hypotheses. This approach is
capable of detecting smaller effect sizes and also allows us to compare the magnitude of
standardized effect sizes.
Third, we should acknowledge that the current study did not capture cross-societal
variation in cooperation across studies or individual differences in response to structural
influences. Some previous research has found that individuals and societies differ in
impersonal cooperation (e.g., Herrmann et al., 2008; Romano, Sutter, et al., 2021; Thielmann
et al., 2020). Moreover, features of the situation may vary in their impact on cooperation
across individuals (e.g. personality) and societies (e.g., culture). For example, punishment
was found to be positively associated with cooperation in some societies but not others
(Gächter & Herrmann, 2009). Recently, Spadaro, Graf, et al. (2022) performed a large-scale
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 63
meta-analysis on 1,506 studies using PDs and PGDs conducted across 70 societies (k = 2,271)
to examine the cross-societal variation in impersonal cooperation. They found little, if any,
cross-societal variation in cooperation after controlling for study characteristics, including
several structural features analyzed in the present study (e.g., sanction, communication,
matching design). Their finding suggested that cooperation between strangers may be an
essential and general characteristic of large-scale modern societies, and that the variation of
cooperation in experimental social dilemmas can be better explained by the rules of the game,
as opposed to the society or culture in which the study was conducted.
Concluding Remarks
For decades, researchers have been observing how different structural features affect
behavior within highly standardized, internally valid models of social dilemmas. The
variation in the rules applied by researchers to create social dilemmas can inform the efforts
of policy makers, managers, and community organizations about the possible institutional
solutions to promote cooperation. Ostrom’s institutional analysis framework (2009) identifies
possible aspects of social dilemmas in which rules can be designed to alter the number of
participants, including their positions and level of control over outcomes, the possible
behaviors, the costs and benefits of their behaviors, and whether strategic interactions are
possible. Of the nine rules about structural changes that were examined in this meta-analysis,
we found that communication and sanctions were the most effective solutions to promote
cooperation, while smaller group size and partner matching were less effective in promoting
cooperation. We found no evidence to support the hypotheses that rules about the symmetry
of the dilemma, sequentiality of decisions and payment affect cooperation.
We found that cooperation was indeed lower in social dilemmas that involved a
stronger conflict of interests, and several of these rules can be wielded to fundamentally alter
the social dilemma in way to align self-interest with collective interests, such as sanctions and
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 64
partner matching. Yet, some rules that were hypothesized to encourage cooperation through
the rational pursuit of self-interest, such as sequential decisions, had no influence on
cooperation. Importantly, rules about structural changes can also affect psychological
processes beyond a rational pursuit of self-interest. Rules can be used to establish trust that
others will cooperate, encourage people to assign greater value to collective outcomes, that
facilitate the learning of social norms, and which can influence how biases in decision
making affect behavior. In fact, evidence exists that communication can affect cooperation
through each of these cognitive and motivational processes. Policy makers or managers of
organizations who create rules to manage social dilemmas can benefit from the knowledge
acquired from decades of research on cooperation, and attend to the many possible rules and
corresponding psychological processes that affect cooperation. In turn, scientists can observe
the impact of institutional rules developed to promote cooperation, measure the efficacy and
efficiency of the many possible rule configurations in social dilemmas, and sketch out the key
psychological processes through which these rules affect cooperation.
INSTITUTIONS AND COOPERATION 65