Development and validation of the domain-specific climate burden scale
Martin Weiß1,2*, Julian Gutzeit2, & Grit Hein2
1 Department of Psychology I: Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Institute of Psychology,
University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
2 Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Center of Mental Health, University
Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
*Corresponding author
Martin Weiß
Department of Psychology I: Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Institute of Psychology,
University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
Marcusstraße 9-11
97070 Würzburg
martin.weiss@uni-wuerzburg.de
Declarations of interest: none
Author contributions: Conceptualization: M.W. and J.G.; Data curation: M.W.; Formal analysis:
M.W.; Funding acquisition: M.W.; Investigation: M.W. and J.G.; Methodology: M.W. and J.G.;
Project administration: M.W. and J.G.; Validation: M.W., J.G. and G.H.; Visualization: M.W. and
J.G.; Writing – original draft: M.W. and J.G.; Writing - review & editing: M.W., J.G. and G.H.
Preprint information
This manuscript is a preprint and may undergo changes. A link to the
published version will be added.
PREPRINT VERSION
Abstract
Climate change is one of, if not the greatest, global challenges of this century, as its consequences can
have a wide range of impacts on society, the environment, and the personal lives of many individuals.
Consequently, many people experience severe psychological burdens in the form of fears, anxieties, or
worries, elicited by one, some, or all these different consequences. Thus, climate change burden can be
conceptualized as a domain-specific construct. We conducted a literature review and a qualitative lay
survey to develop the Domain-Specific Climate Burden Scale (DCBS), with a generic climate burden
domain and six sub-domains (ecology, existence, food supply, future generations, society, and wealth).
In the first study, we validated this structure with a bifactor-(S-1) model and refined the scale according
to its psychometric properties. In a second study, we showed convergent and discriminant validity with
the respective constructs. In a third study, we demonstrated the external validity of the scale by
investigating the relation of its sub-domains to fear reactions to real-life news excerpts and willingness
to donate to different charity organizations. Each sub-domain showed incremental validity over the
generic domain. The scale had adequate psychometric properties and stability over three measurement
timepoints in German gender-balanced convenience samples. We thus conclude that the domain-specific
conceptualization of climate change burden yields important diagnostic benefits and could provide
important insights into the future handling of climate change burden on a political, socio-cultural, and
personal level.
Keywords: anxiety; fear; burden; climate-change; personality
PREPRINT VERSION
Introduction
The consequences of the climate crisis are already noticeable and affect many different areas of everyday
life (Calvin et al., 2023). Climate change anxiety is a relatively new concept that refers to the emotional
distress and anxiety caused by the threat of climate change (Clayton & Karazsia, 2020). As the effects
of climate change become more apparent, many people are experiencing feelings of helplessness,
despair, and fear for the future (Watts et al., 2021). We have subsumed these various types of negative
affect under the term ‘climate change burden’. Since climate change is a global phenomenon that is
widely reported on, every person can potentially be affected by climate change burden (Clayton, 2020),
especially young people (Wu et al., 2020). In fact, in a worldwide survey of 10,000 children and young
adults, 84% were at least moderately worried, and 62% reported feeling anxious about climate change
(Hickman et al., 2021). However, while these results show that climate change has great potential to
induce worries and anxieties, it is somewhat unclear which aspects of climate change are most important
for the elicitation of psychological burden. The consequences of climate change lead to a wide range of
different problems. These include disruptions to agriculture and impact on the global food supply
(Wheeler & von Braun, 2013), the loss of habitable space and increased migration (Horton et al., 2021),
species extinction (Román-Palacios & Wiens, 2020), extreme weather events (Eckstein et al., 2020), or
loss of economic wealth, due to the destruction of people's livelihoods and the costs of adaptive
strategies that must be borne by the general public (Nelson et al., 2013). The extent of the impact of
these problems, however, may vary among regions worldwide, presenting different challenges for the
population of different regions depending on the local context (Calvin et al., 2023). Social disparities
within a country could also play a role in moderating the impact and threat of climate change (Islam &
Winkel, 2017), indicating that not everyone would be equally affected. Furthermore, interindividual
differences, such as age, generalized anxiety, or media consumption (Ogunbode et al., 2022; Whitmarsh
et al., 2022) can have a strong impact on personal psychological burden related to climate change. Thus,
it seems likely that different domains of climate change might elicit different types of worries, anxieties,
or fears to different extents. Soutar & Wand (2022) conducted a systematic review of qualitative
literature and investigated the scope of negative affect related to climate change and its various facets.
They included fifteen studies in which they identified worry about threats to livelihood (e.g., adverse
economic changes, migration, extreme weather events), worry for future generations (e.g., uncertainty
about what would be left for children and grandchildren), worry about apocalyptic futures (e.g., worries
for one’s life, worries about the destruction of the world), or anxiety about the lack of response to climate
change (e.g., the failure to take action to mitigate the consequences of climate change) as key factors of
climate change burden. While there are several measures assessing general climate anxiety (e.g., Clayton
& Karazsia, 2020; Hogg et al., 2021; for review, see Boluda-Verdú et al., 2022), to our knowledge, there
is currently no measure that explicitly takes into account these or other various sub-domains of climate
change burden. A domain-specific approach to the assessment of trait-like climate change burden has
the potential to provide a more fine-grained intraindividual profile of stable climate change burden and
PREPRINT VERSION
to enhance the prediction of related criteria over and above domain-general scales (see Blais & Weber,
2006, for a similar approach regarding risk-taking propensity; see Weiß et al., 2023, for a similar
approach regarding trait greed).
In this manuscript, we aim to develop and validate a new Domain-Specific Climate Burden Scale
(DCBS). The purpose of this work is twofold. First, we expect a domain-specific climate change burden
measure to explain additional variance in theoretically related criteria such as eco-paralysis (Innocenti
et al., 2023) or attitudes towards reducing emissions and adopting pro-environmental behaviors
(Whitmarsh et al., 2022). Second, on a more general level, we investigate the advantages of providing
context to personality measures. Generic items often lead to varied interpretations, leaving room for
ambiguity in determining the frames of reference to consider during the judgment process (Schulze et
al., 2021).
The Current Research
In the current research, we first tested whether climate change burden can be conceptualized as a
domain-specific construct. We used an unstructured narrative literature review followed by a qualitative
lay survey, which identified several domains that may pertain to climate change burden. By surveying
laypeople, we aimed to identify the most subjectively burdensome domains for the general public, rather
than the most objectively pressing climate change threats, which might have been better identified by
experts (Sundblad et al., 2009). Next, we developed a set of items to assess these domains. In Study 1,
we refined our newly developed measure according to its psychometric properties and reported results
on reliability and factor structure. In Study 2, we replicated these results and additionally investigated
the nomological net and the construct-related validity. In Study 3, we addressed the external validity of
the climate change burden domains using ratings of news vignettes and a charity donation task. This
also allowed us to investigate the incremental contribution of a domain-specific approach over a generic
approach. Across all studies, we tried to test as many participants from the previous studies as possible
to address reliability over time. Finally, we examined whether generic climate change burden is
differentially related to the different domains we propose by comparing the relationships between a
generic subscale and each domain-specific subscale.
Scale Development
To identify distinct climate change burden domains, we first conducted an unstructured narrative
literature review regarding proposed domains for climate change burden. Additionally, we used a
bottom-up approach to generate domains empirically. In an online pre-study, we asked 66 laypeople
(mean age = 25.85, SD = 7.62; 42 women; mean score on the MacArthur scale = 6.2, SD = 1.43) to
name domains of climate change burden. This procedure resulted in 215 statements which are depicted
separate domains evolved that adequately captured all statements. The six domains were labeled as
follows: existence, food supply, wealth, society, ecology, and future generations. Following this, we
PREPRINT VERSION
developed a self-report measure for assessing climate change burden as a domain-specific construct and
added some generic climate change burden items. Existence describes burdens associated with
existential threats towards an individual’s life, livelihood, family, and home. Food supply refers to
burdens associated with famines and impacts on agriculture. Wealth describes burdens associated with
impacts on financial resources, infrastructure, or the economy. Society encompasses burdens associated
with social unrest, conflicts, and excessive migration. Ecology refers to psychological burdens
associated with the destruction of the ecosphere and species extinction. Finally, future generations
indicates burdens associated with anxieties, fears, and worries regarding the future of upcoming
generations. Statements referring to natural disasters and weather changes were categorized in the
generic domain, as these are forms of climate change rather than the type of consequences we
conceptualized in our construct of climate change burden. This resulted in a scale with 63 total items
(i.e., 9 items per domain and 9 generic items). The items were rated on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging
from 1 (“does not apply at all”) through 4 (“partially applies”) to 7 (“fully applies”). These verbal
anchors were displayed next to the corresponding numbers 1, 4, and 7. We did not include inverted
items. Total scale scores were computed by summing all domain-specific scale items. All items of the
final version of the DCBS and pre-registrations for all three studies presented can be found on Open
The studies were conducted according to APA Standards and Ethical Principles. The local university
ethics committee approved the study protocol.
by 66 individuals. Taller fonts indicate that these words were mentioned more frequently. Terms were translated
from German for visualization purpose.
PREPRINT VERSION
Study 1
In Study 1, we assessed the psychometric properties of generic climate change burden and six specific
burden domains (ecology, existence, food supply, future generations, society, and wealth) and conducted
item analysis. We also assessed demographic, socio-economic, and psychological variables for
validation. Finally, we analyzed convergent validity and the underlying factor structure.
Method
Sample
We collected a German convenience sample of N = 305 (as recommended by Clarke & Watson, 1995)
using clickworker.com. This sample size is suitable for obtaining sufficient power for a bifactor model
with a medium expected effect size of r = .3, 7 latent variables (generic climate change anxiety + 6
domains), 28 observed variables (i.e., the climate change burden items of the refined scale, see below),
power = .8, and a probability level of .05. The recommended sample size to meet the criteria suggested
by Westland (2010) is N = 170. Participants were on average 42 years old (SD = 12.85, range 18-76
years; mean score on the MacArthur scale = 5.44, SD = 1.65) and 150 (49%) were women. A plurality
of participants had a university degree (n = 133 [44%]) and 70% reported earning more than 1000€ per
and the participants received compensation equal to the minimum wage in Germany.
Procedure
The study was conducted online via soscisurvey.de. In accordance with the recommendations from
Loewe and colleagues (2014), we presented the generic climate change burden items in randomized
order, followed by all domain-specific items in randomized order, in order to avoid what Kahneman et
al. (2006) called focusing illusion. We randomized our scale only once before starting data collection
for Study 1 so that all participants answered these items in the same order. We inserted an attention
check item and excluded participants online who failed to answer this item correctly.
In the beginning of the survey, we assessed monthly net income, highest educational attainment, gender,
age, and the German version of the MacArthur Scale of Subjective Social Status (Adler et al., 2000),
followed by the DCBS and then the German version of the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale-7 (Löwe
et al., 2008; ω = .89; seven items, e.g., “Feeling nervous, anxious, or on edge.”), and the German version
of the Climate Anxiety Scale (Wullenkord et al., 2021; ω = .95; thirteen items, e.g., “I find myself crying
because of climate change.”). Finally, we used a dichotomous self-reported proficiency item to assess
careless responding; participants who demonstrated careless responding were excluded.
Analysis
PREPRINT VERSION
Based on psychometric properties (i.e., the largest item-scale correlations), we selected the four best
items for each sub-scale, reducing the scale to 28 items in total (four each for the generic climate burden
To analyze the underlying factor structure of this refined version of the scale, we specified a bifactor-
(S-1) model (Eid et al., 2017) with six domain factors and one generic climate burden factor, each
consisting of four indicators. A bifactor-(S-1) model requires the specification of a reference domain,
which in our case was generic climate change burden as it was explicitly not connected to a specific
domain. The bifactor-(S-1) model allows the comparison of this reference domain to other relevant
domains. We were interested how much true-score variance in domain-specific climate change burden
is accounted for by generic climate change burden. Thus, no correlations between the domain-specific
factors and the reference factor were allowed, while intercorrelations between domain-specific factors
were permitted. After fitting the model using maximum likelihood estimation, we computed consistency
and specificity coefficients (Eid et al., 2003). For each nonreference climate change burden domain, the
consistency coefficients reflect the amount of true-score variance that is explained by generic climate
change burden, while the specificity coefficients reflect the amount that cannot be explained by generic
climate change burden. We chose the bifactor-(S-1) model to test our hypotheses because in our case the
meaning of the reference facet is clear and theoretically relevant (i.e., the latent variable for generic
climate change burden). Arguing in favor of correlations between the factors, we do not assume that the
covariance between the specific factors is exclusively due to the g-factor. We assumed other reasons
why some factors might be correlated (e.g., climate change burden related to society might be caused
by burden due to threatened wealth). In our case, each item reflects its specific domain of climate change
burden. Such a reflective model is appropriate when the observed variables (items) are considered
manifestations of the latent construct. A formative model, in contrast, would imply that the specific
domains create the higher-order construct. Our reflective models aligns with the theoretical perspective
that higher-order constructs underly the different factors and cause variations in their dimensions
(Edwards & Bagozzi, 2000). Using a reflective model for the generic climate change burden factor is
suitable because it allows us to assess how much true-score variance in domain-specific burdens is
explained by the generic factor, which is crucial in a bifactor S-1 model.
In contrast, other approaches, such as exploratory factor analysis, do not make this distinction and may
result in factors that are mixtures of general and specific variance, which can be difficult to interpret and
may not align with our theoretical constructs (Markon, 2019; Rodriguez et al., 2016).
To estimate the reliability of each sub-scale, we calculated coefficient omega (Dunn et al., 2014). We
then calculated bivariate correlations between each of the domain-specific climate change burden
domains and both generalized (General Anxiety Disorder Scale-7, Löwe et al., 2008) and climate anxiety
(Climate Anxiety Scale, Wullenkord et al., 2021) to test for convergent validity.
PREPRINT VERSION
Domain Item
Regarding climate change…
I feel anxious.
I sometimes feel helpless in the face of challenges.
generic
I often feel overwhelmed by the complexity of the problem.
I feel uncertain about the future.
The idea that my homeland could become an uninhabitable environment due to climate
change scares me.
I think about how I can protect myself and my loved ones to secure our existence,
existence considering the increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.
I think about the danger of natural disasters that could threaten my home and livelihood.
I think about the need to prepare for natural disasters such as floods, storms, and
wildfires.
I fear that climate change will affect food security and quality.
I worry about the impact of climate change on the availability and distribution of food.
food
supply I fear that there will be food shortages and famines.
I fear that climate change will disrupt the global food supply chain.
I fear that climate change will affect the financial stability of companies and markets.
I fear that climate change will affect infrastructure and transportation.
wealth I fear that climate change will lead to reduced economic opportunities and upward
mobility.
I worry about the impact of climate change on energy costs and resource availability.
I fear that climate change will weaken social cohesion in communities.
I fear that climate change will lead to social unrest and conflicts.
society
I fear that climate change could endanger democracy and political stability.
I fear growing social injustice and the gap between the rich and the poor.
I worry about the impact of climate change on wildlife.
I worry about the extinction of endangered species.
ecology
I fear the loss of habitats for animals and plants.
I fear a reduction in biodiversity due to climate change.
I worry about the long-term stability and security of the world future generations will
live in.
I fear that future generations will suffer from the consequences of our current decisions.
future
I fear that future generations will have to live in a world with limited nature and
generations
biodiversity.
I think about the responsibility we have towards our descendants to leave them a livable
world.
Results
We investigated the reliability within each of the 7 domains of the DCBS. The scales showed good
PREPRINT VERSION
Study 3 (S3, N = 322).
True scores
Reliability Consistency Specificity
S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3
generic (reference) .95 .94 .92 1 1 1 0 0 0
ecology .94 .94 .92 .46 .56 .48 .54 .44 .52
existence .91 .90 .88 .65 .68 .56 .35 .32 .44
food .93 .93 .92 .64 .67 .65 .36 .33 .35
future generations .92 .92 .91 .62 .69 .62 .38 .31 .38
society .88 .89 .89 .54 .56 .48 .46 .44 .52
wealth .90 .85 .82 .45 .52 .53 .55 .48 .47
Note. Generic climate change burden is the reference. The reliabilities (omega; see Dunn et al., 2014) of the scales
are displayed as well as the consistency between generic climate change burden and the 6 postulated domains with
their respective specificity.
All criteria in the specified bifactor-(S-1) model exhibited at least acceptable model fit ( = 577, df =
329, p < .001; comparative fit index [CFI] = .96; Tucker-Lewis index [TLI] = .95; root mean square
error of approximation [RMSEA] = .06; standardized root mean square residual [SRMR]= .04). The
consistency coefficients varied from domain to domain, ranging from .45 to .65. The highest consistency
coefficients were found for ecology and wealth. This means that generic climate change burden shared
more variance with climate change burden in the domains of existence, food supply and future
generations compared with domains of ecology and wealth. On a manifest level, the domains were
generic climate change burden and the DCBS domains ranged from r = .58 to r = .75 (all with p < .001),
indicating that all 6 domains shared substantial variance with generic climate change burden. The
correlations between the DCBS domains and GAD-7 ranged from r = .15 (ecology) to .32 (generic and
existence). Moreover, the correlations between the DCBS domains and CAS ranged from r = .18 (future
generations) to .4 (generic and existence). This indicates that DCBS and GAD-7 as well as DCBS and
CAS share variance, but not to a large degree. This makes sense as both scales have a more clinical
focus compared to the DCBS.
PREPRINT VERSION
disorder (GAD), and the Climate Anxiety Scale (CAS). Positive correlations are blue, negative correlations are
red.
Discussion
In Study 1, we reduced the original scale from 63 to 28 items and demonstrated good reliability across
all sub-scales of the refined DCBS. We also confirmed that the scales fit a bifactor-(S-1) model. Each
sub-domain was related to the generic climate change burden but also explained additional variance
beyond the generic domain. This indicates that we were able to assess a broad spectrum of psychological
burdens related to various aspects of climate change consequences. While all sub-scales showed
significant associations with related constructs, namely general anxiety disorder (GAD-7) and climate
anxiety (CAS), these correlations explained less than 16% of the variance, indicating good discriminant
validity. We thus conclude that the refined DCBS is a valid measure with good psychometric properties.
Study 2
In Study 2, we aimed to assess the test-retest-reliability of the DCBS by re-applying the refined version
of the scale consisting of 28 items with a 7-point Likert scale to the majority of the sample of Study 1.
In addition, we aimed to extend convergent and discriminant validity by including several psychological,
demographic, and socio-economical constructs, such as Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Depression,
General Climate Anxiety, Pro-environmental Behavior, Environmental Activism, Environmental
Attitudes, Political Ideology, and Media Exposure.
Method
Sample
PREPRINT VERSION
1 (total n = 305) as possible for Study 2 via clickworker.com. In this way, we collected data from n =
228 individuals who had previously been tested (74.75% of the original sample). Data were collected in
July 2023 and there were approximately eight weeks between the two dates of data collection. Again,
participants were paid based on the minimum wage in Germany. For further analyses we collected data
from n = 78 more subjects to achieve the same total sample size as in the previous study (n = 306). The
justification for the sample size corresponds to that in Study 1. The participants were on average 43
years old (SD = 13.01, range 18-75 years; mean score on the MacArthur scale = 5.39, SD = 1.69) and
earning more than 1000€ per month (n = 201).
Procedure
As in the previous study, we assessed monthly net income, highest educational attainment, gender, age,
and the German version of the MacArthur Scale of Subjective Social Status (Adler et al., 2000) at the
beginning of the survey. Then we presented DCBS in the same randomized manner as in Study 1.
Afterwards, to obtain information about the nomological net of the domain-specific climate change
burden measure, we assessed the German version of the following questionnaires, as they were linked
to climate change burden in previous research (e.g., Ogunbode et al., 2022; Wullenkord et al., 2021):
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale-7 (Löwe et al., 2008; ω = .93), Climate Anxiety Scale (Wullenkord
et al., 2021; ω = .97), Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (Löwe et al., 2005; ω = .79; two items, e.g.,
“Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless.”), pro-environmental behavior (PEB; Ojala, 2012; ω = .76; eight
items, e.g., “‘Buy environmentally friendly products.”) and environmental activism (Ogunbode et al.,
2022; single item: “Have you attended a climate protest at any point in the past year up till to date?”),
the Environmental Attitudes Inventory 24 (EAI; Milfont & Duckitt, 2010; twelve subscales with two
items each; ωs = .52 - .87), political ideology (European Social Survey, political left-right position: “In
politics people sometimes talk of left and right. Where would you place yourself on a scale from 0 to 10
where 0 means the left and 10 means the right?”), and media exposure (Ogunbode et al., 2022; three
single items; media impact: “How often do you read or hear about the consequences of climate change?”;
media solution: “How often do you read or hear about solutions to combat climate change?”, and media
attention: “How much attention do you pay to information relating to climate change?”). All
questionnaires were hosted via soscisurvey.de. As in Study 1, we used a dichotomous self-reported
proficiency item to assess careless responding; participants who demonstrated careless responding were
excluded. We then validated the underlying factor structure and quality of our items.
Analysis
We applied item-analysis and a bifactor-S-1 model as in Study 1. Next, we calculated bivariate
correlations between each of the domain-specific climate change burden domains and the previously
mentioned scales to obtain information about the nomological net. We performed a sensitivity analysis
PREPRINT VERSION
assuming 1-β = .8 and α = .05 with G*Power (Faul et al., 2009) to obtain information about whether our
sample was large enough to detect these correlations. Finally, we used bivariate correlations to assess
the test-retest reliability of the DCBS domains.
Results
As in the first study, all criteria in the specified bifactor-(S-1) model exhibited acceptable model fit ( =
737, df = 329, p < .001; CFI = .94; TLI = .93; RMSEA = .07; SRMR = .04). Like in Study 1, the scales
Overall, most of the DCBS domains showed a high test-retest reliability (generic: r = .84, ecology: r =
.83, existence: r = .78, food: r = .78, future generations: r = .85, society: r = .74). The only exception
was wealth with r = .66.
The bivariate correlations showed that the DCBS domains are almost all significantly related to GAD-
7 (.12 ≤ r ≤ .25), CAS (.21 ≤ r ≤ .41), PHQ-2 (.12 ≤ r ≤ .24), PEB (.41 ≤ r ≤ .51), political ideology (-
.37 ≤ r ≤ -.19), eco activism (.12 ≤ r ≤ .16; insignificant for ecology with r = .09), media impact (.13 ≤
r ≤ .17; insignificant for ecology with r = .1 and for future generations with r = .09), media solution (.13
≤ r ≤ .17; insignificant for future generations and society, both with r = .09) and media attention (.42 ≤
correlations where |r| ≥ .11, i.e., all significant correlations reported in Figures 2-4.
PREPRINT VERSION
disorder (GAD), Climate Anxiety Scale (CAS; Wullenkord et a., 2021), depression (PHQ-2), pro-environmental
behavior (PEB; Ojala, 2012) and political ideology (European Social Survey, political left-right position),
environmental activism (Ogunbode et al., 2022), media exposure to impacts of climate change, exposure to
possible solutions of climate change, and the amount of attention spent on media (Ogunbode et al., 2022). Positive
correlations are blue, negative correlations are red. Non-significant correlations are crossed out.
For the EAI, the pattern is more heterogeneous. EAI 2 (.34 ≤ r ≤ .50), EAI 3 (.37 ≤ r ≤ .48), EAI 6 (.24
≤ r ≤ .51), EAI 7 (-.33 ≤ r ≤ -.19), EAI 8 (.19 ≤ r ≤ .33), EAI 10 (-.46≤ r ≤ -.24), and EAI 11 (.24 ≤ r ≤
.42) were all significantly correlated to all DCBS domains. For EAI 5, there was no significant
correlation. For the remaining EAI subscales, only some domains correlated significantly: EAI 1 (.12 ≤
r ≤ .16; insignificant for existence with r = .11, society with r = .09, and wealth with r = .07), EAI 4 (-
.31 ≤ r ≤ -.14; insignificant for wealth with r = -.11), EAI 9 (-.35 ≤ r ≤ -.17; insignificant for wealth with
r = -.09), and EAI 12 (.12 ≤ r ≤ .20; insignificant for future generations with r = .08).
Environmental Attitudes Inventory 24 (Milfont & Duckitt, 2010), consisting of 12 subscales: enjoyment of nature
(EAI_1), support for interventionist conservation policies (EAI_2), environmental movement activism (EAI_3),
conservation motivated by anthropocentric concern (EAI_4), confidence in science and technology (EAI_5),
environmental fragility (EAI_6), altering nature (EAI_7), personal conservation behaviour (EAI_8), human
dominance over nature (EAI_9), human utilization of nature (EAI_10), ecocentric concern (EAI_11), support for
population growth policies (EAI_12).
PREPRINT VERSION
Discussion
We demonstrated high re-test reliability for all sub-scales of the DCBS. The fact that scores remained
relatively stable across eight weeks indicates the stability and thus trait-like nature of our climate change
burden construct. This is particularly interesting, as one might expect climate change burden to be
influenced by short-term events, such as weather changes, specific personal experiences, or media
exposure (Ogunbode et al., 2022). However, we found climate change burden ratings to be relatively
stable over time. Similar to the previous study, we showed good convergent and discriminant validity of
the DCBS with respect to general anxiety disorder, climate anxiety, depression, pro-environmental
behavior, political ideology, eco-activism, media consumption, and environmental attitudes.
Study 3
The aim of Study 3 was to further validate the DCBS against external criteria and behavioral measures.
In everyday life, people are often confronted with news about climate change and its consequences,
which could be received differently by people with existing fears, anxieties, or worries about specific
climate change-related aspects. News regarding climate change influences the public opinion by
conveying elite cues and economic concerns (Carmichael & Brulle, 2017), and coverage of climate
change has increased dramatically over the last two decades (Bohr, 2020). Online articles or TV reports
covering future or present impacts of climate change can enhance or even create concerns regarding
climate change (Searle & Gow, 2010), although empirical findings regarding this are mixed (Ogunbode
et al., 2022). On the other hand, news regarding the impacts of climate change and news in general might
also be perceived differently depending on what concerns recipients might already experience (e.g.,
news regarding COVID-19, Freiling et al., 2023). Thus, it might be interesting to investigate how news
articles addressing specific impacts of climate change are processed differently depending on differences
in the specific sub-domains of climate change burden of the DCBS.
In addition, to validate if the specific burdens assessed with our scale are associated with general and
specific pro-environmental behavior, we were interested in the association between our scale and the
willingness to donate to charities mitigating the impacts of climate change. In Study 2 we already
assessed self-reported pro-environmental behavior and self-reported environmental activism and found
them to be substantially associated with several of our climate change burden domains. However, the
validity of self-reported pro-environmental behaviors might be limited due to several biases such as
inaccuracy of memory, social desirability (although the strength of effects might be debatable, Vesely &
Klöckner, 2020), or differing interpretations of items (Kormos & Gifford, 2014; Lange et al., 2018).
This might lead to overestimation of the frequency and extent of pro-environmental behaviors,
especially as merely reporting environmentally responsible behavior bears no real costs but might
benefit one’s social identity or subjective adherence to social norms (Koller et al., 2023). For that reason,
PREPRINT VERSION
we included a task in Study 3 in which participants could actually behave in a pro-environmental manner
that was associated with real monetary costs.
In addition, we created a short version of our questionnaire, consisting of one item per domain (i.e.,
seven items in total), using the responses from participants in all three studies, but only from their first
encounter with the survey if they also participated in Study 2 and Study 3.
Method
Sample
We recruited as many participants as possible who took already part in Study 1 and Study 2 (intersection
n = 227), resulting in 170 participants that had been previously tested (74.89% of the intersection of
Study 1 and Study 2). Data collection took place in November 2023, so there were approximately 16
weeks between the data collection for Study 2 and Study 3. As before, participants were paid based on
the minimum wage in Germany. For further analyses we collected data from n = 152 more participants
to achieve approximately the same sample size as in the previous studies. In total, 322 participants took
part in the survey (mean age = 44.03, SD = 12.96, range 18-76 years; 158 (49%) women; mean score on
the MacArthur scale = 5.35, SD = 1.72). 136 participants reported having a university degree and 71%
Stimuli
To find real news articles addressing the domain-specific burdens of the DCBS, we conducted searches
across various German online media platforms. We selected appropriate vignettes and made small
linguistic changes and reductions to keep the length and readability (Björnsson, 1968; Lenhard &
Lenhard, 2011) roughly the same for all texts. We then conducted a lexicon based weighted sentiment
analysis to assess the polarity of each vignette (Remus et al., 2010). This resulted in 14 vignettes (two
for each domain) with an average word length of 34.21 (SD = 2.48, range = 30-38); an average
readability index (LIX, originally “Läsbarhetsindex” Björnsson, 1968) of 53.68 (SD = 2.96, range =
50.00-59.22), thus approximating the complexity of factual texts (Lenhard & Lenhard, 2011) and typical
German newspaper articles (Björnsson, 1983); and an average weighted polarity of -0.016 (SD = 0.008,
range = -0.038 - -0.008), indicating similarly negative sentiments expressed by all vignettes. For an
To assess willingness to donate as actual (costly) pro-environmental behavior, we selected six real
charity organizations, each of them focusing on mitigating a specific aspect of climate change impact
each charity name and a short description of the aims and purposes of the organization.
Procedure
PREPRINT VERSION
The study was, again, conducted online via soscisurvey.de. Participants first reported monthly net
income, highest educational attainment, gender, age, and the German version of the MacArthur Scale of
Subjective Social Status (Adler et al., 2000). Then they answered the DCBS with two attention checks.
After this, they read the 14 news vignettes (two vignettes per domain) in randomized order. After reading
each vignette, they reported how much fear they experienced (“This news scares me.”) and how strongly
they experienced physiological fear responses (“This news causes me to have physical reactions (e.g.,
heart palpitations, sweating or trembling).”). They used a visual analogue slider ranging from 0-100 to
answer each question. After this, participants were informed that they would receive additional money
(€1.20) on top of the compensation for taking part in the survey. We instructed them to thoroughly read
the descriptions of each charity organization, which were presented simultaneously in random order.
Participants could then distribute the money among the organizations or keep some (or all) of the money
for themselves. This was again done using a visual analogue scale for each organization, presented next
to its short description, and an additional slider to indicate how much money they wanted to keep for
themselves. We assessed the general willingness to donate and the amount of money donated to each
specific organization to understand domain-specific motives of behavior. After the final confirmation of
the chosen distribution of the donation amounts, we informed participants that the money would not
actually be donated to any organization. We used this deception because we did not want to favor any
specific organization based on our pre-selection. After this debriefing, participants were paid the full
amount (€1.20) regardless of their previously chosen distribution.
the description that was shown to the participants.
Domain Organization Name Description
The Nature Conservancy focuses on protecting plants,
The Nature animals, and ecosystems that represent the diversity of life
ecology
Conservancy on Earth (biodiversity), as well as preserving their habitats
on land and in water.
By helping agricultural and rural communities restore
existence Livelihoods Funds natural ecosystems, Livelihoods Funds ensures the
livelihoods and homes of people worldwide.
Groundswell International is committed to accelerating the
Groundswell
food transition to more sustainable food and agriculture systems
International
around the world to secure the global food supply.
future The World Future Council is committed to passing on a
World Future Council
generations healthy and sustainable planet to future generations.
PREPRINT VERSION
Climate Refugees is a human rights organization that
society Climate Refugees advocates for the protection and rights of people displaced
by climate change to stabilize societies.
Green America hosts the Social Investment Forum, and
wealth Green America promotes a variety of fair trade and socially responsible
investment programs, ensuring sustainable prosperity.
Analysis
A subsample of all three studies (n = 170) completed the DCBS at all three measurement timepoints. To
test the reliability of the DCBS domains across all timepoints, we calculated the multilevel reliability
using the psych package in R.
We fit the same bifactor-S-1 model to validate the underlying factor structure again. To determine the
external validity, we performed fourteen separate multiple regressions, i.e., one set of seven regressions
for the subjective fear items and one set of seven regressions for the self-reported physiological symptom
items. For each of the averaged vignette-ratings per domain, we first regressed generic climate change
burden and subsequently investigated the incremental validity of the corresponding domain-specific
climate change burden sub-scale. To quantify the incremental validity, we computed an analysis of
variance with both models to determine if the second model was significantly better. We also examined
the increase in explained variance (R²). We also conducted a sensitivity analysis assuming 1-β = .8 and
α = .05 with G*Power (Faul et al., 2009) to test for the lower bounds of sensitivity for the increase in
R². Next, we performed another set of six multiple regression models, one for each of the charity
donations (i.e., one per domain). We first regressed generic climate change burden and subsequently
tested the incremental validity of the corresponding domain-specific climate change burden sub-scale.
The models were compared in the same manner as above.
General willingness to donate (in Cents) was assessed by the total amount of money that participants
did not keep for themselves. We computed a Pearson correlation between generic climate burden and
willingness to donate and anticipated a significant positive correlation.
In addition to the pre-registered analyses, we tested whether the domains were differentially related to
generic climate change burden using the procedure proposed by Ment and colleagues (1992).
To provide a short version of our questionnaire, for use in surveys with limited space or other situations
requiring brevity, we used the same approach as for shortening the original item pool to four items per
domain (see Study 1). For this analysis, we combined all datasets and used only the first encounter each
participant had with the survey, thus ensuring substantial power for the shortened version (N = 592). We
also performed correlations between the resulting item and the domain score based on all four items to
PREPRINT VERSION
demonstrate the validity of the short scale, as well as the merit of using the regular version with four
items per domain.
Results
All criteria in the specified bifactor-(S-1) model exhibited comparable model fit measures as in Study 1
and Study 2 ( = 747, df = 329, p < .001; CFI = .93; TLI = .92; RMSEA = .07; SRMR = .04). Again,
Regarding the reliability across the three measurements, the generalizability of average time points
across all items (random time effects) per domain showed high reliabilities for all domains (values
Domain RkR
generic .93
ecology .91
existence .91
food .91
future
generations .92
society .87
wealth .85
Note. RkR refers to the generalizability of average time points across all items (random time effects)
calculated with the multilevel.reliability function in the psych package.
subjective fear, all models were significant, and each corresponding domain showed incremental validity
beyond generic climate change burden reflected by a significant increase in explained variance with a
relatively large range (ΔR² between 3% and 15%). For the self-reported physiological symptoms, all
models were also significant. However, only the models including the domain existence and the domain
wealth showed a significant effect of the domains, in line with a significant large increase in explained
variance for existence (ΔR² = 10%) and a small increase for wealth (ΔR² = 1%). According to the
sensitivity analysis, the increase in R² was detectable for ΔR² = .025, which means that only the
regression of the wealth domain on self-reported physiological symptoms had a ΔR² lower than the
detectable effect size.
PREPRINT VERSION
Incremental validity from multiple regression analyses
self-reported physiological
fear
symptoms
B R² B R² B R² B R²
Domain Predictor ΔR² ΔR²
M1 M1 M2 M2 M1 M1 M2 M2
generic 2.11 0.70 1.09 0.95
ecology .23 .38 .15 .09 .09 0
domain – 2.37 – 0.23
generic 3.06 2.00 1.52 0.30
existence .41 .46 .05 .13 .23 .10
domain – 1.68 – 1.93
generic 2.74 1.28 1.19 1.00
food .35 .43 .07 .09 .09 0
domain – 2.12 – 0.27
future
generic 2.09 1.08 1.10 1.15
.24 .30 .05 .08 .07 0
generations
domain – 1.45 – -0.08
generic 2.67 2.10 1.19 1.20
society .38 .40 .03 .11 .10 0
domain – 1.03 – -0.02
generic 2.01 1.18 1.02 0.66
wealth .24 .30 .06 .08 .09 .01
domain – 1.66 – 0.71
Note. The incremental validity of the DCBS subscales (Model 2 [M2]) in addition to the generic domain
only (Model 1 [M1]), the R2 value, and the increase in R² (ΔR²) are depicted separately for fear and self-
reported physiological symptoms. Significant (p ≤ .05) predictors in the model without the specific
climate burden scales (M1) and with the incremental validity of the specific climate burden scale (M2)
are printed in bold.
For the donation task, we found that the domains ecology, future generations and society had a
significant effect beyond generic climate change burden and a significant increase in explained variance
between the general willingness to donate and generic climate change burden was significant (r = .3, p
< .001).
PREPRINT VERSION
Incremental validity from multiple regression analyses
B B
Domain Predictor R² R² ΔR²
M1 M2
generic .42 -.39
ecology 0 .04 .04
domain – 1.36
generic .26 .46
existence 0 .01 0
domain – -.32
generic .34 .19
food .01 .01 0
domain – .22
future generic .47 .06
.03 .04 .02
generations
domain – .60
generic .85 .48
society .04 .05 .01
domain – .67
generic .24 .20
wealth .01 .01 0
domain – .06
Note. The incremental validity of the DCBS subscales (Model 2 [M2]) in addition to the generic domain only
(Model 1 [M1]), the R2 value, and the increase in R² (ΔR²) are depicted for the charity donations. Significant (p ≤
.05) predictors in the model without the specific climate burden scales (M1) and with the incremental validity of
the specific climate burden scale (M2) are printed in bold.
The additional analysis aimed at understanding the differences in correlations between the domains and
generic climate change burden confirmed that the correlation coefficients were not equal (χ² = 37, df =
5, p < .001). Thus, generic climate change burden was differentially reflected by the domains (see also
the variability of the consistency coefficients in the bifactor-(S-1) model). The largest difference in the
correlation between a domain and generic climate change burden was found between food supply and
society, as the squared correlation was 1.5 times higher for food supply than for society (𝑅 = .57 vs.
𝑓𝑜𝑜𝑑
𝑅 = .39).
𝑠𝑜𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑡𝑦
Short Version
The resulting items for the short version and corresponding correlations with the sub-scale scores are:
“I sometimes feel helpless in the face of challenges.” [generic; r with four item domain score = .92], “I
worry about the extinction of endangered species.” [ecology; r = .92], “I think about the danger of natural
disasters that could threaten my home and livelihood.” [existence; r = .88], “I fear that there will be food
shortages and famines.” [food supply; r = .92], “I fear that future generations will suffer from the
consequences of our current decisions.” [future generations; r = .91], “I fear that climate change will
weaken social cohesion in communities.” [society; r = .86], “I fear that climate change will lead to
reduced economic opportunities and upward mobility.” [wealth; r = .84].
PREPRINT VERSION
General Discussion
The escalating issue of climate change burden is becoming more prevalent in contemporary society. The
climate crisis is already negatively impacting or threatening to soon impact various facets of everyday
life (Calvin et al., 2023). However, the extent to which specific individuals experience anxiety, fear, or
worries due to these specific subdomains of climate change can vary noticeably (Ogunbode et al., 2022;
Whitmarsh et al., 2022). In this study, we differentiated the construct of climate change burden and its
sub-domains. Based on literature research and a bottom-up empirical approach, we constructed six sub-
domains of climate change burden, namely ecology, existence, food supply, future generations, society,
and wealth. We also included a generic climate change burden facet, resulting in the Domain-Specific
Climate Burden Scale (DCBS), which showed adequate psychometric properties and stability over three
measurement timepoints.
In addition, the DCBS provides information on intraindividual profiles of climate change burden in
different domains, which paves the way for future research on personalized intervention strategies to
mitigate climate change burden. In practice, the use of a domain-specific regressor for a corresponding
criterion can help in the precise prediction of specific criteria such as fear, anxieties, or worries related
to family, society, and species.
We also used the combined data of all three studies to develop a short version of this scale with only one
item per domain. This shortened version showed adequate to strong correlations with its sub-scales.
While we recommend using the standard version, the shortened version could be useful in surveys where
space or efficiency is important.
We investigated the external validity of the DCBS by assessing fear and self-reported physiological
symptoms while reading news vignettes that address the impacts and threats of climate change with
relation to the scale sub-facets. All news vignettes were comparable in length, complexity, and
sentiment. The extent of fear experienced while reading the vignettes was related to generic trait-like
climate change burden but also to trait-like burden in each respective sub-domain. This indicates that
the domain specific trait-like climate change burden facets may impact real-life consumption of
everyday news. Recent research has shown that consumption of news covering impacts of the climate
crisis is related to increased climate anxiety (Ogunbode et al., 2022). One explanation of this association
might be that repeated exposure to climate change news induces such worries and anxieties (Searle &
Gow, 2010). However, since we assessed domain specific climate change burden, which showed
considerable trait-like temporal stability over six months (see re-test reliability), before participants were
exposed to our news vignettes and showed a correlation with experienced fear during exposure to these
vignettes, it is also conceivable that news is processed differently depending on inter-individual
differences. In fact, this has been recently shown to be the case with news covering COVID-19 and
personal beliefs (Freiling et al., 2023). Furthermore, participants in our study might have experienced a
confirmation bias resulting in higher fear ratings for news vignettes that were in line with their prior
PREPRINT VERSION
beliefs. Recent research has indeed shown that individuals tend to select news that confirms their prior
beliefs, especially in times of crisis (Klebba & Winter, 2023). In conclusion, the heightened state fear
ratings observed after exposure to the news vignettes, along with their clear association with the
corresponding specific sub-domains of climate change burden, suggest that these domains appear to
hold valid relevance to the everyday consumption of news, even though the clear determination of causal
direction remains elusive.
However, while we found clear relationships between all climate change burden domains and
experienced fear during news exposure, we found only some domains to be related to self-reported
physiological symptoms during news consumption. While generic climate change burden was related to
self-reported physiological symptoms across all news items, only burdens related specifically to
existence and wealth were linked to self-reported symptoms during respective news coverage. This
suggests that general climate change burden may have clinical significance. Our results imply that a
trait-like climate change burden could be associated with self-reported physiological symptoms of
anxiety and distress. In line with this, recent research has shown that mental health is adversely affected
by general anxiety related to climate change (Clayton, 2020; Leonhardt et al., 2022; Wullenkord et al.,
2021). Long lasting distress can be a risk factor for depression (Hammen, 2005; Plieger et al., 2015) or
anxiety disorders (Juruena et al., 2020; Syed & Nemeroff, 2017). Taken together, this gives insight into
the potential underlying processes of climate change burden as a risk factor for mental illness. Second,
these results indicate that some of the climate change burden domains might lead to a stronger
physiological response. Both domains, namely existence and wealth, describe “personally close”
impacts of the climate crisis. The thought of danger to one’s family, livelihood, and home (existence),
or personal wealth might be more immediate and direct compared to more abstract facets of climate
change, such as increased migration (society), negative impacts on food supply, negative impact on
future generations, or the extinction of species (ecology). Thus, news covering these potential impacts
to immediate everyday life might have been experienced as more threatening and less abstract, thus
leading to heightened arousal. However, recent research produced mixed results regarding physiological
reactions specifically to existential threats (e.g., Gould et al., 2015; Klackl & Jonas, 2019; Poppelaars et
al., 2020). However, while actual physiological responses to existential threats were not distinguishable
from responses to other threats, the subjective physiological response was stronger to existential threats
(Poppelaars et al., 2020). Third, the generic, existence, and wealth domains were most strongly related
to self-reported symptoms of general anxiety disorder (GAD-7, see Study 2). This disorder is associated
with nonspecific physiological anxiety related symptoms (DeMartini et al., 2019; Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 2013). Thus, the relationship between the specific (and general)
climate change burden sub-domains and self-reported physiological symptoms might be driven by
increased symptoms related to general anxiety disorder.
PREPRINT VERSION
Regarding objective donation behavior, generic climate change burden was related to donations for
organizations aiming to mitigate negative impacts on future generations, society, and wealth.
Interestingly, only the domains ecology, future generations and society show incremental value of the
domain-specific subscales over generic climate change burden. Importantly, generic climate change
burden was not significant in these models (anymore). Here, the domain-specific subscales show their
practical value in specifically predicting distinct real-life behavior. Interestingly, these were all domains
that did not show effects on the physiological item in the news vignette task (see above). We argued
earlier that domains such as existence and wealth might be experienced as personally closer than
domains like future ecology, future generations, and society. While the former might be more relevant
for everyday personal life and thus lead to stronger physiological threat, the latter might be categorized
as more relevant to broader society. In line with this, previous research has suggested differentiating
between personal vs. societal consequences of external threat (Jonas et al., 2014; Onraet & Van Hiel,
2013; Reiss et al., 2021). Reiss et al. (2021) also suggest a taxonomy of threat regarding concreteness
and distance. In our study, ecology, future generations, and society appear to be more distanced than
(personal) wealth and existence. Following this taxonomy, a higher donation to charity organizations
can be interpreted as a concrete distal response to an abstract external social threat, aiming to reinstate
a global sense of control or to enable goal pursuit. The absence of evidence for a relationship between
donation behavior and this type of climate change burden sub-domains might indicate that individuals
use palliative efforts to diminish threat. This means that they exert effort to diminish the arousal elicited
by the threat but do not try to alter the situation (Stollberg et al., 2024). These findings have potential
implications for charity organizations, policy makers, and Non-Governmental Organizations. In the
context of distanced, more societal threats, it seems to be beneficial to concretely address worries and
anxieties of individuals regarding specific consequences of climate change, rather than addressing
general psychological burdens.
A conceptual organization of climate change burden domains
As a final step, we summarized and integrated the findings of the present research in a structural model
climate change burden, there are six domains that can differentiate which areas of life climate change
burden is associated with. Following a thorough literature review supplemented by laypeople surveys,
we are confident that these domains cover most areas of life where individuals are affected by their
climate change burden. On the one hand, we showed convergent and discriminant validity with
corresponding constructs and criteria. On the other hand, the Euclidian distances indicate that some
domains are more central than others. While generic climate change burden was significantly related to
all domains, the correlations differed significantly from each other. This is supported by the results of
the bifactor-(S-1) models showing that generic climate change burden shares more variance with the
domains of food supply, future generations, and existence and less variance with domains of ecology,
PREPRINT VERSION
wealth, and society. We conclude that climate change burden can be conceptualized as a domain-specific
Euclidian distance of the correlations between generic climate change burden and the domains, ranging from .70
(food supply) to .87 (society).
Limitations and Outlook
Our aim was to identify as many domains of climate change burden as possible using a bottom-up
approach. Nevertheless, demonstrating completeness is a challenge, and future research could refine or
expand the identified domains related to climate change burden. From a conceptual perspective, these
domains could be organized hierarchically, suggesting the existence of alternative structures that
distinguish specific burden domains at a lower level or group them into broader categories at a higher
level. Since we collected the data in Germany, the generalizability of the results to other countries is
limited. As a first step, future research should test the structure of the DCBS in another country with
similar climate change threats as Germany to replicate our main findings. A further step would be to
explicitly test the external validity and predictive value of the domains where a domain is already
threatened (e.g., in countries where the effects of global warming are already affecting food supply). We
were able to show that the domain-specific scales had incremental validity over the generic climate
change burden domain in explaining subjective fear responses to real life news. However, this analysis
was not suited to assessing the discriminant validity of the sub-domains because the vignettes, while
focusing on specific climate change aspects, often included elements that overlapped with other sub-
domains, leading to potential intercorrelations that confound distinct sub-domain assessments.
Therefore, in future research, we recommend designing experimental tasks, such as an approach-
PREPRINT VERSION
avoidance task (Heuer et al., 2007), that incorporate real physiological measures and distinct stimuli
tailored to specific sub-domains to better assess discriminant validity. Such an approach could provide
clearer insights into the unique contributions of each sub-domain and further validate the advantages of
domain-specific assessments in understanding climate change burden. Conclusion
We have shown that climate change burden can be conceptualized as a domain-specific construct.
Furthermore, we have proposed and validated a comprehensive personality measure that corresponds to
the domains to which climate change burden may belong. This opens up the possibility of answering
important current and future research questions.
PREPRINT VERSION