Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning: A
Comparative Approach
Hyungwook Yim
Department of Cognitive Sciences, Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Leyre Castro
Department of Psychology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
Jay I. Myung
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
Edward A. Wasserman
Department of Psychology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
Vladimir M. Sloutsky
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
word count: 6205
Author Note
The research was supported by the National Institutes of Health Grants R01HD078545
and P01HD080679 to VMS, and the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the
Ministry of Science and ICT (No. RS-2022-00166828) awarded to HY. Part of the study was
presented at the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. The data and
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Vladimir Sloutsky
(Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. E-mail:
sloutsky.1@osu.edu) or Hyungwook Yim (Department of Cognitive Sciences, Hanyang
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 2
University, Seoul, Korea. E-mail: hwyim@hanyang.ac.kr).
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 3
Abstract
We investigated the interactions between category structure, supervision, and the ability to
selectively attend in category learning. To examine selective attention, we compared human
adults and pigeons in a category learning task, where we manipulated the category structure
(dense vs. sparse) and the level of supervision (low vs. high). Humans, who have a more
advanced ability to attend selectively, showed faster learning and better generalization
overall. Both species showed a benefit for the category structures that had multiple
category-relevant dimensions (i.e., dense categories). In addition, there was a benefit of
supervision that was particularly strong in learning the sparse categories. Finally, attention
was optimized to the category-relevant dimension in the sparse category only in human
adults. Subsequent computational simulation of the data indicates that these patterns are
well explained by a parameter that controls the ability to flexibly switch attention to
category-relevant dimensions.
144/250 words
Keywords: category learning; selective attention; supervision; category structure;
comparative study
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 4
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning: A
Comparative Approach
1. Introduction
The ability to form categories is crucial for human cognition. Categories serve as a unit
of knowledge and thought, and help us to generalize and predict beyond what we have
already experienced (Goldstone & Kersten, 2003). The ability to learn categories also enables
us to treat discriminable things as equivalent (Bruner et al., 1956), which is essential for us to
simplify incoming information in a manageable way. However, it is not fully understood how
organisms form and use categories. The mechanisms underlying the ability to learn categories
are complex and involve different interdependent components.
1.1. Selective attention
One of the most important components in understanding category learning is selective
attention (Shepard et al., 1961). Studies have shown that when learning a category, human
adults do not deploy attention equally to the different dimensions of the category items.
Instead, they focus their attention to the category-relevant dimensions and ignore the
irrelevant dimensions (Ashby & Ell, 2001; Goldstone & Steyvers, 2001; Nosofsky, 1986;
Rehder & Hoffman, 2005). The process of selectively attending to the category-relevant
dimensions during category learning facilitates efficient learning and aids better
generalization (Mackintosh, 1965), both of which are key features of human category
learning. For example, when learning how to distinguish alpacas from llamas, the shape of
the ears is a relevant dimension – alpacas have pointy ears whereas llamas have long ears.
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 5
Focusing on the shape of the ears, while ignoring the dimensions that the animals share (e.g.,
four-legged, furry, grass fed), helps one learn the two distinct camelid family animals that
otherwise look alike.
The importance of selectively attending to the category-relevant dimension during
learning has led major theories and computational models to incorporate selective attention
as a key mechanism in explaining category learning (Kruschke, 1992; Love et al., 2004; Medin
& Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1986; Smith & Minda, 1998). In these models, selective attention
is assumed to stretch the scale of the attended dimension (e.g., shape of the ears) in a multi-
dimensional psychological space. The stretched dimension, therefore, becomes more
sensitive to stimulus differences, which not only helps one learn the categories but also
increases one’s ability to generalize when new instances are given.
Accordingly, previous studies have supported these models by showing that the ability
to selectively attend impacts how categories are learned. For example, organisms that may
not have a fully functional ability to selectively attend compared to human adults (such as
human infants or nonhuman animals, including pigeons), do not completely focus their
attention to the category-relevant dimensions during learning, and sometimes use the overall
similarity of the exemplars when learning the categories (Best et al., 2013; Castro et al.,
2020). The reason for these different attentional profiles in pigeons and humans may reside
in the neural substrates underlying selective attention. The human prefrontal cortex (PFC) is
considered to be critical for executive functions, such as selective attention (e.g., Miller &
Cohen, 2001; O'Reilly, 2006). Humans’ and pigeons’ anatomical organization of their
forebrains is considerably different. Among those differences, pigeons do not have a PFC.
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 6
They have an analogous region, the nidopallium caudolaterale (NCL), but it is not known how
the NCL may be involved in the deployment of attention. We know though that pigeons tend
to distribute their attention over different dimensions, rather than focus on most diagnostic
information (Castro et al., 2020). As a result, they may show less learning and limited
generalization.
1.2. Category structure
In addition to selective attention, the structure of the to-be-learned categories has also
been found to affect learning. Among the many ways to define category structure, one
important way is with category density (Gentner, 1981; Kloos & Sloutsky, 2008; Sloutsky,
2010). The density of a category can be defined as a combination of the similarity among the
members in the same category and their distinctiveness from the members in the other
category. Kloos and Sloutsky (2008) and Sloutsky (2010) further quantified category density in
a formal way. They defined density as the ratio between the variance of the information
relevant for category membership and the total variance of information regardless of
category membership. As the formulation measures statistical redundancy of the information
relevant for category membership, an inverse function of relative entropy (Shannon &
Weaver, 1949) was used to mathematically define density (see Sloutsky, 2010 for details).
Specifically, dense categories have multiple intercorrelated features that are relevant
for the category, while having only a few features that are irrelevant. Therefore, basic level
categories such as ‘dog’ and ‘cat’ can be considered to be dense. Due to the redundancy of
the category relevant information, it has been known that even infants are able to learn
dense categories (e.g., Quinn et al., 1993). On the other hand, sparse categories have many
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 7
features that are shared across different categories, with only few features being relevant to
distinguish these categories. Categories such as ‘llama’ and ‘alpaca’ can be considered as
sparse categories because there are many overlapping features between the categories, but
only a few features that are relevant for differentiating the two kinds. Due to having little
category-relevant information, sparse categories can be hard to learn (e.g., x-ray images for
diagnosing a disease) and may require extensive training even for adults (Palmeri et al., 2004;
Vong et al., 2019).
Category density naturally interacts with the ability to selectively attend to the
category-relevant dimensions when learning the categories. The ability to attend to the
relevant dimensions is more critical for learning sparse categories as there is little
information that is relevant for determining category membership. In particular, one needs to
discard many irrelevant dimensions while attending to the few relevant dimensions to
efficiently learn the sparse category. On the other hand, selective attention may not be
crucial for learning dense categories. As dense categories have multiple intercorrelated
features that are relevant to category membership, learning can be achieved by using the
overall similarity of the category exemplars (Goldstone, 1994).
A number of studies have examined the relationship between category density and the
functionality of selective attention, where the functionality has been primarily linked to the
size or maturation of the prefrontal cortex (e.g., Squire et al., 2013). For example, studies
show that 6-to-8-month-olds, who possess an immature prefrontal cortex, are unable to
learn sparse categories (Yim et al., 2012). At the same time, although 6-to-8-month-old
infants can learn dense categories, eye-tracking studies show that they do not selectively
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 8
attend to category relevant dimensions (Best et al., 2013). With the development of the
ability to selectively attend, four-to-five year-olds start to learn sparser categories while
attending to category-relevant dimensions (Deng & Sloutsky, 2016). However, they do not as
sharply focus their attention during learning as do adults. As selective attention undergoes
prolonged development (Diamond, 2002), it becomes an important factor in explaining the
types and structures of categories that children can (e.g., dense categories) or cannot learn
(e.g., sparse categories; Sloutsky, 2010).
Comparative studies with pigeons have shown similar results. Although pigeons can
use category-relevant information, they may not selectively attend to the category-relevant
dimensions (Castro et al., 2020; Nicholls et al., 2011; Wasserman et al., 2021). For example,
Castro et al., (2020) examined the performance of pigeons and human adults in a category
learning task where the categories could be learned via a single deterministic feature or via
multiple probabilistic features. Both pigeons and humans showed evidence for using the
single deterministic feature over the multiple probabilistic features. However, further
analysis using computational modeling showed that only humans deployed their attention to
the single deterministic feature, whereas pigeons distributed their attention over several
features. The results imply that pigeons are able to use a single deterministic feature, as it
has high predictive value, but they do not selectively attend to that feature as strongly as do
human adults. These results also suggest that pigeons may not be able to learn and
generalize sparse categories as well as human adults.
1.3. Supervision
Supervision, in the form of corrective feedback or explicit instruction, is another factor
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 9
that affects category learning. The different outcomes elicited by supervised and
unsupervised category learning have been well documented along with their possible
underlying mechanisms (e.g., Colreavy & Lewandowsky, 2008; Love, 2002; Love et al., 2004;
Pothos et al., 2011). Moreover, evidence shows that the effect of supervision is modulated by
the density of the category structure and the ability to selectively attend (e.g., Ell et al., 2012;
Kloos & Sloutsky, 2008; Pothos et al., 2011; Vandist et al., 2009). For example, Kloos and
Sloutsky (2004) examined human adults and 4-to-5 year-old children in a category learning
task, and compared the effects of category density and supervision. When supervision was
provided, learning was enhanced for sparse categories and the enhancement was greater for
children. As supervision acts as a top-down signal and aids category learning, children with
immature selective attention benefited more from supervision than did adults, who already
have the ability to selectively attend. On the other hand, when learning dense categories,
supervision hindered learning in both age groups. Therefore, it is not clear whether
supervision, when provided without increasing cognitive load, will also hinder learning dense
categories.
1.4. Current study
As previous studies have found that different factors affect category learning,
examining the interactions among these factors may be crucial for a better understanding of
the mechanism(s) of how we and other organisms learn categories. In the current study,
therefore, we systematically examined how (1) selective attention, (2) category density, and
(3) supervision affect category learning, and how these factors interact. The effect of
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 10
selective attention was investigated in two experiments with human adults and pigeons . The
two populations are likely to differ in their ability to attend selectively (e.g., Castro et al.,
2020; Smith et al., 2012). In each experiment, we manipulated category density (i.e., dense
vs. sparse category) and the amount of supervision (i.e., low- vs. high- supervision). Finally, to
compare the results across the two experiments, we utilized a computational model (i.e.,
ALCOVE; Kruschke, 1992) to simulate the data patterns and to infer the latent parameters
that may drive the performance differences across the groups.
2. Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, human adults learned two flower-like artificial categories, where
we manipulated category density and the level of supervision. In the task, participants
were presented with a category member one at a time and had to choose whether it
belonged to one category or the other. We were especially interested in the number of
trials it took to learn the categories. After participants learned the categories by reaching
a set criterion, we introduced a generalization phase. In the generalization phase,
participants were presented with new exemplars of the studied categories where
irrelevant features were substituted by novel features. We expected that the ability to
generalize would provide valuable evidence for how well participants selectively attended
to the category relevant dimensions during learning.
2.1. Method
2.1.1. Participants
We additionally tested 4-5-year-olds using a similar paradigm as in Experiment 1. However, many children did not
learn the sparse category after two days of training, which made the interpretation of the results unclear. We have
included the experiment in the supplementary materials for full disclosure.
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 11
One hundred undergraduate students at The Ohio State University participated for
course credit (66 females, M = 19.31 years, SD = 2.04). Each participant was randomly assigned
to one of four conditions created by crossing two independent variables: Density (Dense vs.
Sparse) × Supervision (Low vs. High). There were 25 participants in each condition. We have
not conducted a power analysis prior to the experiment. A post-hoc power analysis on the
ANOVA with an effect size (f) of .25, alpha of .05, N = 100 showed a power of .70. The
experiment was approved by the Institutional Review Board at The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
2.1.2. Materials
learning phase, there were two sets of categories (i.e., Category A and Category B) for each
density condition (i.e., Dense and Sparse). Every exemplar had a gray hexagon in the middle
with six colored shapes on each side. Each of the six locations was considered a dimension. For
the Dense categories, three out of the six dimensions had variable colors and shapes, whereas
the other three dimensions had the same shape and color within a category and different
from those in the contrast category; the latter three were category relevant dimensions. For
example, Category A in the Dense condition had three pink triangles that were the same for all
members of Category A, whereas Category B had three blue semicircles in the same location
their color and shape, so that they were irrelevant, whereas one was constant, the relevant
dimension. For example, one category in the Sparse condition (i.e., Category A) had a pink
triangle, whereas the other category (i.e., Category B) had a blue semi-circle (marked as ‘R’ in
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 12
irrelevant dimensions had new values. Each category set had 18 unique exemplars, and there
were two sets each for the learning phase and the generalization phase. As there were two
density conditions, the total number of exemplars used in the experiment was 144 (= 18
exemplars ⨯ 2 category sets (category A/B) ⨯ 2 phases (learning/generalization) ⨯ 2 density
conditions (dense/sparse)).
structures used in the learning phase and the generalization phase. The letter ‘R’ in the first
column represents the relevant dimension of the category; the letter was not shown to the
participants. (B) Experimental design in Experiments 1. (C) Experimental design in Experiment 2.
2.1.3. Design and procedure
Participants were told they were going to play a game where a cartoon character (i.e.,
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 13
Dora the Explorer) was investigating magic flowers from a different planet, which would turn
into black or white aliens when she touched them. Participants were told that their job was to
help the cartoon character find out which flowers would turn into black aliens and which
flowers would turn into white aliens, so that they should carefully look at the flowers.
There were 12 trial blocks, with 12 learning trials per block. Half of the learning trials
had Category A exemplars, and the other half had Category B exemplars, with exemplars
presented in a random order. On each trial, an exemplar was presented on the top center of
the computer screen, and an image of a white alien and a black alien were each presented on
the bottom left and right sides of the screen, left and right locations were randomized across
image of a white or black alien to indicate their decision about how the presented flower would
change.
In the Low-Supervision condition, when the participant made a decision, regardless of
their accuracy, a star appeared on the correct side for 500 msec. A “Good Job!” sign was also
simultaneously presented at the bottom of the screen. In the High-Supervision condition, the
star was only presented when the participant made a correct response. If the participant made
an incorrect response, a “Try again!” sign was presented in the center of the screen for 500
msec. Then the participant was presented with the same exemplar and was again asked to
make a choice.
When a participant obtained more than 10 correct trials in a 12-trial block, a
generalization phase was introduced before proceeding to the next block. Trials in the
generalization phase were identical to the learning trials except: (1) stimuli from the
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 14
generalization set were used, (2) there were six trials, and (3) a blank screen was presented for
500 msec after the participant’s response, without any feedback. The experiment was
terminated either when the participant responded to all 12 blocks or when the participant
responded incorrectly for only one trial across two consecutive blocks (i.e., 23 correct
responses out of 24 trials). The experiment was controlled by MatLab, using PsychToolbox
(Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997).
2.2. Results
We first examined the number of participants who successfully learned the categories.
Successful learners were defined as those who reached an accuracy higher than .85 in each
block for two consecutive blocks, and displayed asymptotic performance after reaching the
criterion. Overall, there were more learners in the Dense conditions and in the High-
as covariates showed that there was a statistically significant effect for Density (Z = 2.50, p
= .013), but not for Supervision (Z = 1.27, p = .20). The non-learners were excluded from all
following analyses unless mentioned otherwise.
Proportion of learners in Experiment 1. The numbers in parentheses represent the number of
learners and the total number of participants.
Sparse Dense
Adults Low-Supervision 0.72 (18/25) 0.96 (24/25)
High-Supervision 0.84 (21/25) 1.0 (25/25)
Additionally, we examined how many trials it took to learn the category (i.e., trials-to-
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 15
how learners were determined (i.e., the number of trials until accuracy was higher than .85 in
each block for two consecutive blocks, and asymptotic performance after reaching criterion was
attained). The Dense-High-Supervision condition showed the fastest learning (M = 38.4, SD =
17.32) followed by the the Dense-Low-Supervision condition (M = 44.5, SD = 29.07), the Sparse-
High-Supervision condition (M = 64.57, SD = 30.47), and the Sparse-Low-Supervision (M = 78.0,
SD = 27.69) condition. A 2 × 2 (Density × Supervision) between-subjects analysis of variance
(ANOVA) showed a statistically significant main effect for Density (F = 27.79, p < .001, η2 = .24),
a suggestive trend for Supervision (F = 2.98, p = .09, η2 = .03), but no sign of an interaction (F
= .42, p = .52).
accuracy. (Note that error bars represent +/- 1 SEM)
For the generalization trials, the highest accuracy was shown in the two Dense
conditions (High-Supervision: M = .99, SD = .028; Low-Supervision: M = .99, SD = .034), followed
by the Sparse-High-Supervision condition (M = .88, SD = .23), and the Sparse-Low-Supervision
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 16
condition (M = .78, SD = .32). A Density × Supervision between-subjects ANOVA showed a
statistically significant main effect for Density (F = 16.0, p < .001, η2 = .16). There was no effect
for Supervision, nor an interaction (ps > .21). Generalization performance was above chance
(.50) for all conditions (ts > 3.71, ps < .005).
Overall, human adults showed an effect of density and supervision during learning,
supported by comparing the number of learners and the trials to criterion in each condition.
Generalization was affected by category density, but not by supervision. In Experiment 2, we
examined pigeons, who exhibit a lower functioning selective attention, in a similar category
learning task.
3. Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, pigeons were given the same four category learning tasks as in
Experiment 1, except for necessary modifications in the training procedures.
3.1. Method
3.1.1. Participants
The subjects were 16 feral pigeons maintained at 85% of their free-feeding weights by
controlled daily feedings. The pigeons were randomly assigned to each of the conditions,
resulting in 4 pigeons for each condition. The pigeons had served in unrelated studies prior to
the present project. We have not conducted a power analysis prior to the experiment. A post-
hoc power analysis on the ANOVA with an effect size (f) of .463, alpha of .05, N = 16 showed a
power of .402. The experiment was approved by the Institutional Review Board and the
Despite the relatively low statistical power, we found robust main effects of Density and Supervision on pigeons’
measures of their performance. There was a tendency for an interaction between Density and Supervision that fell
short of statistical significance for both trial-to-criterion and generalization accuracy. Perhaps these interactions
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 17
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Iowa.
3.1.2. Materials
The experiment used four 36 × 36 × 41 cm operant conditioning chambers detailed by
Gibson et al. (2004). The chambers were located in a dark room with continuous white noise.
Each chamber was equipped with a 15-in LCD monitor located behind an AccuTouch resistive
touchscreen (Elo TouchSystems, Fremont, CA). The portion of the screen that was viewable by
the pigeons was 28.5 cm × 17 cm. Pecks to the touch screen were processed by a serial
controller board outside the box. A rotary dispenser delivered 45-mg pigeon pellets through a
vinyl tube into a food cup located in the center of the rear wall opposite the touchscreen.
Illumination during the experimental sessions was provided by a house light mounted on the
upper rear wall of the chamber. The pellet dispenser and houselight were controlled by a
digital I/O interface board. Each chamber was controlled by a personal computer, and the
experiments were developed in MatLab. The category exemplars used in the experiment were
identical to those used in Experiment 1.
3.1.3. Design and Procedure
The learning phase consisted of 144 trials each day. Among the 144 trials, half contained
exemplars from Category A and the other half contained exemplars from Category B. On each
trial, two identical exemplars were presented on the right and left side of the computer screen
a target stimulus (i.e., black concentric rings on a white background) was presented on the
correct side of the screen; the correct side for Category A and Category B was counterbalanced
could have been statistically significant had we had a larger sample.
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 18
across subjects. After one peck to this target stimulus, food reward was delivered. Completing
the sequence of category exemplars-target stimulus always ended with food reinforcement,
regardless of the specific side that the pigeons chose when the exemplars were presented.
Inter-trial intervals were 5000 msec in duration. The High-Supervision condition was very
similar to the Low-Supervision procedure. However, the five pecks to the category exemplar
had to be on the correct side for the target stimulus to be presented. If the last peck was on
the wrong side, then the screen turned black for 1000 msec and the same category exemplar
was again presented. The pigeons had to complete the 5-peck response requirement again until
the correct response was made. Responses from the correction trials were not analyzed. When
a bird reached a learning criterion of .85, the generalization phase was introduced the next day
and continued for 4 days. The generalization phase consisted of 162 trials a day, which included
144 training trials and 18 randomly intermixed testing trials. The testing trials presented the
generalization stimuli; on these trials, no correction procedure was given (to avoid teaching the
birds the correct response) so that pigeons’ choices were always reinforced, regardless of the
pigeons being in the Low- or High-Supervision conditions.
3.2. Results
All birds were trained until they reached the same learning criterion as in Experiment 1
(i.e., .85 correct), except for one bird in the Low-Supervision/Sparse condition which had not
from all following analyses. We did not conduct a statistical analysis for examining the effect
of Supervision and Density on the number learners as in Experiment 1 as the experiment was
intended to provide learning trials until the birds learned the categories.
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 19
Proportion of learners in Experiment 2. The numbers in the parentheses represent the number
of learners and the total number of participants.
Sparse Dense
Pigeons Low-Supervision 0.75 (3/4) 1.0 (4/4)
High-Supervision 1.0 (4/4) 1.0 (4/4)
High-Supervision conditions showed faster learning (Dense: M = 288, SD = 0; Sparse: M = 612,
SD = 72), than the two Low-Supervision conditions (Dense: M = 1836, SD = 1685; Sparse: M =
5664, SD = 3169). A 2 × 2 (Density × Supervision) between-subjects ANOVA showed a
statistically significant main effect for Density (F = 6.12, p = .031, η2 = .17) and Supervision (F =
15.46, p = .002, η2 = .42) with a suggestive interaction (F = 4.36, p = .061, η2 = .12).
Generalization performance was also higher in the High-Supervision conditions (Dense: M = .94,
M = .88, SD = .07; Sparse: M = .67, SD = .11). A Density × Supervision between-subjects ANOVA
showed a statistically significant main effect for Supervision (F = 9.14, p = .012, η2 = .25) and
Density (F = 14.03, p = .003, η2 = .39), but not an interaction (p = .17). Additionally,
generalization performance was above chance (.50) for all conditions (ts > 8.15, ps < .005),
except for the Low-Supervision/Sparse condition (t = 2.54, p = .13).
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 20
accuracy. Note that error bars represent +/- 1 SEM.
The results from pigeons showed a tendency for an interaction in the trials-to-criterion
data, which implies that pigeons benefited more from a stronger supervisory signal in the
Sparse condition than in the Dense condition. During generalization, pigeons showed both an
effect of Density and Supervision unlike the adults’ pattern. We further investigated the
differences between pigeons and adults in the next section by conducting a computational
model simulation.
4. Computational Model Simulation
The results across the two experiments suggested that the ability to selectively attend
declined from adults to pigeons, as shown by the increase in the number of trials to reach the
learning criterion, and by the decrease in accuracy of generalization performance.
Additionally, generalization performance was not statistically different from chance in pigeons
in the Low-Supervision/Sparse condition, indicating that pigeons may not have optimally
attended to the category-relevant dimension and simply learned the exemplars by rote
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 21
memory. Finally, the effect of supervision was more prominent in pigeons than in adults; in
addition, the benefit of supervision for pigeons was greater in the sparse categories than in
the dense categories during learning.
The overall pattern across the two participant groups can be explained by differences in
the ability to selectively attend to the category relevant information. If selective attention is
highly functional, then it should be easier to pinpoint the category relevant information and to
ignore the category irrelevant information. As a consequence, category learning will be faster
and generalization accuracy will be higher. On the other hand, if selective attention is less
functional, pinpointing the relevant information will be difficult and category learning may have
to rely on remembering each exemplar (i.e., rote memory). Generalization will also be less
robust because the overall similarity of the exemplars will have to be used when categorizing
the exemplars rather than only relying on the category relevant information.
To further examine this account, we used a computational model of category learning.
Here, we chose ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992; Lee & Navarro, 2002) to identify which component of
the model contributes to the overall pattern that changes across groups. ALCOVE is an
exemplar-based network model that represents the exemplars in a multidimensional space and
incorporates attentional learning. Importantly, ALCOVE is able to simulate not just an outcome
but also the learning process of category learning (c.f., Nosofsky, 1986).
We took a simulation approach where we changed each parameter one at a time and
examined the model predictions. The four main parameters of ALCOVE are: the attention
learning rate (𝝀 ), the output learning rate (𝝀 ), the decision scaling parameter (𝜙), and the
ɑ 𝑤
specificity constant (c). Most importantly, the 𝝀 parameter controls how flexibly the model is
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 22
able to allocate attention throughout learning; it has been a useful parameter in explaining the
results of various category learning studies (e.g., Nosofsky & Kruschke, 2002). The 𝝀 parameter
controls how well the model associates each exemplar to the correct responses (i.e., category
membership). The 𝜙 parameter reflects the consistency of choice responses (i.e., temperature
parameter in a softmax function). Finally, the c parameter controls the activation of the
psychological exemplar space and tunes (or scales) the psychological exemplar space. A smaller
c parameter will activate more exemplars near the encountered exemplar, while a larger c
parameter will only activate the encountered exemplar in the psychological space. The
simulation involved the same category structures and design used in the current study, and the
parameters were fixed to c = 5, 𝜙 = 2.5, 𝝀 = .001, and 𝝀 = .001 when they were not varied in
ɑ 𝑤
the simulation3. We used the catlearn R package (Wills et al., 2017) to implement the
simulation, and ran the simulation 100 times for each condition, where the order of the
presented exemplars was randomized in each simulation.
results from changing a single parameter while fixing the other parameters. The dots in the
plots represent the mean values across 100 simulations. The top row presents trials-to-
criterion, and the bottom row presents generalization accuracy as the parameter value is
changed. If the parameter is crucial for explaining differences across groups when increasing
the parameter values, then trials to criterion will decrease and generalization accuracy will
We were not able to obtain stable estimates of the parameters by fitting the data and instead used a simulation approach.
The values were chosen within a range that were selected from previous studies. There were no qualitative differences when
we used different values for the fixed parameters. Simulation code and results can be found in our OSF repository
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 23
the other hand, the c parameter shows an increase in both learning to criterion and
𝝀 , and (D) 𝝀 . For each column, the top row presents trials to reach a learning criterion of .85
ɑ 𝑤
for a given parameter, and the bottom row presents corresponding generalization accuracy at
test. To examine the effect of these parameters, each was changed one at a time with the other
parameters being fixed to c = 5, 𝜙 = 2.5, 𝝀 = .001, and 𝝀 = .001. Across the simulation results,
ɑ 𝑤
only 𝝀 shows a decrease in trials to criterion and an increase in generalization accuracy with
increases in the parameter value.
We further examined how the model deployed attention to the category dimensions as
The top row shows the trials to criterion prediction, the middle row shows the generalization
accuracy prediction, and the bottom row shows how attention was allocated to all of the
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 24
dimensions after reaching criterion, where the category relevant dimension is presented in red.
long time to reach criterion (i.e., 3344 trials) and, even after reaching criterion, generalization
accuracy is low (i.e., .53). The model also shows that attention is distributed across all of the
dimensions and is not focused on the category relevant dimension (i.e., red bar). This pattern
resembles the results in the Low-Supervision/Sparse condition with pigeons
, who seem to exhibit little or no selective attention. On the other hand, when the 𝝀
required to reach criterion and generalization accuracy is high (i.e., .86). Additionally, attention
is heavily focused on the category relevant dimension depicted in the red bar. In sum, the
simulation results using ALCOVE supported our conclusion that selective attention is a critical
factor in understanding the behavioral differences between human adults and pigeons.
condition. Each column shows the simulation result of the model for a specific 𝝀 value
presented on the top of each column while the other parameters were fixed (i.e., c = 5, 𝜙 = 2.5,
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 25
and 𝝀 = .001). The top row presents the trials to criterion, where the criterion was .85. The
middle row presents accuracy during the generalization phase after the criterion was reached.
The bottom row presents attention weights after the criterion was reached, where the bar in
red represents the attention weight for the category-relevant dimension.
5. General Discussion
In the current study, we investigated the effects of selective attention, category
structure, and supervision on category learning. We examined two participant groups–human
adults and pigeons–that we suspected might exhibit different levels of selective attention, and
manipulated the structure of the to-be-learned category in terms of the density and level of
supervision during learning. Results showed that: (1) the group that displayed the greater level
of selective attention, human adults, learned the categories faster and generalized to new
exemplars better, (2) overall learning was faster in the Dense condition than in the Sparse
condition, and (3) the benefit of supervision became more prominent when training involved
sparse categories. By utilizing a computational model of category learning (i.e., ALCOVE), we
were able to show that these patterns of performance were well explained by the parameter
that controls the ability to flexibly attend to different dimensions (i.e., 𝝀 ).
5.1. Selective attention
Most importantly, our results revealed that the functionality of selective attention
greatly affects category learning. As the ability to focus on the category-relevant dimension
increased (e.g., human adults), fewer trials were required to learn the categories and more
individuals learned the categories by the end of the training phase. Moreover, greater attention
to the relevant dimension prevented distraction by the novel irrelevant features in the
generalization trials, thereby promoting better generalization. These results are in line with
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 26
previous developmental studies, which showed that infants and children do not fully focus their
attention on the category-relevant information during learning due to their immature selective
attention (Best et al., 2013; Deng & Sloutsky, 2015, 2016). As a consequence, infants and
children have shown slower learning and poorer generalization. Previous studies have also
shown that pigeons tend to distribute their attention, rather than to selectively attend to the
category-relevant dimensions (Castro et al., 2020). Thus, it seems that a fully developed PFC
may be necessary to focus attention on relevant information and/or suppress attention to
irrelevant or less reliable information.
5.2. Category structure
The advantage of the Dense category structure held for both humans and pigeons, and
it was observed regardless of the amount of supervision. The Dense category structure required
fewer trials to learn and showed better generalization than the Sparse category structure.
There are at least two possible explanations for this result. First, the Dense category had more
category-relevant dimensions (three out of six) than the Sparse category (one out of six).
Therefore, there is a greater chance for the learners to discover a relevant dimension in the
Dense condition. Additionally, as the total number of dimensions did not change between the
Dense and Sparse structures, there were also fewer category-irrelevant dimensions in the
Dense structure; this too could decrease the level of distraction compared to the Sparse
structure.
The former possibility is related to the ability to focus on the relevant information,
whereas the latter possibility is related to the ability to filter out irrelevant information. Both
abilities have been conceptualized under the term "selective attention.” However, studies show
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 27
that these two abilities may not entail the same construct in category learning (e.g., Gao et al.,
2024; Unger & Sloutsky, 2023). Theories of category learning have not effectively distinguished
these two constructs (e.g., ALCOVE does not have a separate parameter for focusing and
filtering), and it is not possible to disentangle which sub-construct may have been responsible
for the participant differences in the current study. In future research, it would be useful to
distinguish the contributions of focusing and filtering to understand how density affects
category learning and generalization.
Another, but not mutually exclusive explanation for the Dense category advantage
stems from the fact that the relevant dimensions in the Dense category had multiple features
that were identical (i.e., three red triangles vs. three blue semi-circles). The repetitive
configurations may make these features more salient and increase the overall discriminability
of the training stimulus, perhaps also helping the learner discriminate this information as
category-relevant to optimize their attention (e.g., Hammer, 2015; Hammer & Sloutsky, 2016).
This argument is also supported by the fact that most of the participants in the two groups
were able to learn and generalize the Dense category without high supervision.
5.3. Supervision
Overall, supervision aided learning either through reducing the number of trials to learn
the category and/or improving generalization accuracy. As to the interactions with category
density, the results differed from previous studies that examined the effect of supervision
across different category densities. For example, Kloos and Sloutsky (2008) found that, although
supervision helped learning sparse categories, it hindered learning dense categories. As noted
earlier we believe that the discrepancy stems from the way supervision was implemented. In
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 28
Kloos and Sloutsky (2008), supervision was provided through verbal instructions, which
described all of the features that were relevant to category membership. Although verbal
instruction can be helpful, as it provides more detailed information of category membership
than simple correct/incorrect feedback, it can also increase cognitive load for the participant
and hinder learning (e.g., Zeithamova & Maddox, 2006). In the current experiment, it is possible
that, because supervision was provided through response feedback, no such additional
cognitive load could hinder category learning; now, category learning was facilitated.
The benefit of supervision interacted both with the ability to selectively attend and with
category density. For adults, supervision only aided in decreasing the trials-to-criterion, but did
not affect the proportion of learners or the accuracy of category generalization. It seems that
the absence of an effect for adults in the latter two measures was due to their performance
being near ceiling in the Dense condition. This result implies that adults were capable of
learning and generalizing the Dense categories and there was no room for supervision to afford
additional assistance. On the other hand, there was a numerical difference in the Sparse
conditions in terms of the proportion of learners (Low-Supervision: .72, High-Supervision: .84)
and category generalization (Low-Supervision: .78, High-Supervision: .88). For pigeons, there
was a benefit of supervision in the trials-to-criterion4, and generalization. Although the
magnitude of the benefit was not different between the Dense and Sparse conditions (i.e., no
interaction effect), it is noteworthy that pigeons’ generalization performance was not
statistically different from chance in the Low-Supervision Sparse condition.
Note that the current experiment intended to train the pigeons until they learned. Therefore, comparing the proportion of
learners across conditions in the pigeon group is misleading.
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 29
The fact that pigeons did not generalize the sparse category in the low-supervision
condition, even after learning the training exemplars, implies that selective attention may not
have been utilized during learning in the Low-Suversion/Sparse condition. Instead, it is possible
that pigeons in this condition stored all of the exemplars via rote memory. Therefore, in the
generalization phase, they failed to use the category-relevant dimension which was embedded
within new features. The explanation is supported by the fact that pigeons failed to generalize
even when they had more trials to learn the categories than the adults (i.e., 10,944 trials, which
is equivalent to 304 repetitions of the 36 exemplars, compared to human adults who were only
tested up to 144 trials, which is equivalent to 4 repetitions of the whole set). Moreover, in the
attention deployment that lacked focusing on the category-relevant dimension, which was a
consequence of a low attention learning parameter (i.e., 𝝀 ).
5.4. Conclusion
In the current study, we examined how category learning is affected by selective
attention, category structure, and supervision. We specifically showed how selective attention
affects category learning, while interacting with category structure and supervision, based on
the functionality of selective attention in two different species: human adults and pigeons.
Supervision overall aids category learning, although the amount of benefit depends on whether
the category structure requires selective attention, and whether selective attention is fully
functional. Based on the structure of the category, selective attention may not be crucial for
category learning with dense categories. However, when the structure can benefit from
selective attention (e.g., with sparse categories), the functionality of selective attention can
Selective Attention, Category Structure, and Supervision in Category Learning 30
affect how the categories are learned–either through optimizing attention to the category-
relevant dimension (e.g., human adults) or through not optimizing attention and relying on rote
memory or simple association strength (e.g., pigeons).