Racial Differences in the Income-Well-Being
Gradient
1 2 3
Bouke Klein Teeselink , Jin Kim and Gal Zauberman
King’s College London, Department of Political Economy, 30 Aldwych, WC2B 4BG, United Kingdom.
The D’Amore-McKim School of Business, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA
02115, United States.
Yale School of Management, 165 Whitney Ave, New Haven, CT 06511, United States.
December 31, 2024
Abstract
Extent past research documented a robust non-linear relationship between
income and subjective well-being (i.e., income-well-being gradient). Utilizing
data from millions of Americans, mainly from the Gallup Daily Poll, we find
significant differences in the income-well-being gradient between racial groups.
Whites experience a steeper gradient, gaining more well-being per dollar than
Blacks and Asians. These results cannot be explained by lower optimism re-
garding future well-being among minorities, as Whites are actually the least
optimistic about their future well-being at every observed income level. Poli-
cymakers seeking to maximize societal well-being would need to consider the
moral and practical implications of this heterogeneity.
Keywords: subjective well-being; race; income-well-being gradient; redistribution
Klein Teeselink (corresponding author): bouke.klein teeselink@kcl.ac.uk. Kim:
jin.kim1@northeastern.edu. Zauberman: gal.zauberman@yale.edu.
Introduction
A large body of research has studied the relationship between income and subjective well-
being, finding that the well-being enhancing effect of income diminishes as income increases
(Layard et al., 2008; Kahneman and Deaton, 2010; Killingsworth, 2021; Killingsworth
et al., 2023; Diener and Biswas-Diener, 2002; Lindqvist et al., 2020; Dwyer and Dunn,
2022; Klein Teeselink and Zauberman, 2023). However, there has been relatively little
research investigating the robustness of this income-well-being gradient across different
subgroups of the population, which serves as a critical assumption when applying such
findings to policies.
One group characteristic that has received particular attention in both the well-being
and the income inequality literature is race (Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008, 2013; Iceland
and Ludwig-Dehm, 2019; Akee et al., 2019; Cummings, 2020). Prior research documents
large differences between racial groups in terms of both average income and well-being
levels separately, but to the best of our knowledge, no research has examined the more
fundamental question of whether and how the relationship between income and well-being
systematically differs between racial groups. This gap in research deserves attention,
because racial differences in subjective well-being (a socially important outcome) may stem
from (1) racial differences in income, (2) racial differences in income-well-being gradient,
or (3) baseline differences in well-being. Any attempt to assess and then close the racial
well-being gap requires an understanding of the underlying causes, one of which is income-
well-being gradient.
This paper examines differences in the income-well-being relationship across racial
groups using data on millions of Americans from the Gallup Daily Poll (GP). The data
contain responses to a large set of questions asking respondents to rate their subjective well-
being across various evaluative and experiential dimensions. Compared to other surveys,
the GP surveys a much larger number of individuals from minority groups, which makes
the survey a particularly useful source to examine the relationship between income and
well-being across racial groups. We supplement the GP data (N = 2, 252, 805) with a data
set from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), which contains a smaller number of
observations (N = 217, 656) but has the advantage of tracking the same individuals over
time.
Our results demonstrate that the relationship between income and well-being differs
markedly between racial groups. Across the entire range of observed income levels, the
income-well-being gradient is considerably steeper for Whites than for Blacks, suggesting
that Whites receive a larger boost in subjective well-being per additional dollar of income
than Blacks. For Asians, the gradient is even more shallow than for Blacks. The between-
race differences in the gradient are sizable: Whites are the least happy of all racial groups
at low income levels, and the happiest at high income levels, whereas the opposite holds
true for Asians. These results cannot be explained by lower optimism regarding future
well-being among minorities, as Whites are actually least optimistic about their future
well-being at every observed income level.
Beyond the importance of such differences to researchers who study well-being, the
observed heterogeneity is important because policymakers aiming to maximize the sum
total of well-being in a society would technically need to consider redistributing resources
to groups with steeper gradients (Diener and Seligman, 2004; Dolan et al., 2011; Oishi
and Diener, 2014; Adler and Seligman, 2016; Frijters et al., 2020). Yet, the prospect of
redistributing resources from one group to another may be considered reprehensible if it is
based on immutable characteristics such as race. We corroborate this intuition through a
survey, in which we measure people’s attitudes toward race-based redistribution and other
forms of redistributive policies. The results indicate that people strongly oppose policies
that redistribute resources between races, even if such policies increase the aggregate
amount of happiness in a society.
Although our research focuses on the income-well-being gradient, our research opens
up more general questions about systematic heterogeneity in observed well-being relation-
ships, with potentially important conceptual and policy implications.
Methods
Consistent with much prior work on well-being, we use responses to the Cantril Ladder
scale as our main outcome variable. This ladder scale asks respondents to rate the quality
of their lives on a scale from 0, representing the worst possible life, to 10, representing
the best possible life. To measure income, we use respondents’ annual pre-tax household
income (self-reported, chosen from 10 categories). Respondents report race as one of
five categories: White, Black, Asian, Hispanic, and Other. After excluding observations
with missing or incomplete data, the Gallup Poll sample consists of 2,252,805 respondents
between 2008 and 2019.
We use two separate well-being measures for each respondent (i.e., within subjects):
the commonly used measure of present well-being (“Please imagine a ladder with steps
numbered from zero at the bottom to ten at the top. The top of the ladder represents the
best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst possible life
for you. On which step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand at this
time?”) as well as the less commonly used future well-being as a measure of well-being
optimism (“On which step do you think you will stand about five years from now?”). These
two measures allow for assessing the extent of well-being optimism for respondents across
demographic groups, providing a test for one key reason for group differences in the income
In this paper, we use the term ‘race’ to denote survey respondents’ self-identification as one
of the limited racial or ethnic groups presented to them. We acknowledge that this term may
inadequately capture the complexity of ethnic and cultural identities, but this is the data available,
and is a common approach in the literature.
well-being gradient.
In our main analysis, we estimate the relationship between income and well-being for
different racial groups. Income is measured in 10 income categories. To impose minimal
restrictions on the functional form of the relationship between income and well-being, we
include each income category as a separate dummy variable. Specifically, we estimate the
following regression model for each racial group g ∈ {Asian, Black, Hispanic, White}:
(cid:88)
Y = β + δ + δX + ε (1)
it k Income in k t it it
k=1
Y denotes the subjective well-being of individual i in year t, which ranges from 0 to 10
it
on the Cantril ladder scale. is an indicator variable that takes the value of
Income in group k
1 if individual i belongs to income group k ∈ {1, . . . , 10}. δ are year fixed effects. X is a
it
vector of control variables including health, gender, number of children, sexual orientation,
age, employment status, educational attainment, marital status, and year of interview.
Except for health and the number of children, we include all these variables as fixed effects
to impose minimal functional form restrictions. Our main coefficients of interest are β ,
which are our estimates for the marginal effect of income on well-being, using the lowest
income category as a reference group. By separately estimating Equation (1) for each
racial group, we allow for differences in the relationship between income and well-being,
as well as covariates and well-being across racial groups.
We adapt Equation (1) in several ways to conduct our additional analyses. To test
the relationship between income and optimism, we use people’s expected well-being five
years into the future as the outcome variable (measured from 0 to 10), keeping everything
else the same. To test the effect of unobserved neighborhood characteristics, we add zip
code fixed effects. To test the effect of relative income comparisons, we interact the income
group dummies with zip code-level average income, and add zip code-level
Income in group k
average income as an additional covariate.
Results
and socioeconomic characteristics. Across income levels, Asians report the highest level
of well-being (7.07), whereas Blacks report the lowest level (6.92). However, Blacks seem
most optimistic about the future, on average expecting their well-being to reach 8.27 five
years from now, as compared to 7.97 for Asians, 7.95 for Hispanics, and 7.44 for Whites.
Asian Black Hispanic White
Observations 52,665 204,112 192,173 2,079,822
Well-being 7.07 6.92 6.98 7.06
Expected Well-being (5 years) 7.97 8.27 7.95 7.44
Physical health 76.30 70.01 71.22 72.08
Female 0.42 0.56 0.50 0.51
Age 42.30 49.15 43.54 56.92
$ $ $ $
Income 82,726 52,058 50,417 68,890
Married 0.55 0.35 0.47 0.58
No diploma 0.02 0.08 0.19 0.04
High/voc. school 0.12 0.29 0.32 0.26
College 0.86 0.63 0.49 0.70
Children below 18 0.91 0.87 1.31 0.56
Religious 0.73 0.89 0.85 0.85
Employed 0.70 0.58 0.64 0.56
Unemployed 0.05 0.07 0.07 0.03
of respondents of a particular race. Well-being measures people’s answers to the Cantril ladder
question. Expected Well-being (5 years) measures people’s expected well-being 5 years into the
future. Physical health is a composite index of 26 health-related factors, and takes a value between
0 (worst health) and 100 (best health). Female is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if
the respondent reports to be female. Age is a respondent’s age in years. White, Black, Asian,
and Hispanic refer to respondents’ self-reported race. Married is a dummy variable that takes the
value of 1 if an individual is currently married. No diploma is a dummy variable that takes the
value of 1 if a respondent did not finish high school. High/voc. school takes the value of 1 if
the respondent either only finished high school, or obtained a vocational degree after high school.
College takes the value of 1 if the respondent has at least some college education. Children below
18 are the respondent’s number of children below 18. Religious is a dummy variable that takes
the value of 1 if the respondent reported being religious. Employed is a dummy variable that takes
the value of 1 if the respondent is employed. Unemployed is a dummy variable that takes the value
of 1 if the respondent is looking for a job but does not currently have one.
across racial groups. Consistent with prior work, higher levels of income are associated
with higher levels of well-being. This positive association exhibits an approximately log-
linear shape, with no evidence of saturation at high income levels for any racial group.
Despite this similarity, however, we find marked differences in the income-well-being
relationship across racial groups. Well-being increases more rapidly with income for Whites
than for Blacks, Hispanics, and, especially, Asians. Whites report the lowest level of well-
being within low-income groups (6.10, as compared to 6.46 for Asians, 6.46 for Blacks, and
6.57 for Hispanics), and the highest level of well-being within the higher-income groups
(7.69, as compared to 7.49 for Asians, 7.49 for Blacks, and 7.63 for Hispanics). The
opposite holds true for Asians.
2 $ $
income levels from 0 to 24,000.
3 $
income levels above 120,000.
(A) Unconditional averages
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
$0 $50,000 $100,000 $150,000
Midpoint of income group
gnieb−lleW
(B) Estimated gradient
1.0
0.5
0.0
$0 $50,000 $100,000 $150,000
Midpoint of income group
Asian Black Hispanic White
gnieb−llew
no
tceffE
Race Asian Black Hispanic White
being is measured by the Cantril ladder question. The horizontal axis displays the midpoint of each
$ $
income category, where the highest income category ( 120,000+) is displayed at 150,000. Panel A
shows the average level of well-being across different income levels without controlling for additional
covariates. Panel B shows the estimated increase in well-being when moving an individual from
the lowest income category to a higher one, controlling for gender, age, health, employment status,
education level, religion, children, marital status, and survey year. All curves are estimated using
results of the regression analyses.
One potential explanation for the different slopes is that income groups may vary
between races in characteristics such as age, health, education, and religion. For example,
if health contributes to well-being, and low-income Whites lag behind other low-income
racial groups in health, then Whites would exhibit a steeper income-well-being gradient,
independent of differences in the well-being enhancing effect of income. To address such
composition differences, we estimate the association between income and well-being, while
controlling for other variables known to correlate with well-being, such as gender, age,
health, employment status, education level, religion, children, and marital status, and
year in which the survey was conducted. We estimate a separate regression model for each
racial group, which has the advantage of allowing for the possibility that each variable
affects well-being differently across racial groups.
lowest income group as the reference point, each dot represents the estimated change
in well-being when an individual moves from the lowest income group to a higher one,
holding constant the aforementioned set of possible confounding variables. Consistent
with the unconditional relationship displayed in Panel A, we find a steeper income-well-
being gradient for Whites than for other groups. For example, moving an individual from
$ $
the lowest income group to a middle one ( 36,000 – 48,000) is associated with a 0.8 point
increase in well-being for Whites (SE = 0.016, t(1, 157, 347) = 41.21, p < .001), whereas
the same change in income only yields an increase of 0.7 point for Blacks (SE = 0.039,
t(126, 437) = 14.86, p < .001), 0.6 point for Hispanics (SE = 0.046, t(112, 353) = 11.76,
p < .001), and 0.2 point for Asians (SE = 0.066, t(31, 753) = 2.54, p = 0.011). Similarly,
moving an individual to the highest income category yields an estimated well-being increase
ranging from 1.3 points for Whites (SE = 0.016, t(1, 157, 347) = 81.86, p < .001) to 0.6
point for Asians (SE = 0.063, t(31, 753) = 9.72, p < .001), with Blacks (1.1 points, SE =
.040, t(126, 437) = 26.45, p < .001) and Hispanics (1.0 points, SE = .047, t(112, 353) =
21.72, p < .001) in the middle.
To determine whether the observed differences in the income-well-being gradient are
statistically significant, we estimate a model using data from all races, and include interac-
tion terms between race and income in predicting well-being. The control variables are the
same as before. The results of this regression analysis (presented in Appendix B) reveal
that the increase in well-being associated with moving an individual from the lowest in-
$ $
come group ( 0) to the highest income group ( 120,000) is significantly higher for Whites
(1.3 points) compared to the respective minority groups (0.6, 0.9, and 1.0; all p < 0.001).
This pattern of greater increases in well-being from income for Whites extends to smaller
income changes as well. In fact, the estimated increase is significantly larger for Whites
than for any other group when moving an individual from the lowest income group to any
$ $
income group at or above a middle one ( 36,000 to 48,000), with all p-values less than
0.001.
Potential Explanation: Differential Optimism
Another, more psychological, potential explanation for why Whites exhibit a steeper
income-well-being gradient than other groups is that societal factors such as systemic
discrimination make minorities less optimistic about the future, thus subduing any pos-
itive effects of income on their well-being. In other words, Whites may show a steeper
income-well-being gradient because they are more optimistic about the future than the
minority groups. An often-ignored measure of the Gallup well-being survey allows us to
test this hypothesis, because individuals are asked to evaluate not only their current level
of well-being, but also their expected well-being five years into the future. To formalize
optimism, one may consider both absolute optimism (how do you think your life will be
5 years from now), and relative optimism (how much do you think your life evaluation
will change in the coming 5 years). To be consistent with prior literature and to avoid
regression to the mean, we focus on absolute optimism rather than the difference between
current and future well-being (Gallagher et al., 2013; Graham and Pinto, 2019).
of individuals per racial group who have higher expected well-being than current well-being. On
being across racial groups. First, all groups are optimistic regarding their well-being
by showing higher average ratings for future well-being than for current well-being; see
lower optimism regarding well-being than minority groups. This trend is evident across
poor Whites are not only the least happy of all groups, but they also have the lowest
expectations regarding their future happiness. Rich Whites are currently happier than
other racial groups at the same income level, but also less optimistic about where they
will stand in five years, which is consistent with prior research by O’Connor and Graham
(2019); Graham (2017); Graham and Pinto (2019). These results demonstrate that our
main findings are not explained by generally lower optimism among minorities.
$0 $50,000 $100,000 $150,000
Midpoint of income group
sraey
ni
gnieb−llew
detcepxE
Asian Black Hispanic White
groups. Expected well-being is measured by an individual’s expected answer to the the Cantril
Other Possible Explanations: Neighborhood Characteristics
and Relative Income Considerations
We also test whether our findings can alternatively be explained by unobserved neighbor-
hood characteristics or by different relative income comparisons (Ball and Chernova, 2008;
this measure, Black respondents exhibit the highest level of optimism, with 63.5% anticipating
improvements in their well-being over the next five years, followed by Asian (59.4%) and Hispanic
respondents (58.5%). In contrast, White respondents report markedly lower optimism, with only
between this definition of optimism and income.
Boyce et al., 2010). To do so, we first estimate a set of regression models that account for
neighborhood quality by controlling for zip code fixed effects. These models account for
any unobserved time-invariant neighborhood characteristics such as school quality, crime,
the Supplementary Materials, are highly similar to those of our main specification, sug-
gesting that unobserved location characteristics do not explain our findings on income and
well-being across racial groups.
Next, to test whether relative income comparisons can explain our results, we follow
the methodology in Boyce et al. (2010) by assuming that the average income in one’s neigh-
borhood serves as a reference point for such comparisons. We specify a set of regression
models that interact the level of respondents’ own income and the income level of their
neighborhood using average zip code-level income data, obtained from zip code-level busi-
shows the results. The interaction terms between zip code income and respondents’ own
income suggest that higher zip code-level incomes dampen the positive effect of having
a higher income oneself. Yet, the interaction terms are not significantly different across
racial groups, suggesting that relative income considerations are similar across groups.
Moreover, the pattern of different absolute income-well-being gradients remains apparent
even after controlling for relative income considerations.
Robustness Checks: Alternative Well-Being Measures
We checked the robustness of our finding by testing whether the racial differences in
the income-well-being gradient extend to other measures of well-being. We examined 10
additional items in the GP survey that indirectly measure respondents’ well-being. These
items ask respondents whether they (1) are satisfied with their relative living standard,
(2) like what they do every day, (3) learn something new every day, (4) feel like they have
enough money, (5) consider their city the perfect place to live, (6) use their strengths
every day, (7) rate their relationships as stronger than ever, (8) experienced enjoyment
yesterday, (9) experienced worry yesterday, and (10) experienced stress yesterday. As
these 10 items measure different aspects of well-being, we conducted a factor analysis to
confirm the presence of common underlying dimension(s) (see Appendix C for a detailed
explanation).
The pattern of items clustering on the same factors suggest that the first factor rep-
resents Positive Evaluation of Life (comprising items like ‘Satisfied with living standard’
and ‘City is a perfect place’), whereas the second factor represents Lack of Negative Affect
(comprising the two items ‘Worried yesterday’ and ‘Stressed yesterday’). Next, we analyze
We invert the answer scales for the ‘stress’ and ‘worry’ questions, such that the value of 0
indicates that the respondent experienced stress or worry yesterday, whereas the value of 1 implied
the absence of such an experience.
factor scores for these two factors as dependent variables to test whether these alternative
measures of well-being would also show racial differences in the income-well-being gradient.
well-being measures (Panels A and C), as well as the estimated relationship after control-
ling for a wide set of covariates (Panels B and D). Consistent with our main analyses, the
analyses of the first principal component reveal a steeper income-well-being gradient for
Whites than for other groups, particularly Asians. Whites again have the lowest well-being
at low income levels, and the highest well-being at high income levels. The only distinction
from our main analyses is that, upon controlling for additional covariates, the estimated
gradient becomes more similar for Whites and Blacks, although some differences remain.
For the second principal component, we also document a very stark difference between
Asians and other groups. Asians experience only modest decreases in the absence of stress
and worry when their income increases, whereas the relationship is much stronger for other
racial groups.
(A) Unconditional averages, PC1
0.0
−0.5
$0 $50,000 $100,000 $150,000
Midpoint of income group
gnieb−lleW
(B) Estimated gradient, PC1
0.4
0.2
0.0
−0.2
$0 $50,000 $100,000 $150,000
Midpoint of income group
Asian Black Hispanic White
gnieb−llew
no
tceffE
Race Asian Black Hispanic White
(C) Unconditional averages, PC2
0.00
−0.25
−0.50
−0.75
$0 $50,000 $100,000 $150,000
Midpoint of income group
gnieb−lleW
(D) Estimated gradient, PC2
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
$0 $50,000 $100,000 $150,000
Midpoint of income group
Asian Black Hispanic White
gnieb−llew
no
tceffE
Race Asian Black Hispanic White
of a set of 10 alternative well-being measures. The first principal component primarily consists of
positive evaluative dimensions of well-being, whereas the second principal component mainly loads
Within-Person Variation in Income
We test whether our main finding can be replicated using a different data set from the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). As the PSID surveyed the same individuals over time,
its data allowed us to account for within-person variation in income. Conducted since
1968, the PSID is a longitudinal, genealogical survey of roughly 18,000 people in 5000
households and their descendants since 1968, with the sample consisting of a nationally
representative sample of households and additional samples of low-income and immigrant
households. Unlike the Gallup Poll surveys, the PSID has the main advantage of surveying
the same people over time. Accordingly, we can include person fixed effects to control for
any unobserved characteristics that are constant at the individual level. Examples are
personality traits, cultural background, and childhood experiences, which may confound
the relationship between income and well-being. In other words, we employ a within-
subject design to examine individual-level changes in income and well-being. With the
PSID data, we compare only Whites and Blacks, because there are insufficient observations
to meaningfully compare other racial groups. Appendix D in the Supplementary Materials
explains our methodology in more detail.
income has a positive and statistically significant relationship with well-being (b = 0.041,
SE = 0.0088, t(10417) = 4.72, p < .001). For Blacks, by contrast, the relationship is
positive but non-significant (b = 0.011, SE = 0.011, t(8331) = 0.99, p = .32). The dif-
ference in coefficients is sizable, with effect sizes differing by a factor 1.5 to 4 depending
on model specifications. These large differences notwithstanding, the difference in coeffi-
cients between Whites and Blacks is not statistically significant (b = −0.035, SE = 0.029,
t(25709) = −1.20, p = .23) as the standard errors are too large to detect reasonable dif-
ferences between both groups. Still, the results are broadly consistent with our findings
from the GP data.
Attitudes Towards Redistribution Between Racial Groups
If strict well-being maximization is accepted as the ultimate goal of government policy
in its strong form, a logical implication is that demographic characteristics that affect
the income-well-being relationship such as race should be considered when formulating
income redistribution policies. To investigate public attitudes towards such group-based
redistribution, we conducted a pre-registered survey (N = 960) examining people’s views
on policies that redistribute resources between racial groups based on differences in their
Respondents were randomly assigned to one of eight conditions across two formats in
a between-subjects design. In the “differential taxation” format, participants indicated
whether it is acceptable (Yes vs. No) for the government to tax one group more than
another if reductions in income have a smaller impact on the happiness of the first group
compared to the second. In the “direct transfer” format, participants indicated whether
the government should implement a policy to increase total happiness by transferring
money from one group to another (1 = Definitely No, 4 = Unsure, 7 = Definitely Yes).
Across both formats, we examined four types of redistribution: from one unknown group
(“Group A”) to another unknown group (“Group B”), from rich to poor, from Whites
to Blacks, and from Blacks to Whites. Section E in the Supplementary Materials gives
additional details on our survey.
The results reveal overwhelming opposition to redistributing resources between racial
groups, even if doing so would increase overall societal well-being. Between 88% and 96%
of respondents considered it unacceptable to tax Whites and Blacks differently, while 61%
to 88% opposed transferring money from one race to another. Opposition was strongest
to redistributing from Blacks to Whites (96% for differential taxation and 88% for direct
transfer), but disapproval was also high for redistributing from Whites to Blacks (88%
for differential taxation and 61% for direct transfer). As for redistributing between two
unknown groups, opposition was also substantial, though comparatively lower (70% for
differential taxation and 46% for direct transfer). Notably, however, much smaller percent-
ages of respondents opposed redistributing from rich to poor (14% for differential taxation
and 27% for direct transfer), indicating that the aversion to race-based redistribution is
not driven by a general opposition to redistribution. Moreover, while political orientation
strongly and significantly predicted attitudes towards income-based redistribution, it did
not significantly predict attitudes towards race-based redistribution in three out of the
four cases (i.e., all but the case of transferring money from Whites to Blacks). Specifically,
except for the direct transfer from Whites to Blacks (which was opposed less strongly by
liberals [49%] than by conservatives [87%]), liberals and conservatives were similar in their
proportions opposing race-based redistribution (ranging from 85% to 97%, all ps from χ
tests comparing liberals and conservatives > .58).
Conclusion
We find that the relationship between income and well-being differs between racial groups:
While well-being rises with income across all racial groups, the gradient of this relationship
varies significantly. Whites experience the steepest gradient, gaining the most in subjective
well-being with every additional dollar, whereas Asians show the flattest gradient. These
disparities are large and cannot be fully accounted for by traditionally invoked factors such
as demographic or socioeconomic differences, or local circumstances.
This differential response in well-being to income also does not seem to be explained
by differences in optimism between racial groups, as Whites consistently exhibit lower
optimism about their future well-being than minorities. This finding is informative for
interpreting our main results, but also interesting in its own right, as it runs counter to the
notion that minorities are less optimistic about the future due to factors such as systemic
discrimination or historical disadvantages. Our findings thus emphasize the importance of
considering not only current well-being, but also individuals’ expectations and perceptions
about the future when examining disparities in well-being across demographic groups.
In the “direct transfer” format, responses lower than 4 on the 7-point scale were classified as
opposition to the policy.
7 2
For these χ tests, respondents who indicated their political orientation as “Very liberal,”
“Liberal,” and “Slightly liberal” were classified as “liberals,” whereas those who indicated “Very
conservative,” “Conservative,” and “Slightly conservative” were classified as “conservatives”; those
who indicated “Moderate” were excluded from these χ tests.
Further research exploring the formation and consequences of well-being optimism across
demographic groups could provide valuable new insights.
It is important to acknowledge that the cross-sectional nature of our primary data lim-
its our ability to make strong causal claims. The associations we document, while robust
to an extensive set of demographic and socioeconomic controls, may still be influenced
by unobserved factors that differ systematically between racial groups. Nevertheless, we
believe the strength and consistency of the correlational evidence presented here should
shift priors about the existence of different causal effects of income on well-being across
racial groups. Given the pervasive divergence in the relationships we observe, the absence
of any differences in these causal effects seems unlikely. Ultimately, future research ex-
ploiting exogenous shocks to income will be needed to conclusively establish the magnitude
of racial differences in how income affects well-being. However, our conclusion that one
ought to be skeptical about the unconditional adoption of well-being as the sole metric
for policymakers does not hinge on the precise magnitude of these differences, but only
requires there to be any differences at all.
Our findings highlight the importance of studying heterogeneity in the relationships
between variables such as income and well-being. Although our research focuses on differ-
ences between racial groups, many other dimensions such as health, personality, and social
connections are potentially important as well (Finkelstein et al., 2013; Proto and Rusti-
chini, 2015; Richards, 2016). Our findings contribute to this literature by introducing racial
groups as a societally important variable that can also modify the relationship between
income and well-being. More generally, between-group differences in the income-well-being
gradient highlight the importance of factors such as culture, personal circumstances, and
life experiences in shaping how income affects subjective life evaluations.
In terms of policy implications, our findings provide potentially uncomfortable conclu-
sions for those who assert that strictly maximizing well-being should be the government’s
ultimate objective (e.g., Diener and Seligman, 2004; Dolan et al., 2011; Oishi and Diener,
2014; Adler and Seligman, 2016; Frijters et al., 2020). Insofar as income boosts well-being
more for Whites than for other racial groups, a narrow-minded well-being maximizer
should want to redistribute income from Blacks, Asians, and Hispanics to equal-income
Whites. However, our survey results show that, as expected, people clearly reject this type
of redistribution, even if we stipulate that it would increase aggregate well-being. Hence,
a more sophisticated well-being maximizer should perhaps conclude that the existence of
certain types of between-group redistribution may in and of themselves reduce societal
well-being. Therefore, regardless of the exact considerations, our results raise important
questions about the principles underlying group-level redistribution with well-being as
an objective, and highlight the importance of procedural considerations (i.e., the means
through which we pursue an end).
The fact that the aversion to redistribute along racial lines is harbored by liberals and
conservatives alike suggests that such policies offend a core value that is widely shared
by different parts of the population. This finding relates to a longstanding debate in
moral philosophy and moral psychology on the relative merits of consequentialism and
deontology, or ends-versus-means reasoning (see e.g. Sinnott-Armstrong, 2003; Alexan-
der and Moore, 2021; Van Leeuwen and Alger, 2019; Chen and Schonger, 2022; B´enabou
et al., 2024). The approach of maximizing well-being is squarely consequentialist, advo-
cating that policies should be evaluated solely based on their outcomes. Our results show,
however, that people sometimes oppose policies even if the consequences are desirable,
revealing the presence of commonly held non-consequentialist concerns among the general
public when it comes to redistribution.
More generally, our findings—and the general discomfort they might generate—highlight
the importance of stress-testing one’s conceptual arguments, exactly where such tensions
might arise. It is within this context of heterogeneous effects that we need to have the
debate about the role that subjective well-being should play in public policy.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the main findings of this study are from the Gallup Daily Poll. These
data are available from the Gallup Organization but restrictions apply to the availability,
which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data
are however available from the authors upon request, subject to permission from the Gallup
Organization. For our own survey on people’s attitudes toward redistribution, we have
uploaded the preregistration, questionnaire, data, and analysis code on ResearchBox [link:
we will make both the code that was used to clean and combine the data, the code that
was used to obtain our results, and instructions for obtaining the data available online
with publication.
Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Financial Support Statement
This research received no specific grant funding form any funding agency, commercial or
not-for-profit sectors.