THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Draft version October 21, 2024. This paper has been submitted for publication but has not yet
been peer-reviewed.
The Many Faces of Narcissism: Unpacking Situational Triggers and State Interactions
Sophie C. Bauditz1
Aidan G.C. Wright2
Ursula Hess1
Matthias Ziegler1
1Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Department of Psychology
2University of Michigan, Department of Psychology
Author Note
The authors confirm their contribution to the paper as follows: Sophie Bauditz:
conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, visualization, writing—original draft,
writing—review and editing; Aidan G.C. Wright: writing—review and editing; Ursula
Hess: funding acquisition, investigation, writing—review and editing; Matthias Ziegler:
funding acquisition, conceptualization, project administration, formal analysis, supervision,
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
writing—review and editing. We have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Correspondence
concerning this article should be addressed to Sophie Bauditz, Institute of Psychology,
Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Rudower Chaussee 18, 12489 Berlin, Germany. E-Mail:
sophie.bauditz@hu-berlin.de
This study draws on data from a more extensive project financed by the German
Research Foundation (ZI 1792/9-1). A codebook containing all measures and items, as well
as the data (after the publication of pending papers) and all materials necessary for the
replication of the study, can be found in the Open Science Framework (OSF) folder of the
analyses outlined in this paper were preregistered, and R-Codes can be found in the OSF:
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Abstract
This study investigated the correlations and transactions between narcissistic states
(narcissistic agency, antagonism, and vulnerability) and situation perceptions using the
DIAMONDS framework. Participants (N = 183) engaged in weekly online group discussions
over six weeks, simulating a natural acquaintance process. Results showed significant
correlations: Positive situation perceptions related to heightened narcissistic agency, while
Duty and Negativity perceptions were linked to narcissistic antagonism and vulnerability. A
Random-Intercept Cross-Lagged Panel Model revealed person-situation transactions, with
situation perceptions often preceding changes in narcissistic states. For example, perceptions
of Intellect and Positivity increased narcissistic agency, while Intellect, Duty, and Negativity
triggered higher-than-usual narcissistic antagonism. Findings highlight the role of situation
perceptions in shaping narcissistic state variability.
Keywords: person-situation interactions; situation perceptions: narcissism dynamics;
narcisstic states
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
The Many Faces of Narcissism: Unpacking Situational Triggers and State Interplay
Individual’s behaviors, motives, and goals can change from situation to situation—
this is the hallmark of the adaptive system (Carver & Scheier, 2001; DeYoung, 2015). Given
the recent advancements in data capturing and analytical techniques (Hamaker & Wichers,
2017), it comes as no surprise that there has been a notable increase in interest in examining
personality as a collection of context-driven dynamic processes (e.g., Baumert et al., 2017;
Fleeson, 2001; Mischel & Shoda, 1995). Studies on personality state variability and dynamic
person-situation relations have blossomed (e.g., Horstmann et al., 2021; Sherman et al., 2015;
Rauthmann et al., 2014). Their results showed that the situation—specifically the individual
situation perception (i.e., psychological situation; Rauthmann et al., 2015)—plays a pivotal
role in understanding the variability of personality states (e.g., Big Five, interests, or motives;
Horstmann et al., 2021b; Roemer et al., 2021; Sherman et al., 2015; Witte et al., 2024).
Interest in personality processes, alongside the traditional focus on personality structure, has
expanded into research on narcissism. Increasingly, studies examine narcissism at the state
level, complementing the more conventional focus on dispositional traits (e.g., Edershile &
Wright, 2021a). These studies have demonstrated moment-to-moment variability in
narcissistic states, with some highlighting the importance of situational context in shaping
these momentary expressions, particularly in relation to interpersonal dynamics (Edershile &
Wright, 2021b; Giacomin & Jordan, 2016b; Heyde et al., 2023; Roche et al., 2013; Wright et
al., 2017).
Building on classic ideas of interactionism (Mischel, 1977; Shoda & Mischel, 1996) ,
which emphasize the influence of situations on behavior, we aim to extend the existing
research on narcissistic states in two ways: firstly, by broadening the examination of the
person-situation relations in narcissism beyond interpersonal factors; and secondly, by
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
examining person-situation correlations, as well as elucidating directional relations through
moment-to-moment spill-over effects (i.e., transactions).
Our primary objective is to explore the within-person interplay between psychological
situations, as conceptualized by Rauthmann et al. (2014), and the momentary expression of
narcissism. While much of the existing research emphasizes interpersonal factors (e.g.,
Edershile & Wright, 2021b; Wright et al., 2023), the DIAMONDS taxonomy of
psychological situations (Rauthmann & Sherman, 2018) expands the focus to include other
situational dimensions, such as Duty and Intellect, which also shape situational contexts.
Secondly, we aim to provide initial insights into the within-person causal relationships
between narcissistic states and situation perceptions. To achieve this, data were collected
using a longitudinal, experimental design. This experimental setup allows for precise
manipulation of the context. Further, the longitudinal approach enables the investigation of
bidirectional spillover effects between situation perceptions and narcissistic states, both in the
immediate future (minutes later) and over a more extended period (one week later).
Understanding Narcissism: The Three Domains and State Manifestations
Narcissism is probably best described as a personality construct characterized by an
inflated self-image, entitlement, and a craving for attention (e.g., Krizan & Herlache, 2018;
Campbell & Foster, 2007; Morf et al., 2017; Miller et al., 2017). Emphasized in clinical
literature since long (e.g., Cain et al., 2008; Pincus et al., 2009; Pincus & Lukowitsky, 2010),
recent research in personality psychology has advanced the understanding of narcissism by
differentiating it into at least two domains: grandiosity and vulnerability (Cain et al., 2008;
Miller et al., 2011; Pincus et al., 2009; Pincus & Lukowitsky, 2010). More recently, a refined
conceptual framework has emerged, which divides the two higher-order domains—
grandiosity and vulnerability—into a lower-order trifurcated structure. Positioned
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
hierarchically beneath grandiosity and vulnerability, the three domains reflect one or both
higher-order domains.
Multiple models have proposed a triarchic narcissism structure. The Narcissism
Spectrum Model (Krizan & Herlache, 2018) differentiates narcissistic expressions through
approach and avoidance orientations, which also shape their interpersonal styles. The
Trifurcated Model of Narcissism (Miller et al., 2016; Crowe et al., 2019) defines the
narcissistic domains from a Five-Factor Model perspective (Miller et al., 2016, 2017; Weiss
et al., 2019). Though the identified models have minor discrepancies regarding the bandwidth
of domains and terminology, they largely converge conceptually (cf. Crowe et al., 2022; cf.
Wright & Edershile, 2018). In the current study, we will adopt the terminology that has been
suggested to most accurately reflect the different interpersonal styles and motivations
associated with each domain (Edershile et al., 2024; Kroencke et al., 2023): narcissistic
antagonism, narcissistic agency, and narcissistic vulnerability.
Narcissistic antagonism is characterized by entitlement, arrogance, exploitativeness,
and lack of empathy. Narcissistic agency is associated with assertiveness, leadership, self-
esteem, and behavioral preferences for activation and approach. Lastly, narcissistic
vulnerability is linked to weaker and dependent self-esteem, a desire for admiration, negative
emotionality, emotional dysregulation, and other self-conscious emotions (e.g., Crowe et al.,
2019; Krizan & Herlache, 2018; Miller, 2016).
A State Approach to Narcissism
Personality research is increasingly examining personality state expressions.
Personality states are presumed to have the same content domain as their corresponding
traits; however, they are concerned with how a person is momentarily rather than how that
person is in general (e.g., Fleeson, 2001). Empirical findings support the concept of states
and their variabilities, such as for Big Five, self-esteem, interests, or motives (Donnellan et
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
al., 2012; Fleeson, 2001; Roemer et al., 2021; Sherman et al., 2015; Witte et al., 2024). This
shift from a focus on traits to an emphasis on states has also been observed in research on
narcissism (e.g., Edershile & Wright, 2021a).
While the hierarchical narcissism structure is well established for data derived from
narcissistic trait measures, only recent studies using state data have examined the structural
composition of narcissism at the within-person level. These studies exacerbate the notion of
two higher-order domains that split into three lower-order domains (Rogoza et al., 2024;
Bauditz et al., 2024). However, the structural composition of narcissism exhibits slight
differences between trait and state data (Bauditz et al., 2024). Specifically, previous findings
suggest that the within-person structure of narcissism may vary depending on situational
context (Bauditz et al., 2024), indicating that expressions of narcissistic states are susceptible
to situational influences.
The transactive nature of narcissism is further exacerbated by studies that have
established substantial and meaningful within-person variability in the narcissistic state
domains. For instance, Edershile and Wright (2021a) indicate intraclass correlations (ICCs)
ranging between .47 and .65 for vulnerability and between .47 and .74 for grandiosity (Crowe
et al., 2018; Edershile et al., 2019; Edershile & Wright, 2021a; Heyde, Wille, et al., 2023;
Maaß et al., 2018). Reported ICCs for the three lower-order domains were in a similar range:
ICCs for narcissistic agency ranged from .60 to .84; for narcissistic antagonism, the ICCs fell
between .67 and .78; and for narcissistic vulnerability, ICCs ranged from .56 to .78 (Rogoza
et al., 2024; Bauditz et al., 2024). This variability has been observed both in naturalistic (i.e.,
daily diary or experience sampling designs) and experimental settings (e.g., Edershile et al.,
2023).
Jointly, these findings suggest less pronounced variability in narcissistic domain states
than has been found in other personality constructs. For instance, ICCs for the Big Five
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
typically yield smaller values, ranging between .20 and .40 (e.g., Horstmann et al., 2021;
Sherman et al., 2015). Yet, regardless of the absolute ICC values, all studies found substantial
within-person variance in narcissism domains. The consistent finding of narcissistic state
variability across samples and study designs prompts the need for investigations into why
narcissistic states vary and whether different situations may relate to momentary narcissistic
expressions.
Person-Situation Relations in Narcissism
Personality psychology aims to understand the individual. However, as Mischel
emphasized in 1977, humans do not exist in isolation; instead, they might be best understood
through their interactions with their environment. This view is supported by Richard et al.'s
(2003) meta-review, which demonstrated that behavioral variance is approximately equally
influenced by personality traits and situational factors, with a slight advantage of situational
influences. Numerous personality theories continue to recognize the dynamic interplay
between people and their environments (e.g., the Cognitive-Affective Processing System
model, Mischel & Shoda, 1995; Trait Activation Theory, Tett & Guterman, 2000; Whole
Trait Theory, Fleeson, 2012; Fleeson & Jayawickreme, 2015).
Most interactionist theories focus on the Big Five. However, the consistent evidence
of intra-individual variability in narcissism highlights the need for more targeted theories that
account for the transactional nature of narcissism. Although not central to many existing
frameworks, several have proposed that narcissistic manifestations emerge from complex
person-situation relations.
For instance, the dynamic self-regulatory processing model (Morf et al., 2011; Morf
& Rhodewalt, 2001) introduces conditional if…then... patterns, proposing that individuals
high in narcissism actively shape their environments to achieve personal goals. Similarly, the
extended agency model (Campbell et al., 2005; Campbell & Foster, 2007)(Campbell et al.,
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
2005; Campbell & Foster, 2007) posits that narcissistic esteem thrives in environments
conducive to narcissistic objectives. The Status Pursuit In Narcissism (SPIN) model (Grapsas
et al., 2020) further explores these dynamics, suggesting that individuals with high grandiose
narcissism –rivalry and admiration—seek out public, hierarchical settings to enhance their
status. Additionally, the SPIN model proposes that situational appraisals can lead to distinct
expressions of narcissism, depending on the domain activated. Similarly, the Narcissistic
Admiration and Rivalry Concept (NARC; Back et al., 2013) distinguishes between two
motivational dynamics of grandiose narcissism: admiration and rivalry. These dynamics are
trait-rooted but context-dependent. Specifically, they can lead to varying social outcomes,
subsequently reinforced by either ego-boosts or ego-threats. Both the SPIN and NARC
models extend beyond traditional approaches that emphasize only the agentic, exhibitionistic
aspects of narcissism by explicitly considering the antagonistic domain of narcissistic
behavior. The Narcissism Spectrum Model (Krizan & Herlache, 2018) offers an even broader
framework, distinguishing between three key expressions of narcissism: agency, antagonism,
and vulnerability. This model introduces two functional orientations—boldness and reactivity
—that account for the person-situation relations in narcissism.
Collectively, these models offer valuable insights into how narcissism manifests
through an intricate interplay of personality and situation. However, they also allow for
conflicting predictions about the directionality of these associations, potentially due to
differing conceptualizations of narcissism itself. While correlational studies offer meaningful
findings, the ultimate goal remains to uncover the underlying causes and consequences of
people‘s behaviors, emotions, and cognitions (e.g., Grosz et al., 2020).
Our study’s experimental and longitudinal design enables us to directly investigate the
specific directional relations between narcissistic manifestations and the situation. By
examining narcissism as a trifurcated structure—comprising narcissistic agency, antagonism,
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
and vulnerability—we aim to gain a refined understanding of these relations. Unlike
traditional interactionist approaches focusing on the trait level, our study aims to explore
these dynamics at the within-person level. This innovative perspective allows one to examine
the causal relations between narcissistic states and situations.
Beyond Objective Cues: The Psychological Situation
The SPIN, dynamic self-regulatory processing, agency, NARC, and Narcissism
Spectrum models (Back, 2018; Campbell & Foster, 2007; Grapsas et al., 2020; Morf &
Rhodewalt, 2001) present a summary of studies highlighting the importance of person-
situation interaction. However, those studies mainly examined situations as objective cues.
This methodological approach characterizes situations by their physical properties (e.g.,
location, persons), thus treating situations as uniform across individuals. While individuals
can actively select physical environments that may elicit specific responses (e.g., Wood &
Neal, 2007), this perspective fails to account for potentially significant variations in
individual interpretations of these environments (e.g., Mischel & Shoda, 1995; Rauthmann et
al., 2015; Sherman et al., 2015). This idea was pursued and culminated in measuring
psychologically relevant situations. Rauthmann et al. (2015) suggest that every individual
processes situational cues idiosyncratically, crafting their psychological representation of the
circumstances—the psychological situation.
Several taxonomies have been proposed to operationalize the psychological situation.
Rauthmann et al. (2020) examined the conceptual and empirical overlap between those
taxonomies, resulting in six replicable situation characteristics domains (i.e., threat, stress,
tasks, processing, fun, and mundaneness). To date, no validated instrument assesses the
“replicable six.” As a result, the current study uses the more extensive DIAMONDS
(Rauthmann et al., 2014). Based on this classification, situations can be perceived along eight
distinctive axes: Duty (e.g., “work needs to be done”), Intellect (e.g., “deep thinking is
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
required”), Adversity (e.g., “someone is being threatened”), Mating (e.g., “potential romantic
partners can be attracted”), pOsitivity (e.g., “the situation is positive, playful”), Negativity
(e.g., “the situation could be tainted by negative feelings”), Deception (e.g., “someone can be
deceived”), and Sociality (e.g., “meaningful social interaction is possible or required”).
Therefore, situations can be conceptualized by their psychological properties, considering the
individual’s perspective.
Situation perceptions can be related to momentary personality expressions (de Vries et al.,
2016; Rauthmann et al., 2014). Empirical evidence for those effects has been found in studies
by Sherman et al. (2015) or Horstmann et al. (2021b), demonstrating that differences in
situation perceptions are linked to meaningful variations in specific personality states. For
example, when individuals perceive a situation as highly focused on close interactions (i.e.,
Sociality), they tend to exhibit higher levels of extraversion. Beyond personality expressions,
this interplay has also been demonstrated for other constructs, such as interests (Roemer et
al., 2021; 2023) or motives (Witte et al., 2024). In the current study, we aim to examine those
relations for the three narcissism domains—narcissistic agency, narcissistic antagonism, and
narcissistic neuroticism.
Standardizing Situations: Enhancing Control in Personality Research
Previous studies have explored the relations between situation perceptions and
personality states, such as the Big Five, using experience sampling methods (ESM; e.g.,
Horstmann et al., 2021b; Roemer et al., 2021). ESM studies offer the advantage of sampling a
wide range of situations and allow those to vary naturally. However, the lack of
standardization can have interpretative challenges due to the inherent lack of control over
situational variables. This can also obscure the effects of specific situational factors on
psychological outcomes or vice versa, essentially complicating the determination of causal
relations. In contrast, while limited in situational variability, experimental studies can control
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
the manipulation of the environment, thereby facilitating inter-individual comparability and
interpretation.
Some previous studies have examined narcissism dynamics in experimental settings
(e.g., Edershile et al., 2023), offering valuable insights. However, these studies often
overlook how individuals interpret situations. While experimental designs can control some
aspects of situation selection and evocation, they cannot eliminate differences in personal
interpretation. Research suggests that an individual‘s perception of a situation often has a
more direct impact on their behavior than the actual physical environment (e.g., Furr &
Funder, 2018). This means that even when experiments are designed to provoke specific
reactions, how a person interprets these conditions ultimately shapes their personality
expression.
Our study aims to bridge these approaches. We collect data in standardized situations to
allow for easier comparison between individuals. However, instead of focusing on objective
cues, we aim to examine the situation perceptions. This approach allows us to consider both
the controlled environment and individual interpretations, providing a more comprehensive
understanding of the environment.
Research Questions and Hypotheses Derivation
The current study aims to examine the within-person interplay between narcissism,
conceptualized as a three-dimensional state construct, and situation perceptions. Our primary
research question is:
RQ1: How are situation perceptions in situ related to state expressions of different
narcissism domains?
Although no prior research has systematically examined the relations between narcissism
as a three-dimensional construct and situation perceptions at the state level, existing studies
on related constructs and trait-level narcissism provide a foundation for developing
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
hypotheses. We draw upon this literature while highlighting the critical distinction between
trait and state manifestations of narcissism.
Several studies can inform our hypotheses regarding narcissistic agency. In an
experimental study on situation construal and personality, Sherman et al. (2013) examined
the relation between narcissistic trait levels, as assessed by the Narcissistic Personality
Inventory (NPI), and situational characteristics, as assessed using the Riverside Situational Q-
Sort. Their findings showed that individuals with high scores on the NPI—which
predominantly assesses narcissistic agency (Krizan & Herlache, 2018)—tend to perceive
their situations as opportunities to be the center of attention, showcase intelligence, express
charm, interpret interactions sexually, and demonstrate assertiveness. Another example
comes from a study by Rentzsch et al. (2021) that examined situation perception as a
potential mediator between narcissistic traits and relationship satisfaction, focusing on
situations with romantic partners. Their findings showed that narcissistic admiration (i.e.,
narcissistic agency) was linked to perceptions of Intellect and Positivity. Despite not
explicitly examining narcissism, findings by Rauthmann (2016) suggested that Sociality
perceptions are positively associated with social recognition, a motivational goal driving
narcissistic agency (e.g., Grapsas et al., 2020). Lastly, Brown et al. (2015) highlight that the
situational goal of status—a goal promoted by narcissistic agency—is mainly linked to
situation perceptions of Sociality, Intellect, and Duty. Based on the close similarity in the
definitions of the involved constructs, we pre-registered the following hypotheses:
H1.1: Situation perceptions of Sociality are positively associated with narcissistic agency
states.
H1.2: Situation perceptions of Duty are positively associated with narcissistic agency
states.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Other studies can be used to derive hypotheses for the domain of narcissistic antagonism.
For instance, Rentzsch et al. (2021) showed that between-person narcissistic rivalry (i.e.,
antagonism) had a negative relation to perceptions of Sociality but a positive relation to
perceptions of Adversity, Duty, and Deception. Rauthmann (2016) reported correlations
between perceptions of Adversity and both social recognition and aggression, two behaviors
that align with narcissistic antagonism (e.g., attacking or devaluing others; Back, 2018;
Pincus et al., 2009). In line with Rauthmann’s (2016) findings, findings by Brown et al.
(2015) suggested that perceptions of Adversity were associated with the situational goal of
self-protection. The latter can be linked to narcissistic antagonism, which is considered to be
responsible for the self-protection of the grandiose self-image (e.g., Back, 2018). This notion
is further reinforced by evidence showing that agreeableness, the Big Five dimension most
negatively related to the three narcissism domains (Crowe et al., 2019), is negatively
associated with Adversity perceptions (Horstmann et al., 2021b). Based on these findings, we
pre-registered the third and last hypothesis:
H1.3 Situation perceptions of Adversity are positively associated with a narcissistic
antagonism state.
While we will specifically examine the hypothesized relations, all other possible between
narcissistic domain states and situation perceptions will be investigated exploratory.
Importantly, we will examine the correlations and the transactions (i.e., the mutual influence
these variables exert on each other over time; Kuper et al., 2021) of these associations. We
can address this research question because data were collected in a standardized setting on
multiple occasions. Hence, our second and last pre-registered research question is the
following:
RQ2: How do narcissistic states and situation perceptions in situ affect each other over
time?
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
We do not propose any hypotheses for this question as, to the best of our knowledge, no
prior research has examined the directional relations between narcissism and situation
perceptions. Rauthmann et al. (2016) empirically investigated whether prior situation
perceptions influence subsequent personality states or vice versa. However, their findings
merely showed minimal detectable effects in both directions. In addition, theories on
narcissism dynamics (Back, 2018; Campbell & Foster, 2007; Grapsas et al., 2020; Morf &
Rhodewalt, 2001) suggest both possibilities: situation perceptions might influence the
expression of narcissism or the opposite. Consequently, we will examine the second research
question in an exploratory fashion.
The Current Study
The current study aims to explore the dynamic within-person interplay between
situation perceptions and narcissistic state expressions. Put simply, we seek to uncover one
potential explanation for why narcissistic states are expressed or, even further, why they
fluctuate over time. Our investigation aims to address this objective from two angles. Firstly,
we will examine the correlations between situation perceptions and narcissistic states (RQ1).
In other words, we aim to investigate the simultaneous interplay between the two variables.
Secondly, we aim to investigate the causal spill-over effects, encompassing proximal and
distal consequences in both directions (RQ2). This analysis will incorporate a time
component, allowing us to assess how one variable may influence the other at a later point in
time.
Our research builds upon previous studies in several significant ways. While earlier
work has provided preliminary insights into the relations between situational perception and
narcissistic traits, our study advances the field by focusing specifically on narcissistic states,
conceptualized as a triarchic structure, and their dynamic interplay with situational factors.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
This three-dimensional framework of narcissism allows for a more refined understanding of
how various aspects of narcissism are influenced by situational perceptions and vice versa.
Furthermore, our study design facilitates exploring potential causal relationships
between situational perceptions and narcissistic states—an area that has yet to be
investigated. Although some research has systematically examined the interplay of narcissism
and interpersonal perceptions, as noted by Edershile and Wright (2021b) and Maaß et al.
(2018), these studies have primarily relied on data from naturalistic settings, such as ESM. In
contrast, our objective is to investigate narcissistic states and situational perceptions within a
controlled longitudinal setting. The standardization of our protocols enables us to assess all
participants at identical moments, thereby minimizing confounding variables related to
individual differences and systematic measurement errors (Balliet & Van Lange, 2013;
Robinson, 2007). The structured approach allows for the examination of proximal and more
distal spillover effects between narcissistic states and situation perceptions.
Methods
This study draws on data from a more extensive project financed by the German Research
Foundation (XXXX). The study used an experimental setup, where individuals gathered
weekly in groups of up to four persons to discuss predetermined topics over six consecutive
sessions. The study was held online. Next to the variables examined in this study, other
constructs were evaluated, such as other hostile personality traits (e.g., psychopathy and
Machiavellianism) and interpersonal judgments such as likeability and status.1 These
variables are not included in this paper, which focuses on the interplay between narcissism
domain states and situation perceptions.
1 A full list of measures used can be found in the OSF of the project.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Participants
A total of 385 participants provided trait data. State information was collected from
the 220 participants included in the group experiment. As pre-registered, we removed data
from participants who (i) had more than 25% missing responses, (ii) exhibited no variance
across all narcissism surveys at any measurement time point, or (iii) attended fewer than four
group sessions. We also excluded individual reports that contained more than 20% missing
values. The final sample included 183 participants (72,81% female, 26.78% male, and 1.1%
identifying as other; mean age M = 24.42 years; SD = 3.85). These participants contributed to
3,042 measurement occasions (M = 16.62, SD = 1.82).
assessment points assessment points
Recruitment was conducted through several channels: Facebook, numerous university
websites, and an email list of people interested in participating in psychological studies.
Moreover, study assistants sought possible participants on the university campus and
distributed fliers about the experiment. At the recruitment stage, some inclusion criteria were
used: participants were required to be between 18 and 35 years old. This age range was
chosen because we believed that individuals closer in age would be more likely to develop
friendships or be encouraged to do so (of relevance to the overall project). Lastly, the German
language level was required to be at least C1 so that participants could communicate
smoothly and discuss more difficult themes with their group peers. The study’s participants
were compensated financially for their involvement in the study. The German Psychological
Society Ethics Committee (DGPs; XXXXX) authorized all procedures.
Procedure
The study used an experimental longitudinal design based on Paulhus (1998). In
contrast to this previous work, all sessions were held online. Participants were randomly
assigned to a group on the condition that they did not know their group members prior to the
first meeting. For six weeks, they met weekly via Zoom. During the initial session, enrolled
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
participants were asked to complete a test battery, including trait measures of narcissism. The
meetings lasted approximately one hour and covered predetermined topics. During the initial
three encounters, participants engaged in affiliative tasks, such as asking preset questions to
enhance intimacy (e.g., “What would constitute a perfect day for you?”). Conversely, the last
three meetings involved tasks that were more likely to generate controversy, such as a group
decision game called “Lost on the Moon.” A depiction of the experimental setup can be
ranging from asking each other questions to get to know one another to cooperative activities,
political debates, and group decision-making games. Narcissistic states and situation
perception measurements were taken before, in the middle of, and after the group sessions.
All meetings were video recorded.
Manipulation Check
Next to the main research objects, we will perform a manipulation check. In other
words, we want to examine whether the average situation perception between the initial and
last three group meetings differed. We pre-registered three specific hypotheses for this
manipulation check; however, we will examine this check in an exploratory fashion for all
DIAMONDS.
Manipulation Check: Is there a difference in situation perceptions between the initial
three and final three meetings?
H1: There is a significant difference in Adversity perceptions between the first and
last three meetings, whereby during the final three meetings, there are higher average
levels of Adversity perceptions than during the first three meetings.
H2: There is a significant difference in Positivity perceptions between the first and
last three meetings, whereby during the first three meetings, there are higher average
levels of Positivity perceptions than during the final three meetings.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
H3: There is a significant difference in Negativity perceptions between the first and
last three meetings, whereby during the final three meetings, there are higher average
levels of Negativity perceptions than during the first three meetings.
Note. Each group discussion session included two fifteen-minute segments, with the entire session, including
state assessments, lasting approximately one hour.
Materials
A codebook containing all measures, items, and materials necessary for the
replication of the study can be found in the Open Science Framework (OSF) folder of the
the data is only available on request, as further studies are still pending. As soon as they are
published, the data will be available in the project’s OSF folder. The detailed classification of
narcissism sub-scales was pre-registered
Measures
Traits
Narcissistic trait. Trait assessments were taken prior to the experimental onset of the
study. For both trait and state assessments of narcissism, we employed a “measurement
stack” approach, as advocated by several researchers (Brunell & Buelow, 2018; Crowe et al.,
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
2019; Weiss et al., 2019; Miller, 2017; Schneider et al., 2023). This method combines various
assessment tools to capture the full range of narcissism. Our methodology for assigning
different narcissism (sub)scales to the three domains (narcissistic agency, narcissistic
antagonism, and narcissistic vulnerability) is based on the comprehensive mapping provided
by Crowe et al. (2019). We pre-registered this approach. Notably, we used the Five-Factor
Narcissism Inventory - short version (FFNI-SF; Sherman et al., 2015; German translation by
Wehner et al., 2021), a self-report tool with 62 items overall divided into 15 sub-scales that
measure narcissism. The questionnaire’s fifteen-facet sub-scale scores had an estimated
internal consistency ranging from ω = .62 for reactive anger and arrogance to ω = .91 for
exploitativeness. Moreover, we used the Pathological Narcissism Inventory (PNI-54; Pincus
et al., 2009; German version by Morf et al., 2017), a self-report assessment of seven facets of
pathological narcissism (Pincus et al., 2009). The internal consistencies of the seven-facet
subscale scores were estimated to range between ω = .76 for self‐sacrificing self-
enhancement and ω = .90 for contingent self-esteem. While the PNI originates from clinical
psychology, the instrument has been validated in general populations, demonstrating stable
factor structure and high reliability (Pincus et al., 2009; Wright et al., 2010). From the
Narcissism Spectrum Model perspective, the PNI provides a comprehensive assessment of
narcissistic vulnerability (Krizan & Herlache, 2018). Lastly, participants completed the
Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry Questionnaire - Short Scale (NARQ-S; Leckelt et al.,
2018), a six-item evaluation measure distinguishing between narcissism's admiration and
rivalry facets (Back et al., 2013). The estimated internal consistency was ω = .64 for rivalry
and ω = .79 for admiration.
States
Narcissistic states. Aligned with recent recommendations, we also assessed
narcissism using a “stack” approach (Brunell & Buelow, 2018; Crowe et al., 2019; Weiss et
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
al., 2019). This method combines multiple assessment instruments to cover the entire
construct. We relied on the findings by Crowe et al. (2019) to guide our selection of scales
and their assignment to the various narcissism domains. We used the German version of the
Five-Factor Narcissism Inventory - short version (FFNI-SF; Sherman et al., 2015; German
translation by Wehner et al., 2021), Pathological Narcissism Inventory (PNI-54; Pincus et al.,
2009; German version by Morf et al., 2017), Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry
Questionnaire - Short Scale (NARQ-S; Leckelt et al., 2018), Narcissistic Grandiosity Scale
(NGS; Rosenthal et al., 2007; Crowe et al., 2016), and Narcissistic Vulnerability Scale (NVS;
Crowe et al., 2018). Participants used a six-point rating scale to indicate how much they
agreed with the items. The PNI-54, FFNI-SF, and NARQ-S are trait assessments of
narcissism. These were adapted to measure narcissism at the state level. Following, prior, in
the middle of, and after each session (total of 18 assessment points), participants were asked
to complete the items in this way: “Please provide your answer that best corresponds to your
agreement or disagreement AT THE MOMENT.” Notably, previous reports on some of
these measures (Rogoza et al., 2024), as well as the evaluation of the multilevel structure
through confirmatory factor analysis in prior work on this data set (XXX, under review),
provide evidence for structural composition, reflecting the hierarchical structure of narcissism
at the state level and validates our assessment approach in the current study. The estimated
internal consistency for the FFNI-SF state measures was between ω = .41 for
weighted
narcissistic agency and ω = .80 for narcissistic vulnerability. For the PNI, the estimated
weighted
internal consistencies ranged between ω = .59 for narcissistic agency and ω = .63
weighted weighted
for narcissistic vulnerability. For the NARQ-S, the estimated internal consistency was
ω = .46 for rivalry (i.e., antagonism) and ω = .57 for admiration (i.e., agency).
weighted weighted
The estimated reliability of the NGS was ω = .90, and for the NVS, ω = .86.
weighted weighted
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
We used a planned missingness approach in narcissistic state assessments to reduce
participant burden and ensure fair effort and content accuracy (Silvia et al., 2014). Following,
we used the six NARQ-S items and nine FFNI-SF and PNI-54 items (out of a total of 62 and
54, respectively). For the PNI-54 and the FFNI-SF, each measuring occasion included two
anchor items per narcissistic domain. The third item per domain was randomly selected from
the remaining items. Anchor items were selected based on their centrality and loading (Crowe
et al., 2019), as well as their theoretical relevance to the narcissistic domain. Random items
were selected from the remaining items for the corresponding domain. Due to a technical
error, the random item was not always selected from the remaining items in the same domain.
This issue led to an unequal quantity of records per domain.
Situation perceptions. To assess situation perception, we used the Situation Eight
DIAMONDS ultra-short measure in its original German version (Rauthmann & Sherman,
2018). The DIAMONDS assess Duty, Negativity, Sociality, Positivity, Mating, Intellect,
Adversity, and Deception. Participants were presented with statements such as “Social
interactions are possible or required.” on a six-point rating scale, with the end-point
designations “not at all” (1) and “totally” (6).
Data Preparation and Analyses
The analyses outlined in this section were preregistered on the OSF
from the preregistration are made explicit. Statistical analyses were conducted in R (v.4.2.2;
R Core Team, 2022) with the packages tidyverse (v. 1.3.2; Wickham et al., 2019), lme4 (v.
1.1.32; Bates et al., 2014), lavaan (v. 0.6.15; Rosseel, 2012), and bootnet (v.1.5; Epskamp et
al., 2018). The R code and supplementary material are available in the OSF
Multilevel Models—Exploring Covariation Within Persons
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Due to the nested structure of the data, we applied a multilevel modeling approach to
estimate the relation between situation perceptions and state expressions of different
narcissism domains (Hox, 2010; Nezlek, 2008). Before fitting the multilevel models, the
Level 1 predictors (situation perception) were person-mean centered. All Level 2 variables
(trait narcissism and mean situation perception) were grand mean-centered to be introduced
as Level 2 predictors. These steps follow common guidelines for the centering of variables in
multilevel linear models (MLM; Enders & Tofighi, 2007).
Model specification and estimation. For the MLM, we adhered to a step-by-step
procedure. Initially, unconditional random intercept models were estimated for each
narcissistic state measure (Model I: Null Model). These models include narcissistic states as
the outcome, with only one nesting variable: individuals at Level 2. Intraclass correlations
(ICCs) were estimated using this model for all three narcissism domains. Null Models were
also fitted to estimate the ICCs of situation perception. Subsequent models used narcissistic
states as the dependent variables and included, next to the person, the group as a second
nesting variable. For each narcissism domain separately, we entered the corresponding
narcissism domain trait scores as grand-mean centered predictors at Level 2 to account for the
influence of narcissistic traits on narcissistic states (Models II: Narcissistic trait). Next, we
included situation characteristics (Models III: Situation Characteristics Fixed). Random
effects for the Level 1 effect of situation perceptions were added to allow for person-specific
deviations (Barr et al., 2013; Models IV: Situation Characteristics Random). We first tested
the pre-registered models and then examined every other combination of situation
perceptions (eight) and narcissism domain (three) in an exploratory fashion, resulting in 24
models per step.
Model evaluation. We use information criteria to select the best-fitting model. As
suggested by Vallejo et al. (2014), we estimated the Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC)
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
values to compare the models. A level of significance of alpha = .05 was applied for
individual parameters. However, this was a one-tailed test for pre-registered models and two-
tailed for exploratory models. We used a 90% CI for the preregistered models for the
parameters informing our hypotheses, representing a unidirectional test. For the exploratory
analyses, we use a 95% CI and the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to diminish the chance of
alpha inflation due to conducting multiple tests. We considered each narcissism domain and
corresponding relations (eight situation perceptions) as one family (i.e., tests were adjusted
for k = 8 tests).
Random-Intercept Cross-Lagged Panel Model—Examining Spill-Over Effects
A Random Intercept Cross-Lagged Panel Model (RI-CLPM) was employed to
investigate the relations between narcissistic states and situation perceptions over
time. Unlike traditional Cross-Lagged Panel Models (CLPMs), the RI-CLPM incorporates
random intercepts for stable individual differences. This approach is advantageous for our
analysis compared to latent growth models as we posit that neither narcissism nor situation
perception exhibit genuine developmental changes within the timeframe of this study. We
argue that, within the timeframe of this study, neither narcissism nor situation perception
undergoes genuine developmental changes. Instead, we posit that narcissism fluctuates
around a stable trait level in response to contextual factors rather than experiencing
systematic change over the six weeks. While a between-person component might be less
evident in the psychological situation, it seems reasonable that people have a “general”
tendency (or bias) to perceive situations in a certain way (Horstmann et al., 2021a; Ziegler et
al., 2019), particularly in the current study, where situations are functionally equivalent. By
distinguishing between stable traits and state-level fluctuations - for both narcissism and
situation perceptions - the model facilitates a clearer understanding of how deviations from
one’s typical level in one construct may lead to changes in the other. Following, the RI-
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
CLPM is particularly well-suited for analyzing constructs that are expected to have a stable
component (i.e., trait) over short time frames, aligning with our hypothesis that the primary
drivers of change in situation perception are the individual’s interactions with their context
rather than developmental changes in personality. We controlled for the nestedness of
individuals within groups by including the group as a cluster variable. The standard errors
were corrected for this nestedness. The model distinguishes between the within-person
process and stable between-person differences by incorporating random intercepts (Hamaker
et al., 2015). Hence, it considers cross-lagged panel data from a multilevel perspective.
Model specification and estimation. For the between-person factors, all factor loadings
were constrained to one. As pre-registered, we maintained fixed autoregressive (⍺; spill-over
effects within the same construct) parameters for both narcissistic states and situation
perceptions across all sessions. Moreover, we tested two constraints for the cross-lagged
parameters (β; spill-over effects across constructs): uniform constraints across all sessions, as
done for the autoregressive parameters, and alternatively, separately for the initial three and
final three sessions (that is, per manipulation condition). Likewise, the dynamic error
variances were constrained across all sessions. In contrast, the dynamic error covariances (ɛ)
were constrained either across all sessions or the first three and last three sessions,
respectively.
As preregistered, our initial plan was to omit autoregressive and cross-lagged parameters
between sessions, mainly because of the approximately one-week interval between
measurements. This decision was guided by the notion that the time gap between repeated
measurements (Hamaker et al., 2015) can affect lagged regression coefficients. Hence,
ensuring consistency in lagged parameters across successive waves becomes meaningful
primarily when the time intervals between occasions are relatively uniform. However, after
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
discussion with all co-authors, we departed from this initial plan. We opted to include these
parameters, albeit with constraints distinct from the within-session parameters (i.e., proximal
spill-over effects), but equally across all between-session parameters (i.e., distal spill-over
effects).
Importantly, for the later interpretation of the results, we emphasize that autoregressive
and cross-lagged effects were modeled on the residualized scores, not the observed scores.
Consequently, an autoregressive effect, for instance, informs about whether a within-person
deviation from the trait level of a specific construct has a prospective effect on change in the
within-person deviation from the trait level of the same construct at a subsequent time point.
Further, we erroneously pre-registered that situation perception was not assessed in the pre-
ratings. We now integrate this variable into the model, which resulted in three situation
perceptions and three narcissistic state ratings per session. Whereas situation perception was
evaluated with one item per time point, narcissistic states were assessed with multiple items.
Therefore, for narcissism domain states, averages rather than single items were used. For
each combination of situation perception and narcissism domain, models were examined with
a single coupling (one in each direction) and with all cross-lagged parameters fixed, or
specifically among the first and last three sessions2, resulting in 96 models (8 [diamonds] x 3
[narcissistic states] x 2 [single coupling] x 2 [fixes]). Additionally, for each combination of
situation perception and narcissism domain, models with full coupling were examined, either
with all cross-lagged parameters fixed or specifically among the first and last three sessions,
resulting in 48 models (8 [diamonds] x 3 [narcissistic states] x 1 [full coupling] x 2 [fixes]).
Therefore, a total of 144 models were estimated for Research Question 2.
2 These fixations could have been based on the results of the manipulation check; however, we opted to test
every option and then decide on the best-fitting model as described in the model evaluation.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Model evaluation. For the RI-CLPM, all models considered for comparison were
required to demonstrate an acceptable fit based on cut-offs suggested for standard fit indices
(CFI > .95, RMSEA < .06, SRMR <.08; Hu & Bentler, 1999). We use information criteria to
select the best-fitting model. In line with the suggestion by Lin et al. (2017), we used the
Bayesian information criterion index (BIC) for the final model selection.
perception in situ.
Note. Whereas we have only one item per measurement occasion for each situation perception, we have multiple
items per measurement occasion assessing each narcissism domain state. Additionally, we only show two out of
Results
Descriptive statistics can be found in Tables 1 and 2.
Variable M SD 1 2
1. Narcissistic agency 3.00 .72
2. Narcissistic antagonism 2.05 .69 59**
3. Narcissistic vulnerability 3.33 .60 0.33** .36**
Note. N = 183. **p < 0.001. Narcissistic agency is based on the sub-scales acclaim-seeking, authoritativeness,
exhibitionism, grandiose fantasies, indifference, and manipulativeness of the FFNI-SF, the subscales of
exploitativeness and self‐sacrificing self-enhancement of the PNI-54 and the admiration subscale of the NARQ-
S. Narcissistic antagonism was assessed using the arrogance, entitlement, exploitativeness, lack of empathy, and
thrill-seeking subscales of the FFNI-SF and the rivalry sub-scale of the NARQ-S. Narcissistic vulnerability was
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
assessed using the distrust, need for admiration, reactive anger, and shame subscales of the FFNI-SF and the
remaining sub-scales of the PNI-54.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Non-aggregated
Aggregated state measures states
Variable
M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ICC [ 95% CI]
Narcissism Domain
1. Narcissistic agency 2.02 .72 .80 [.76; .83]
.65**
1.62 .66 .77 [.72; .80]
2. Narcissistic antagonism *
.34** .45**
2.23 .65 .71 [.67; .75]
3. Narcissistic vulnerability * *
Situation Perception
1.1
3.60 .19** .14 .27*** .44 [.38; .49]
4. Duty 2
.60**
3.74 .99 .16* -.01 .22** .38 [.33; .43]
5. Intellect *
.34** .29**
1.35 .43 .45*** .22** .21** .23 [.19; .28]
6. Adversity * *
.24**
1.54 .94 .15** .08 .15* .18* .16* .53 [.47; .58]
7. Mating *
- -
3.69 .81 .02 -.20** -.01 .19** .04 .33 [.27; .37]
8. Positivity .28*** .22**
.24** .28** .21* -
2.18 .72 .20** .63*** .22** .51** .26 [.21; .31]
9. Negativity * * * .35***
.30** - .46**
1.25 .43 .17* .43*** .21** .10 .69** .13 .38 [.32; .43]
10. Deception * .37*** *
.40** -
4.45 .89 .02 -.12 .03 .19** -.12 .15* .42*** .01 .27 [.22; .31]
11. Sociality * .21**
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Note. N = 183. ICC = Intraclass correlation. The narcissistic domains are assessed the same as the trait domains, but the NGS was added to assess narcissistic agency, and the
NVS was added to assess neurotic narcissism. *p < .05; **p < .01;*** p < .001.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Manipulation Check: Difference in situation perception between the first and last three
meetings
We performed a series of paired sample t-tests to investigate differences in situation
As predicted, significantly less Adversity and more Positivity were perceived during the first
three meetings than during the last three. However, contrary to H3, no significant difference
in the average perception of Negativity emerged. Additionally, our findings indicated a
significant small to moderate decrease in perceived Mating and Sociality from the first three
sessions to the last three.
First three meetings Last three meetings
Situation Perception df t-test d
M SD M SD
Duty 3.52 1.61 3.65 1.60 182 -2.16 -.16
Intellect 3.72 1.50 3.76 1.55 182 -.97 .07
Adversity 1.25 .66 1.46 .91 182 -5.74††† -.42
Mating 1.64 1.33 1.45 1.19 182 3.92*** .29
Positivity 3.91 1.28 3.48 1.34 182 8.29††† .61
Negativity 2.18 1.30 2.18 1.27 182 -.10 -.01
Deception 1.23 .63 1.27 .68 182 -1.31 -.10
Sociality 4.54 1.60 4.35 1.61 182 3.85*** .28
Note. N = 183. ***p < .001, two-tailed. †††p < .001, one-tailed.
holm-adj. holm-adj.
RQ 1: Relation of Narcissism Domains and Situation Perceptions
The comparison among our sequentially developed multilevel linear models (Models
I-IV) revealed notably better model fits across most model extensions when juxtaposed with
their more parsimonious models. Models with random slopes for the relation between
situation perceptions and narcissistic states fitted best with two exceptions. The models
investigating the relations between Sociality and both narcissistic agency and narcissistic
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
shows the results based on the model incorporating random slopes (Model IV) that
demonstrated the best fit in most cases.
The data supported two out of three hypothesized relations, H1.1 and H1.3:
Deviations from the individual’s mean perceived Sociality (i.e., within-person centered
perceived Sociality) had a positive fixed L1 relation to narcissistic agency states. Deviations
from the individual’s mean perceived Adversity (i.e., within-person-centered perceived
Adversity) had a positive fixed L1 relation to narcissistic antagonism states. In essence, the
fixed L1 effects suggest that these within-person-centered situational perceptions were,
across all individuals, positively associated with the mentioned narcissism domain states. For
instance, when a person perceived more Adversity in a situation than they usually do, on
average, they experienced higher levels of narcissistic antagonism in that situation.
However, the data did not support H1.2: deviations from mean perceived Duty (i.e.,
within-person-centered perceived duty) were not significantly related to narcissistic agency
exploratory examinations of the relations between situation perceptions and the three
narcissism domain states uncovered that 15 out of the 21 remaining L1 relations were
number of significant exploratory relations and the overlap between aggregated DIAMONDS
states, we decided on a further exploratory analysis by incorporating all situation perceptions
as predictors in a single MLM analysis for each narcissism domain. The objective was to
examine which relations remained significant when accounting for all other situation
When controlling for all other situation perceptions, deviations from mean perceived
Positivity perceptions had a positive fixed L1 relation with narcissistic agency states. For
narcissistic antagonism, deviations from mean perceived Negativity and Duty had a positive
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
fixed L1 relation. Further, deviations from mean perceived Duty, Negativity, and Deception
all had a positive fixed L1 relation with narcissistic vulnerability states. Lastly, deviations
from mean perceived Mating had a positive fixed L1 relation with narcissistic agency and
narcissistic vulnerability states.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Narcissistic agency Narcissistic antagonism Narcissistic vulnerability
Holm- Holm- Holm-
b adjusted CI t b adjusted CI t b adjusted CI t
[-0.009; [0.015; [0.035;
< .001/ 0.01
D 0.016] 0.42/ 0.93 0.04***/ 0.03*** 0.058] 4.67/ 3.37 0.06***/ 0.03*** 0.084] 6.63/ 3.39
[-0.005; [-0.013; [-0.002;
0.02/ < .001 1.88/ 0.15 < .001/ 0.01 0.26/ -1.38 0.02/ < .001 1.76/ 0.17
I 0.035] 0.016] 0.037]
[-0.011; [0.028; [0.047;
0.02/ 0.03 1.68/ 1.87 0.06†††/ 0.02 3.88/ 1.81 0.10***/ 0.01 5.24/ 0.54
A 0.054] 0.085] 0.147]
[0.009; [ 0.008; [0.044;
0.04**/ 0.02* 3.50/ 2.31 0.04*/ 0.02 3.14/ 1.94 0.08***/ 0.04*** 5.85/ 4.70
M 0.067] 0.067] 0.109]
[0.028; [-0.053; - [-0.094; -
0.05***/ 0.06*** 5.79/ 6.56 -0.03***/ 0.01 -4.26/ -0.76 -0.07***/ 0.01 -5.87/ -1.14
O 0.079] 0.012] 0.036]
[-0.014; [0.025; [0.107;
0.01/ 0.02 0.76/ 1.74 0.05***/ 0.03** 5.47/ 2.75 0.13***/ 0.10*** 14.24/ 10.74
N 0.028] 0.070] 0.154]
[-0.019; [0.014; [ 0.083;
0.02/ 0.01 1.30/ 0.38 0.07*/ 0.04 3.00/ 1.62 0.14***/ 0.06** 6.16/ 2.80
De 0.064] 0.126] 0.188]
[0.012; [-0.024; - -2.58a/ - [-0.040; -
0.02†††a/ 0.01 4.12a/ 1.03 -0.01*a/ -0.01 -0.02*/ 0.01 2.68/ -1.57
S 0.028] 0.002] 1.38 0.004]
Note. Model selection was based on the lowest AIC value. Coefficients refer to Model IV, except for models with subscript a, where Model III is reported as the AIC
indicated better fit. The preregistered 95% confidence intervals were Bonferroni-Holm adjusted to control the family-wise error rate. We applied a 90% confidence interval as
pre-registered for the three confirmatory relations. b = estimate (unstandardized) effect; t = t-value. *p < .05, two-tailed. **p < .01, two-tailed. ***p < .001,
holm-adj. holm-adj. holm-adj.
two-tailed. †††p < .001, one-tailed. Estimates and t-values for the total model, controlling for all situation perceptions, can be found behind the slash.
holm-adj.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
RQ 2: Directionality of the Relation between Narcissism Domains and Situation
Perceptions
We specified Random Intercept Cross-Lagged Panel models (RI-CLPM) to address
the second research question. Model selection was based on the BIC (Lin et al., 2017).
Models with uniform constraints across all sessions outperformed models with constraints
specific to each manipulation condition. Still, model selection differed among the two
directionalities of single couplings: narcissism domain to situation perception versus situation
perception to narcissism domain. The model fits for the best fitting models are presented in
6 and 7 show the unstandardized autoregressive and cross-lagged parameters from the models
with the best fit for each narcissism domain and situation perception combination.4
As we did not specify hypotheses for the second research question, all relations were
examined exploratory. For the autoregressive parameters (i.e., spill-over effects within the
same construct), our results indicated significant positive autoregressive parameters for all
three narcissism domain states immediately (i.e., within sessions), as well as later (i.e.,
between sessions). Specifically, experiencing a deviation from a narcissism domain trait in a
situation carries over to the subsequent measurement across 15 minutes. Notably, even a
week later, when people entered a comparable situation (i.e., online, knowing that one would
meet the same people), their experienced deviation from their general level was albeit
weaker, yet significantly predicted by their deviation experienced a week before.
Further, our results show significant positive proximal autoregressive parameters for
the situation perceptions, except for perceived Sociality in the model, including narcissistic
3 Inspecting modification indices to identify potential model improvements, most misfits stemmed from inherent
specifications within the model, such as constraining residuals of observed variables to zero (Hamaker et al.,
2015).
4 We present the unstandardized autoregressive and cross-lagged parameters to highlight where parameters are
the same or different. The standardized parameters exhibited disparities. The standardized parameters can be
found in Tables S2 and S3 in the supplement.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
agency. However, for the distal autoregressive parameters, our results only indicate a positive
significant effect for perceived adversity and two negative significant effects for perceived
Intellect and Sociality. Specifically, perceiving more Adversity than usual after a group
session results in more perceived Adversity than usual at the beginning of the next group
session, approximately one week later. Conversely, when individuals perceive less Intellect
or Sociality than usual at the end of a group session, they subsequently perceive less than
usual Intellect and Sociality at the start of the following group session.
We examined the cross-lagged parameters to examine the focal question, which is the
directionality of the relation between narcissistic states and situation perceptions. Overall,
only narcissistic agency seems to affect situation perceptions, both immediately and later.
Proximal spill-over effects indicate that the experience of higher-than-usual narcissistic
agency states led to a proximal increased deviation from the usual perceptions of Deception,
Sociality, and Mating. Regarding distal spill-over effects, levels of narcissistic agency that
were greater than usual seemed to yield lower-than-usual perceptions of Sociality one week
later.
By contrast, significant directionality from situation perception to narcissism domain
states was found for all three narcissism domains. Individual higher-than-usual perceptions of
Intellect led to a proximal subsequent increase in narcissistic agency but a distal subsequent
decrease in this domain. The results indicated the same proximal spill-over for narcissistic
antagonism. Moreover, higher-than-usual perceptions of Sociality led to a proximal rise in
narcissistic agency. By contrast, higher-than-usual perceptions of Negativity led to a
proximal subsequent increase in both narcissistic antagonism and narcissistic vulnerability.
Lastly, higher-than-usual perceptions of Duty led to a proximal subsequent increase in
narcissistic antagonism.
Parameter Fixes across all Sessions.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Model fit
Models
χ2 df CFI RMSEA SRMR
Narcissistic agency
1255.11** 646 .90 .08 .10
Intellect
Adversity 1271.15** 646 .87 .09 .18
Mating 1664.45** 646 .84 .11 .10
Positivity 1142.14** 646 .92 .07 .10
Negativity 1142.35** 646 .91 .07 .08
Deception 1307.64** 646 .86 .09 .11
Sociality 1559.88** 646 .84 .10 .12
Duty 1330.02** 646 .89 .09 .10
Narcissistic antagonism
Intellect 1258.64** 646 .88 .08 .09
Adversity 1312.62** 646 .84 .09 .18
Mating 641.88** 646 .82 .12 .09
Positivity 1168.47** 646 .90 .08 .09
Negativity 1097.30** 646 .90 .07 .08
Deception 1274.30** 646 .85 .09 .11
Sociality 1532.69** 646 .82 .10 .12
1374.00** 646 .88 .09 .10
Duty
Narcissistic vulnerability
Intellect 1245.68** 646 .89 .08 .09
Adversity 1305.62** 646 .84 .09 .19
Mating 1636.76** 646 .83 .11 .09
Positivity 1156.61** 646 .90 .07 .08
Negativity 1040.44** 646 .92 .07 .08
Deception 1276.84** 646 .85 .09 .12
1597.36** 646 .81 .10 .12
Sociality
Duty 1249.33** 646 .89 .08 .08
Note. ** p < .001
Situation Perception and Narcissism Domains
Narcissistic Narcissistic
Narcissistic agency
antagonism vulnerability
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Proximal Distal Proximal Distal Proximal Distal
Autoregressives
Duty .41***c -.03c .41***b -.03b .41***b -.03b
Intellect .22***b -.11**b .23***b -.10**b .23***b -.11**b
Adversity .31***b .11*b .31***b .11*b .32***c .11*c
Mating .36***c .21c .36***c .21c .36***b .21b
Positivity .28***b .02b .29***c .02c .29***b .02b
Negativity .23***b .06b .23***b .04b .19***b .01b
Deception .27***c .22c .27***c .22c .26***b 0.21b
Sociality .04a .27***a .04*c -.26***c .05*b -.27***b
Cross-effects
Situation Perception →
Narcissistic states
Duty - - .22** .10 .03 .18
Intellect .22** -.05 .21** -.03 .03 .15
Adversity .11 .12 .08 .09 - -
Mating - - - - .06 .05
Positivity .19** .10 - - .05 .06
Negativity .12 .21 .16* .21 .29*** .19
Deception - - - - .02 .12
Sociality .16 .57 - - .01 .24
Narcissistic states →
Situation Perception
Duty -.01 .02 - - - -
Intellect - - - - - -
Adversity - - - - < .001 -.02
Mating .02* -.01 < .001 -.01 - -
Positivity - - .01 -.01 - -
Negativity - - - - - -
Deception .03* .02 .02 -.03 - -
Sociality .02* -.04** .01 -.01 - -
Note. Unstandardized parameter estimates; Proximal = within-session; Distal = between-session * at p = .05; **
p = .01; *** p <.001. The model selection was based on the BIC. a = full coupling; b = single coupling from
situation perception to narcissistic states; c = single coupling from narcissistic states to situation perception.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
D I A M O N De S
Pr Di Pr Di Pr Di Pr Di Pr Di Pr Di Pr Di Pr Di
Autoregressives
Narcissistic agency .44*** .13** .44*** .13** .44*** .13** .44*** .13** .44*** .14** .44*** .13** .44** .13** .44*** .16**
Narcissistic
.32*** .14* .32*** .14* .32*** .14* .32*** .15* .32*** .14* .32*** .14* .32*** .15* .32*** .15*
antagonism
Narcissistic
.38*** .13** .38*** .13** .38*** .13** .38*** .13** .38*** .13** .37*** .13** .37*** .13** .37*** .13**
vulnerability
Note. Unstandardized parameter estimates; Pr = proximal (within-session); Di = distal (between-session); D = Duty; I = Intellect; A = Adversity; M = Mating; O = pOsitivity;
N = Negativity; D = Deception; S = Sociality; * p = .05; ** p = .01; *** p <.001.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Discussion
The current study explored the within-person interplay of narcissistic states and situation
perceptions. In particular, we examined whether certain situation perceptions, as assessed by
the DIAMONDS, were related to narcissistic agency, antagonism, or vulnerability states. Our
data, derived from standardized group settings, supported our pre-registered hypotheses with
few exceptions. We identified additional meaningful within-person associations. Next to the
correlations, we examined the directionality of the person-situation relations. Our findings
suggest that although narcissistic states mostly have negligible effects on situation
perceptions, more prominent effects can be identified in the reverse direction. Specifically,
perceived Intellect, Positivity, Negativity, and Duty all showed proximal spillover effects on
the momentary expression of at least one of the three narcissism domains.
Exploring the Interplay: Person-Situation Correlations
Our first aim was to investigate correlations between narcissistic states and situation
perceptions. Our findings showed (i.e., with no control for potential overlaps in situation
perceptions) that most situation perceptions were associated with at least one of the
narcissism domains, particularly with narcissistic antagonism and narcissistic vulnerability.
Controlling for the remaining situation perceptions, many of these associations disappeared,
while others persisted. The persistence of these associations can be considered systematic
rather than random, as relations were established in data collected in standardized situations.
This perseverance indicates their distinctiveness and theoretical importance. In addition, the
models with random slopes provided the best fit, showing that person-situation relations
differ among individuals. This echoes Mischel’s (1977) concept of interactionism and
reinforces the relevance of individual perceptions. This study provides initial empirical
evidence for the relationship between narcissistic states and situation perceptions.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Our data supported two of the three hypothesized relations. Perceived Sociality was
positively related to narcissistic agency states (H1.1). Additionally, perceived Adversity had a
positive relation to narcissistic antagonism states (H1.3). While we hypothesized a positive
relation between perceived Duty and narcissistic agency (H1.2), our data did not support this
link. Conversely, our findings demonstrated positive relations between perceived Duty and
the other two narcissistic state domains. Specifically, individuals’ above-average perceptions
of Duty related to higher averages in narcissistic antagonism and narcissistic vulnerability
states. Next to the relations observed for Duty perceptions, our exploratory analyses, which
controlled for all situation perceptions, revealed some additional links between narcissism
and situation perceptions. First, individuals’ above-average perceptions of Positivity or
Mating related to higher average narcissistic agency. In contrast, individuals’ above-average
perceptions of Negativity related to higher averages in narcissistic antagonism and
narcissistic vulnerability. Lastly, individuals’ above-average perceptions of Deception and
Mating were linked to higher averages in narcissistic vulnerability. We propose several
potential explanations for these exploratory findings. Some of these explanations are
unidirectional and should be interpreted with caution, as no causal effects can be inferred
from the results of the multilevel models.
A potential post-hoc explanation for the relations between perceived Duty and
narcissistic antagonism and narcissistic vulnerability may be the imposition of the “work [that
had] to be done.” In particular, the SPIN model (Grapsas et al., 2020) emphasizes the
importance of self-selected situational contexts for individuals with high narcissism scores,
enabling them to pursue their goals (i.e., grandiose self-image). Consequently, the mere
imposition of tasks (e.g., playing the “Lost on the Moon” game) may have been sufficient to
provoke protective (i.e., narcissistic antagonism) or avoidance (i.e., narcissistic vulnerability)
reactions, at least among those who prioritize narcissistic goals. Alternatively, or in addition,
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
perceiving Duty potentially related to individuals fearing to lose their current status. Consider
an individual who perceives themselves as having high group status. They might view tasks
assigned to them not as opportunities to showcase their abilities, as we initially hypothesized
(H1.2), but rather as risks where failure could tarnish their status. The latter may activate both
narcissistic antagonism to defend their status or narcissistic vulnerability to avoid the
situation. Aligning with our findings, Horstmann and Ziegler (2019) already noted that “Duty
is an exceptional case since it is related positively to PA [positive affect] (r = .22) and NA
[negative affect] (r = .19) at the same time” (p. 136).
Moreover, the positive association between perceptions of Positivity and narcissistic
agency aligns with prior research findings on trait narcissism (Rentzsch et al., 2021).
Narcissistic agency accounts for the drive to self-promote, enhance, and preserve a grandiose
self-image (e.g., Grapsas et al., 2020; Back et al., 2013; Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001; Raskin &
Novacek, 1991). The link between the perceptions of Positivity and narcissistic agency might
imply that the situation provided individuals with the opportunity to pursue their narcissistic
goals. Essentially, Positivity perceptions may indicate a cooperative social environment
conducive to achieving narcissistic goals (Campbell & Foster, 2011). At the same time, it is
reasonable to posit that individuals in a “grandiose” mood, characterized by high narcissistic
agency states, were more likely to perceive Positivity, potentially in both the situation and
them in the situation.
In contrast, our findings showed a positive relation between Negativity perceptions and
both narcissistic antagonism and narcissistic vulnerability. Situation perceptions of Negativity
may indicate that the situation has been construed as “uncooperative” to the narcissistic goals.
If narcissistic goals are important to individuals, this perception may intensify their
imperative to protect their grandiose self-image (i.e., higher levels of narcissistic antagonism;
Back, 2018). Alternatively, they may have wanted to avoid the situation at hand, as indicated
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
by narcissistic vulnerability. At the same time, inherent to the domain’s definition (negative
emotionality, self-conscious emotions; Crowe et al., 2019; Krizan & Herlache, 2018; Miller,
2016), higher average levels of narcissistic vulnerability may lead to perceptions of
Negativity.
Our findings also revealed that individuals with above-average perceptions of
Deception tended to exhibit higher levels of narcissistic vulnerability. We speculate that
perceiving deception—interpreted as noticing deceptive behaviors in other group members—
may contribute to feelings of emotional instability associated with narcissistic vulnerability.
At the same time, individuals with heightened narcissistic vulnerability may be more likely to
engage in deceptive practices, such as self-serving lies(O’Reilly & Doerr, 2020; Palena et al.,
2021), which in turn could lead to their elevated perceptions of deception.
To our surprise and despite our conscious efforts to reduce this effect by exclusively
forming same-sex groups, individuals’ above-average perceptions of Mating were positively
related to both, on average, higher levels of narcissistic agency and narcissistic vulnerability.
It is unclear why this effect emerges, but we do not have adequate data to explore this more.
Overall, aligning with theories acknowledging the interplay between narcissism and
situations (e.g., Back et al., 2018; Campbell & Foster, 2007; Grapsas et al., 2020; Morf &
Rhodewalt, 2001), our results substantiate the existence of meaningful and explicable
correlations between narcissistic states and psychological situations. However, as the careful
prior wording indicates, the directionality of the relations between narcissism domain states
and situation perceptions cannot be inferred from these analyses. Still, the current design
allowed us to investigate this question, which will be discussed in the following section.
Person-Situation Transactions: Disentangling the Directionality
Next to examining momentary correlations, a second principal aim of this research
was to investigate the directionality of the relationship between narcissistic states and
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
situation perceptions. Specifically, we employed Random Intercept Cross-Lagged Panel
Models to analyze the relations between narcissistic states and situation perceptions while
controlling for their respective trait levels. This methodological approach allows us to isolate
within-person relationships and effectively partition variance between trait and state-level
components, enhancing our understanding of how these constructs interact over time. We
examined proximal (minutes apart) and distal (one week apart) spill-over effects of
narcissism domain states on situation perception and vice versa.
Narcissistic State Influences on Situation Perceptions
In the direction of narcissism domain states to situation perceptions, our findings
indicate that only narcissistic agency exhibits proximal and distal spill-over effects in the
current study’s environment. Specifically, when individuals had a higher narcissistic agency
state than usual, they experienced a proximal (i.e., within sessions) subsequent increase in
perceived Sociality, Deception, and Mating and a distal (i.e., between sessions) subsequent
decrease in perceived Sociality.
A possible interpretation of the Sociality effect could be that people with momentarily
heightened narcissistic agency possessed a greater sensitivity to social cues, as those
situations were needed for narcissistic self-presentation. Specifically, theory posits that
manipulative behaviors and strategic self-presentations, driven by grandiosity (i.e.,
narcissistic agency), inherently depend on social interactions (Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001). As
Morf and Rhodewalt (2001) put it: “For the narcissist [individuals with high narcissism
scores], social interactions serve as platforms for the enactment of social manipulations and
self-presentations crafted to elicit positive feedback or mitigate negative feedback about the
self.” (p. 181). This reasoning can explain the positive proximal spill-over effect from
narcissistic agency to Sociality perceptions.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
The heightened sensitivity to situational cues might also explain the negative distal
spill-over effect between higher-than-usual levels of within-person narcissistic agency and
perceptions of Sociality. Specifically, since the initial assessments in each group session
occurred in isolation—prior to any group interaction—those participants were likely more
attuned to the withdrawn situational contexts during these initial assessments than the
subsequent ones.
The spill-over effect from momentarily heightened narcissistic agency to perceived
Deception aligns with prior research that associates grandiosity with the manipulation of
others for personal gain (Campbell et al., 2005) or the use of self-serving behaviors, such as
lying (O’Reilly & Doerr, 2020). We propose that when an individual experienced an elevated
state of narcissistic agency, they adopted a carefree mindset, believing all goals were
attainable, which predisposed them to engage in subsequent deceptive behaviors. Hence,
endorsing the item “someone can be deceived” might have indicated that they perceived an
opportunity to deceive rather than a risk of being deceived by others.
Lastly, in line with the established correlations, the spill-over effect from narcissistic
agency to perceived Mating is surprising, and we cannot provide an adequate explanation for
this effect.
Situational Influences on Narcissistic State Expressions
Although our results indicate significant spill-over effects in both directions, the more
prominent findings were identified from situation perception to narcissistic states. These
spill-over effects indicate some overlap with the presented correlations, yet some distinct
effects were also identified. Moreover, our findings only indicate proximal spillover effects.
Specifically, we found that higher-than-usual perceptions of Positivity and Intellect led to a
proximal subsequent increase in narcissistic agency. Moreover, our findings indicated that
higher-than-usual ratings in perceived Duty, Intellect, and Negativity resulted in proximal
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
heightened levels of narcissistic antagonism. Lastly, higher-than-usual perceptions of
Negativity led to a proximal subsequent increase in narcissistic vulnerability. The findings
Our findings indicate that higher-than-usual perceptions of Positivity led to a
proximal subsequent increase in narcissistic agency. Similar to the proposed reasoning for
their correlations, we believe situations are perceived as positive when interpreted as
cooperative social environments to narcissistic goals (Campbell & Foster, 2011). In turn, this
perception instilled confidence in participants, prompting them to enter the proximal
subsequent interaction with heightened levels of narcissistic agency, ready to promote the
grandiose self. In contrast, our results indicate that higher-than-usual perceptions of
Negativity led to proximal heightened levels of both narcissistic antagonism and narcissistic
vulnerability states. As detailed in the preceding section, we posit that situations are
perceived as negative when interpreted as an uncooperative social environment to narcissistic
goals. Consequently, the subsequent heightened levels of narcissistic antagonism and
narcissistic vulnerability may be explained by the need to either protect the grandiose self
(narcissistic antagonism) or avoid situational engagement (narcissistic vulnerability).
Moreover, our findings show a proximal spill-over effect from perceived Duty to
narcissistic antagonism. In line with our reasoning for their correlation, this effect may be
attributed to the restricted self-selection of conversation topics and tasks at hand. As
elaborated on above, this circumstance could have led participants to perceive Duty as a
potential threat to their status or grandiose self-image.
Lastly, our results indicate that higher-than-usual perceptions of Intellect led to
subsequent increases in narcissistic agency and narcissistic antagonism states. The former
spill-over effect is consistent with previous findings on narcissistic agency. For instance,
Sherman et al. (2013) showed that higher grandiosity trait scores are linked to perceptions of
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
situations as opportunities to showcase intellectual abilities. Similarly, the narcissistic
admiration trait (i.e., narcissistic agency) has been connected to perceptions of Intellect
(Rentzsch et al., 2021). Our findings go beyond these earlier studies by clarifying the
directionality of this relation at the within-person level. We interpret these findings as
follows: Higher-than-usual perceptions of Intellect can be interpreted as providing an
opportunity for self-promotion. Specifically, Intellect situations presented a possibility to
showcase higher levels of deep thinking, which led to a subsequent increase in narcissistic
agency. At the same time, these situations may have posed challenges when other group
members appeared more competent, or the topic was outside one’s expertise. The latter may
have resulted in heightened subsequent levels of antagonism, activated to protect an
individual’s status. To conclude, our findings indicate meaningful within-person proximal
spill-over effects from situation perceptions to all three narcissism domains.
Narcissism Structure and Its Processes: Understanding Activation Dynamics
Our results show that various situation perceptions could trigger both narcissistic
agency and narcissistic vulnerability. Some of those same perceptions would also activate
narcissistic antagonism. Consequently, when a psychological situation (i.e., situation
perceptions) triggers either narcissistic agency or narcissistic vulnerability, narcissistic
antagonism is likely activated. However, narcissistic agency and narcissistic vulnerability
were never activated simultaneously. The situational activation of narcissistic state domains
substantiates the trifurcated narcissism structure at the trait level, highlighting narcissistic
antagonism as the core of narcissism positioned between narcissistic agency and narcissistic
vulnerability. This finding emphasizes that structural models must be linked with process-
oriented approaches to personality (Baumert et al., 2017). As Baumert et al. (2017) have
argued, this integration is necessary to understand the causes of covariation at the trait level.
Our findings substantiate that “factor structures inform us about common causes of behavior”
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
(Baumert et al., 2017, p. 505). In the context of our investigation, we can conclude that the
between-person structure of narcissism domains can be discerned based on the within-person
concurrent or separate activation of these domains by the psychological situation.
Narcissism Domains at the Within-Person Level Including Potential Mechanisms.
Residual Consistency in Narcissism and Situation Perceptions
Narcissism
In addition to the cross-effects found for situation perceptions and narcissism domain
states, our results unveiled residual consistency in narcissism domains. Residual consistency
indicates persistent inter-individual variation in how people respond to situations beyond
what their traits predict (Horstmann et al., 2021a; Ziegler et al., 2019). This is evident in the
autoregressive paths, which show a persistent deviation from people’s trait level within (i.e.,
proximal spill-overs) and across (i.e., distal spill-overs) group sessions. Following, our data
suggests a certain degree of stability, or persistence, in the experience of narcissism over time
that cannot be accounted for by the respective narcissistic trait. Thus, factors beyond
individuals’ narcissistic traits must be considered to explain this consistency. While various
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
person-related factors such as affect or other personality traits could be relevant, one
possibility would be that in our study, participants found themselves in very similar re-
occurring situational contexts (i.e., functionally equivalent situations; Horstmann et al.,
2021a). In particular, the meeting setting via Zoom and the group’s composition remained
unchanged throughout the six weeks of meetings, contributing to the functional equivalence
of situations. Following, deviations from one’s narcissistic trait level may have arisen due to
the configurations of the specific situational contexts.
Situation Perceptions
The spill-over effects for situation perceptions are slightly different. Our findings
indicate residual consistency for proximal spill-overs for all eight situation perceptions.5 Yet,
only three distal spill-over effects for situation perceptions could be identified. Notably,
higher-than-usual perceptions of Adversity after a group session resulted in higher ratings of
perceived Adversity during the next group session. Contrasting results emerged regarding the
perception of Sociality and Intellect. That is, higher-than-usual perceptions of Sociality and
Intellect at the end of a group session led to a subsequent decrease in the respective situation
perceptions at the beginning of the next group session.
We argue that the proximal spill-overs for all situation perceptions are plausible,
given that they occurred within the same sessions, which exhibited limited situational
variation. However, further elaboration may be required to understand the distal spill-over
effects fully. Firstly, despite a weeklong break, the positive distal spill-over for Adversity
may seem surprising. However, it is conceivable that the Adversity perceptions were
reactivated upon entering the familiar (functionally equivalent) situational context. Moreover,
the decrease in Sociality perceptions across the sessions may be attributed to participants self-
reporting their initial situation perceptions in isolation before entering the group setting.
5 Except for perceived sociality in the model with narcissistic agency.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Similarly, the decrease in perceived Intellect may be attributed to participants transitioning
from a group session where they needed to accomplish designated tasks (i.e., tasks provided
as part of the experiment) to re-entering a situation before a new assignment was presented.
Limitations and Future Directions
Our pre-registered study has several strengths, notably the standardized social setting
and the longitudinal design, which allowed for examining causal relations. However, it is
essential to acknowledge certain limitations.
The first limitation lies in the exploratory nature of many analyses, which need to be
replicated to ensure the stability of the findings. Future studies should replicate our findings
to verify their robustness and generalizability across different populations and contexts.
While the standardized setting offers distinct advantages, one limitation is the
relatively monomorphic nature of the situational context, which may restrict the
generalizability of our findings to other environments. Specifically, the group settings tend to
create a stable, predominantly social environment. To address this, we recommend that future
research explore various situations to obtain a more nuanced understanding of the
relationship between narcissistic states and situational perceptions across diverse contexts.
In addition, our exclusion criteria removed data from participants who exhibited no
variance across all narcissism surveys. This approach, while necessary for statistical analysis,
introduces a potential limitation. The lack of variance could stem from two distinct
possibilities: either participant provided inaccurate responses due to careless answering or
fatigue or genuinely experienced no fluctuations in narcissistic states across the eighteen time
points assessed. We cannot definitively determine which scenario applies to each excluded
case without additional information. This uncertainty may have implications for the
representativeness of our final sample and the generalizability of our findings, mainly if
stable narcissistic state expressions are a meaningful phenomenon in some individuals.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
Moreover, using multiple measures to assess narcissism at the state level necessitated
converting trait measures into state measures, except for the NGS (Rosenthal et al., 2007;
Crowe et al., 2016) and NVS (Crowe et al., 2018). While the FFNI-SSF (Packer West et al.,
2021) and SB-PNI (Pincus et al., 2009; Schoenleber et al., 2015) have been validated for
state-level assessment (Rogoza et al., 2024), we must note that we utilized slightly different
versions of these instruments. Following, we recommend that future research develop a
dedicated state scale to evaluate the three domains of narcissism.
Conclusions
The main objective of this study was to investigate the relationship between the
psychological situation and narcissistic states. In other words, we examined the role of
situation perception as a potential explanatory factor for previously established variability in
narcissistic states. To this aim, we first investigated correlations between situation
perceptions, as conceptualized by the DIAMONDS, and three narcissistic manifestations (i.e.,
narcissistic agency, narcissistic antagonism, and narcissistic vulnerability). We found
plausible and theoretically meaningful connections, such as the relation between perceptions
of Positivity and narcissistic agency, as well as the associations between perceptions of Duty
and Negativity with both narcissistic antagonism and narcissistic vulnerability. Secondly, we
also explored causal relations between narcissistic states and situation perceptions, focusing
on both proximal and distal spill-over effects. Albeit spill-over effects were observed in both
directions, the more prominent findings were found for the influence of situation perceptions
on narcissism domain states. Interestingly, narcissistic antagonism was activated after
situation perceptions that also triggered either of the other two domains, emphasizing the
central role of narcissistic antagonism in the trait conceptualization of narcissism. This
finding highlights that structural connections can provide insights into behaviors triggered by
common causes (e.g., Baumert et al., 2017). Moreover, whereas specific correlations were
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM
replicated in the spill-over effects, others were not. In other words, the observed correlations
between situation perceptions and narcissistic states did not consistently translate into person-
situation transactions. Despite being a staple in every undergraduate psychology course, this
finding serves as a reminder that correlation does not need to imply causation.
In conclusion, an interesting pattern emerges: Understanding and anticipating
narcissistic behavior depends, at least in part, on the psychological situation. In social group
interaction, situation perceptions directly influenced subsequent activations of different
higher-than-usual within-person narcissism domains. These findings highlight the importance
of adopting a dynamic perspective on narcissism to grasp its heterogeneous and complex
nature fully. When navigating interactions with individuals who have high narcissism levels,
the dynamic interplay with situational factors needs to be considered. Consequently,
understanding the environment becomes crucial in unfolding the complexities of narcissistic
momentary expressions.
THE MANY FACES OF NARCISSISM