Conversation skills training for people with autism through virtual reality: using
responsible research and innovation approach
Authors
Politis, Y., Sung, C., Goodman, L. & Leahy, M.
Abstract:
It would be hard to argue that participatory design approaches to technological development
of products and services for people with disabilities have been under-utilized, if not neglected
(Frauenberger, 2015; Benton and Johnson, 2015). This can be attributed to the fact that in the
past, decisions related to the design and development were generally influenced by designers
rather than the people with disabilities who were the end-users. However, user involvement
in the design/creation of products and services, has been evolving over time and the role of
the users has changed: from influencers of just the final outcome to influencers of the
development and design process; from being tasked with the standardization of products/
outcomes to being actively involved in their customization to meet individuals’ needs and
preferences; from, more recently, mere participants to having a relationship with the
designers/developers. This more bottom-up approach increases the inclusion of the main
stakeholders (people with disabilities) in the decision-making process and makes their role
more visible and prominent. They are in direct dialogue with the “experts” (researchers,
designers, developers, innovators etc.), which empowers a more ethical and sustainable
innovation process that leads to more desirable outcomes. Those are the main principles of
Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI), which seeks to involve society in framing the
discussion around the ways science and technology can improve the world for the next
generations. This paper will present an example of an RRI approach adopted in the
development of an intervention for conversation skills training for young adults with autism,
using Virtual Reality.
Keywords: Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI); Virtual Reality; Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASD); Conversation skills; Skills training
Introduction
The anti-science movement is gaining traction around the world (e.g., anti-evolution, human-
made climate change denial, flat-earthers, anti-vaccinating). These issues have gained
prominence in recent times. This could be attributed to declining interest in, and thus
deteriorating understanding of science at school level; to lack of understanding of the
usefulness of science (especially in health and technology) in our everyday lives; and to the
new communication environment (social media), where expert and non-expert opinions are
valued equally (and given equal air-time and column inches), even when not based on facts or
rigorous processes. Scientific language, concepts and ideas are becoming increasingly
complex, which consequently, one can argue, has led to a disconnect between scientists and
the public. Science communication has a key role to play in providing, according to Mathew
Nisbet, “civic education — enabling and motivating more people into thinking, talking, and
participating in collective decisions” (Schmidt, 2009; p. 548).
Technological development has traditionally depended on user involvement in the design and
testing phases so that the process culminated with a highly usable and desirable product
(Coleman, 2012). That has been true even more so in recent years in the era of digital
technologies and social media. Societies have embraced a shift to a ‘participatory culture’;
consumers create, share and respond to media (Jenkins, 2006). A diverse group of people
with varied roles in the process are coordinated towards a shared goal and can have a
successful outcome (Lankshear & Knobel. 2010). End-users ceased to be just the recipients
and testers of products and became equal partners in the design process (Scaife & Rogers.
1999). Instead of influencing the outcome they had a relationship with the designers; from
helping with the standardization of products they became engaged in their customization.
There has therefore been an evolution in the roles that the different stakeholders, be it
researchers, designers, technologists, practitioners and the general public have adopted to the
development of scientific and technological products and services. That is in essence
Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI).
In a European context, there have been efforts to reduce the distance between science and
society, which led to terms and cross-cutting issues such as RRI and Science with and for
Society (SwafS) becoming prominent in the H2020 programme calls. Those two terms have a
great deal in common. SwafS is concerned with the mechanics of how to “build effective
cooperation between science and society, to recruit new talent for science, and to pair
scientific excellence with social awareness and responsibility” (EC, 2016; p. 3). Whereas RRI
is concerned with the process of “embedding scientific and technological advances in our
society” (Von Schomberg, 2011). This is done in a participatory design fashion where
stakeholders are involved in the process from the very early stages in order to address societal
challenges and help develop products and services that better meet the needs and preferences
of the target population.
Science and technology have witnessed huge advances over the past few decades and have
had a largely positive impact on our lives. However, there have been instances when they
have caused controversy, they have created ethical conundrums and failed to provide
solutions to the issues they were meant to address. This would be the case more so with
vulnerable and disadvantaged populations such as people with neurodevelopmental
disabilities (autism and intellectual disabilities). It is imperative therefore that research and
innovation happen in a socially robust fashion, so that the process outcomes, outputs and
deliverables are desirable by the end users and meet the sustainability criterion.
The authors espouse the view that Research and Innovation need to align their outcomes with
the values of society. This paper will describe the development process of a training
programme on conversation skills through Virtual Reality that employed the RRI approach.
The training was aimed at people with neurodevelopmental disabilities who experience
difficulties with social interactions. In this initial, pilot phase of the project, people with
autism were involved at every stage of the process, from inception of the Virtual World
environment, to testing of the Virtual World and of the training material and lastly the
intervention itself, followed by feedback of the intervention.
However, before we do that, it would be useful and informative to give the readers definitions
of RRI and a deeper understanding of the term, especially in the European context, followed
by list of examples of applications and projects that have adopted the RRI principles of
diversity & inclusion, anticipation & reflection, openness & transparency and responsiveness
and adaptive change.
Responsible Research and Innovation explained in a nutshell.
We can all agree that technological advances have been very rapid over recent decades.
Society has mostly been the beneficiary of the progress achieved; however, in some instances
the outcomes were misaligned with the values of society. In those instances, the
consequences of the new approaches/products devised were not fully appreciated, nor were
the potential ethical conflicts. In response to that, over the last decade or so, there has been
more willingness to re-imagine “science and innovation policy and the social contract for
science in which scientific freedom is exchanged for the promise or expectation of socially-
beneficial impacts” (Owen et al., 2012; p. 752). These impacts along with – among others -
values-sensitive design (van den Hoven et al., 2012), social desirability and social
acceptability (Karinen & Guston, 2010) form the so-called ‘responsible innovation’.
It was recently (2011) that, the European Commission explored the idea of Responsible
Research and Innovation (RRI). RRI involves all stakeholders from the early stages, which
encourages and empowers innovation to be developed collaboratively, ensures co-
responsibility and changes the association of the terms ‘science’ and ‘society’ from science in
society to ‘Science with and for Society (SwafS)’ (Laroche, 2011). SwafS has increasingly
been highlighted as a best practice for Research and Innovation.
The 2014 Rome Declaration on Responsible Research and Innovation in Europe stated that
benefits of RRI ensure “research and innovation (R&I) deliver smart, inclusive and
sustainable solutions to societal challenges by engaging new perspectives, new innovators
and new talent” (EC, 2016; p. 6). In 2015, Commissioner Moedas proposed three strategic
priorities under the themes of Open innovation, Open science, and Open to the world. An
important aspect of the Open science priority is citizen science, which is an avenue to
promote RRI through outreach activities and public engagement. The R&I Commissioners
meeting on 25 May 2016 highlighted the need to promote RRI throughout the SwafS Work
Programme, with special attention being placed on co-design with stakeholders and end-
users.
The definition of the term RRI has been fluid and ever-changing since then, however the first
definition adopted by the Horizon 2020 programme is that:
“Responsible research and innovation is an approach that anticipates and assesses
potential implications and societal expectations with regards to research and innovation,
with the aim to foster the design of inclusive and sustainable research and innovation.”
(European Commission, HORIZON 2020)
In plain terms, that means RRI is about solving real-world problems collaboratively,
between researchers, policymakers, other organizations and bodies, industry and concerned
citizens, at all stages of the research process. In doing so, it would be more likely that
consequences of research outcomes and methods would be anticipated, and by involving
society in the process, it would help shape a more desirable and functional world for future
generations.
Responsible Research and Innovation in practice
The RRI movement follows in the footsteps of increased inclusion, over the past couple of
decades, of the public in the governance of science and innovation with the establishment of
forums on related issues (Stirling, 2006; Macnaghten & Chilvers, 2014). This more bottom-
up approach came as a response to a need for more legitimacy for those areas (Irwin, 2006;
Hajer, 2009). The public involvement comes in the form of multi-stakeholder partnerships,
inclusion on scientific boards or other modes that encourage debate and discussion between
the researchers, scientists, government organizations, NGOs and the public. This trend seems
to be quite prevalent in Europe, where we can find many examples of application of the RRI
principles. All the examples that are going to be presented below, are contained in the RRI
inspiring practices, projects and library elements of RRI application across many fields,
which has been built with and for the community of practice.
The RRI approach can be found in a science setting such as the Science Centre
Experimentarium in Copenhagen that tried to improve the visitor experience, more
specifically create a better flow and navigation throughout the exhibits, through dialogue and
participatory planning with all relevant stakeholders but primarily the visiting public. The
Navigation Project conducted interviews with visitors about the structure of their visits.
Findings showed that the visits are a mixture of exploratory and planned in nature, because
they are almost always made in groups, which are then split up into smaller groups that meet
up sporadically during the visit. There is thus a need for meeting places that “are easy to spot,
close to activities, and that provide opportunity to sit down and relax” (ecsite, p. 15). The
project then turned to designers who would get inspiration from and replicate meeting places
from cities around the world that have worked really well in creating distinct borderlines and
identities. These help the public to better orientate itself and provide the elements for better
map overviews, a key recommendation from the interviews.
Science cafés are another good example of engaging all relevant stakeholders in an
informative but at the same time fun way. The usual format is that a lay person asks a
question that is answered by an expert in the field, which in turn leads to a discussion. The
Copernicus Science Centre (Denmark) has adopted the ‘Reversed Science Café’ format,
where the public are the experts and the experts are asking the questions. This is a great way
of challenging current ideas and ways of thinking, of involving new blood in the
conversation, thinking outside the box and gaining a fresh perspective.
An RRI approach can also involve public engagement with ongoing projects such as the
example of Atelier Arts Sciences, which is a joint research laboratory shared by a French
research centre (CEA) and a theatre based in Meylan, France (Hexagon Scène Nationale Arts
Sciences). Atelier Arts Sciences aims at enhancing the visibility of art-science research and
creating new partnerships around art-science projects. This endeavour meets a key aspect of
the RRI approach, which is helping projects to contact end-users from the very early stages of
the development of the project. The process culminates with the Experimenta event, which is
the venue where the finalised prototypes are showcased. Experimenta “is designed to meet
the needs of artists as well as researchers, industry and citizens. In doing so, it enhances
collaborations and mitigates barriers between communities” (ecsite, p. 13).
RRI has also found application in the field of Education. For instance, the EnRRICH
(Enhancing Responsible Research and Innovation through curricula in higher education)
tool’s main goal is to help academics re-design their curricular in order to meet the RRI
principles, based on three pillars (a working definition of RRI in higher education, design
principles for embedding RRI in higher education and RRI competence) and two elements
(articulate learning outcomes; define assessment, teaching and learning methods).
3DNovations & Hive-RD
Another very important entry in the Education section is that of 3DNovations, which
comprises of immersive 3D virtual reality applications for primarily training and research
purposes, but which also has a strong community/customer services aspect, targeted at people
with autism and other complex needs. It follows the RRI principles because it is designed at
every stage with and for people with autism. In fact, 3DNovations has demonstrated that
“industry led RRI tools and methodologies can create a more inclusive society by unlocking
ideas and talents of people with autism, increasing their employment and improving
The 3DNovations products have been developed by Hao2, a company that strives to
to participate in and contribute to research and innovation. Its workforce is comprised 80% of
people on the autism spectrum. They are therefore, part of the research and development
teams that create Virtual Worlds, which enables all relevant stakeholders (people with
neurodevelopmental disabilities, technologists, researchers and crucially, employers) to work
together to find ways to include people with complex needs - with the diversity, talents and
Virtual Reality (VR) in recent years has seen a great deal of technological advancement that
have made it more affordable, and thus has made VR more appealing to the public. This
technology has found application in the socialization and training of neurodiverse populations
because it offers safe and less anxiety-provoking environments, where training and learning
exercises and practice can be embedded in an inclusive manner that meets the needs and
preferences of each individual. Research has shown the breadth of affordances and benefits of
VR to the mainstream population; however, very little research has been carried out with
people with neurodevelopmental disabilities (Freina & Ott, 2015). The authors’ project,
“Virtual Learning for people with Autism Spectrum Disorder (VL4ASD)”, is addressing that
gap in the literature; they decided to link up with Hao2 and tap into their experience and
expertise of this technology and their understanding of the target population.
The fact that Hao2, as a social business, uses participatory design approaches (co-design,
with and for people with ASD) in the development of 3D environments, meant that there was
the potential for real social impact of their developed products and services. Some of Hao2’s
3DNovations products are powered by Hive-RD, a company who is seen as “exemplar in
terms of its commitment to inclusive innovation as well as its founders’ technical and design
expertise.…… (Their work follows the) Responsible Research and Innovation (principles) ie.
everything they do at every stage of a project ….. is smart, sustainable, collaborative and
inclusive.” (Nicola Herbertson, founder of Hao2)
Hive-RD provided to the VL4ASD project a Virtual World (VW) that was a first iteration,
early alpha stage of development, Hive-RD construct powered 3DNovations product. This
VW was developed, using RRI principles, in the Unity platform, whose main advantage over
other platforms is its high degree of customization that offers the opportunity to adapt
training to better address individual needs. A truly participatory design process was adopted
for the development of the VW, where people with autism were involved at every stage, from
the inception of the VW, to stress and user testing. An intervention on conversation skills
training for people with neurodevelopmental disabilities (to address the social skills deficits
of the autistic population) was built based on this VW, and the development of each element
of that intervention will be described below.
“Making” the intervention
Virtual World development: early stages
It is made clear then that the creation of the VW was an iterative process that involved a
number of development phases. In the first phase, the two developers who have a great deal
of experience and expertise with autism, created a minimally viable version of the VW. This
was followed by software test sessions with two 15-user stress test groups (8 of whom were
people with ASD), which purpose was to identify anomalies or features that were difficult to
use. Based on the feedback from those stress tests, a revised version of the VW was created
that showed significant improvements on performance (Politis et al., 2017).
Training material development
The next step involved identifying material that would be appropriate and useful for
conversation skills training. The process begun with a thorough review of literature and
resources freely available online. The search first looked at social skills training more
generally, which was followed by a more focused search on communication skills training for
both mainstream and neurodiverse populations. Traditional training approaches for the
general population included list of ways (with animations) to, for instance, identify good
conversation topics, such as conversation starters and how to prolong a conversation
(wikiHow website). Traditional training approaches for children with ASD included visual
strategies on, for instance, the topic of turn-taking (Autism Teaching Strategies website) and
social stories about how to respond to questions (Do2Learn website).
The literature on digital approaches to offering training on communication skills provided
VW examples, for instance with medical students. This was an intervention to train them on
how to communicate with patients and family members about end-of-life care decisions,
which was carried out with virtual role-plays; Second Life was the platform it was created in.
The results of the students’ self-assessment showed that role-playing scenarios in Second Life
improved their learning of how to deal with these situations over time and that they could
identify best practices from scenario to scenario (Lowes et al., 2013). With regards to
neurodiverse populations, the literature suggests that adolescents with ASD can show
improvement in initiating a conversation in a VR café training setting (Parsons et al., 2004;
Mitchell et al., 2007). Moreover, social training through a VR platform can enhance social
understanding of people with ASD (Cheng & Ye, 2010; Herrera et al., 2008).
The examination of the above-mentioned literature and resources, illustrated to the authors
what are the key components of the “art of the conversation” that would need to be included
in the training intervention. The training would consist of 6 sessions in the Virtual World
(VW) and would cover the following categories:
● What is conversation and how does it work?
● Why is conversation useful? & Approaching someone to have a conversation
● Starting a conversation & Why are topics appropriate and inappropriate?
● Finding common interests
● Taking turns & Answering questions
● Switching topics & Ending a conversation
The training material was then developed in Opensimulator, which took the form of a brief
PowerPoint presentation for each session, containing illustrative photos, images and sketches,
and ended with a brief multiple answer quiz (3 questions at the end of each presentation); a
list of 2-3 YouTube videos that would provide either role-playing examples or real-life
examples of the elements of conversation mentioned in the presentations; and a non-playble
character who was narrating the text of the PowerPoint presentations, so that the participants
could read and listen to that material. The developers then transferred these materials to the
Unity based VW. The VW would be displayed on a screen monitor instead of a Head
Mounted Display to avoid “cyber-sickness” (Cobb, Nichols, Ramsey, & Wilson, 1999;
Sharples, Cobb, Moody, & Wilson, 2007), which studies suggest are prevalent in people with
ASD due to sensory processing deficits.
While this process was ongoing, the authors also worked closely with the developers to
explore the feasibility of introducing a ‘chatbot’ (non-playable character), as an additional
training element. The chatbot would offer a chance to the participants to test their
conversation skills based on their knowledge acquisition from the training with the
PowerPoints and videos. The chatbot was programmed to have basic conversational
interactions with the users, based on a script was developed, that “tried to anticipate a
participant’s possible answers to a question or a statement, so it was kept as simple as
possible, to avoid complications arising from unforeseen responses” (Politis et al., 2017; p.
7). When all the training elements were completed, the next development phase could
commence, namely, usability and accessibility testing with people with ASD and with
practitioners.
User feedback of training material in the Virtual World
This testing phase included a feedback session with six people with ASD, and another
feedback session with two practitioners who have had experience working with the above-
mentioned population (and those six individuals in particular). We were encouraged by the
fact that the participants felt that VR has potential in providing training for neurodiverse
populations (ASD in this case) and saw the VW environment in a positive light. Moreover,
they thought that delivering the training in three formats could contribute to the learning
process in different ways, since they felt that PowerPoints would represent teaching, videos
would represent showing and chatbot would represent practicing.
The participants of the two feedback sessions offered their opinion on issues regarding “the
visual presentation, pacing and organisation of the content” (Politis et al., 2017; p. 9) and on
more subjective issues such as the colour scheme of the VW, which are important because
they address the customization aspect of the project. Although, as mentioned above, the
concept of a chatbot was really appealing to both people with ASD and the practitioners, they
both felt that in its current stage of development the chatbot was not very functional due to
lack of interactivity. The reason was that when the chatbot could not understand an answer by
the participant, it would ask them to repeat it; that could happen a few times in a row, which
would cause annoyance and make the conversation feel forced (unnatural). Lastly, it was
interesting to notice that during the feedback sessions, participants focused more “on design
elements (narrative, sounds, characters etc.), and somewhat neglected the educational
components (the training materials in all three formats)” (Politis et al., 2017; p.10).
At that point, both the VW and the training material were revised to address the feedback
provided by the participants. The most significant change was that the chatbot was going to
be removed from the intervention for now, but that its functionality issues would be
addressed again in the future. Identifying a methodology that would offer the optimum way
of assessing the effectiveness of the conversation skills training for people with
neurodevelopmental disabilities through a VW was the last piece of the intervention puzzle.
Identifying the most appropriate methodology
Discussions on the structure of the intervention led to the decision that it would be divided
into the four following phases.
PHASE 1 PHASE 2 PHASE 3 PHASE 4
Having a conversation in Training – then a Having a conversation in a
a …. conversation in the …. ....
Physical Virtual
Virtual Space Physical Space
Space Space
Comparisons between Phase 1 Phase 2 would determine whether VR on itself has a positive
impact on conversation skills of neurodiverse populations. Phase 3 would determine whether
the training instruction on conversation skills in VR is beneficial. Lastly, Phase 4 (a repeat of
Phase 1) would determine whether the participants can transfer any acquired skills from the
With regards to the mechanics of the intervention, the authors assessed different
methodological approaches before concluding that a Single Case Experimental Designs
(SCEDs) would be most suitable for this project. An SCED affords the opportunity (to the
researcher) to identify differences that are specific to each participant, identify methods and
techniques that work but more importantly changes that can be made to an intervention in
order to enhance it (Plavnick & Ferreri, 2013). SCEDs do not necessarily require a
hypothesis, which can sometimes limit the scope of the study, intervention and thus the
conclusions reached; they rather most commonly involve an inductive approach where you
“…experiment first and let the theories emerge inductively from the data” (Sidman, 1960; p.
14). In such an approach, relations between an independent variable and the behaviour of an
individual are identified (Johnston & Pennypacker, 2008). Multiple measurements of that
behaviour can lead to conclusions about the afore-mentioned relationship between the two
variables (Neef, 2006). SCEDs are particularly relevant to an educational study about people
with disabilities (Kratochwill et al. 2010), because they allow “for causal inferences in
situations where large numbers of sufficiently homogenous participants cannot be recruited
(e.g., lower incidence populations)” (Plavnick & Ferreri, 2013; p. 567).
The starting point for each SCED is making many observations over an extended period of
time that establishes a baseline condition (Sidman 1960). The SCED that was decided as
most appropriate to employ in this study is the Multiple Baseline Design (MBD), which
demonstrates the reliability of an intervention in altering behaviour (Baer et al., 1968; Hersen
& Barlow, 1976). More specifically MBD across subjects (participants), whose purpose is to
affect the same behaviour across two or more participants taking part in the intervention in a
successive manner. The 3 subjects will initially all be untreated (at baseline condition). If the
measured behaviour remains at a steady baseline prior to the subjects undergoing the
intervention, then experimental control is established. The first subject then undergoes the
intervention while the other two will remain untreated. if the second and third subject
continue to demonstrate steady baseline condition, while there is an observable and sudden
change to the first subject’s behaviour then this infers a functional relation (Cooper et al.
2007). The intervention is then applied to one subject at a time.
The MBD would consist of 3 participants on the mild/moderate end of the autism spectrum.
The third participant would remain on baseline condition until the other two would have
finished with the work in the VW. Each session would be assessed through a conversation the
researcher (the lead author in this case) would have with the participants. In Phases 1 and 4
the conversation would be face-to-face; in Phase 2 the conversation would be in the VW; in
Phase 3, the conversation would follow the training component and would also be in the VW
session had a specific topic and there were 5 questions (question sets) that the researcher
would try to ask to all participants so that there was a common base of interaction for all 3
participants. The topics for Phase 1 were related to school life, likes/dislikes, subjects,
teachers, hobbies etc.; in Phases 2 and 3 the topics covered TV, films, music, travel, animals,
computers etc., so that the participants would have to face both topics they like and dislike,
feel comfortable and uncomfortable with. The question sets were used in the same order for
all participants. Phase 4 was an open conversation covering topics discussed in the previous
sessions. The sessions would last between 10 and 30 minutes (depending on participant
engagement and taking into account that Phase 3 has the training component)
A new assessment tool (based on the Conversation Skills Rating Scale) has been devised in
order to measure the conversation skill level for each session in a more quantitative manner.
This assessment tool is currently being revised and is undergoing further development based
on initial feedback from 2 coders working with the authors. The final version of the tool will
undergo a validation process; both the tool development and validation processes will be
discussed in detail in a forthcoming journal article.
Limitations
This was a rather complex project that involved simultaneous development of a VW
environment for participants on the autistic spectrum (by engaging with that population in
every stage of the development), development of training material on conversation skills in
different formats and development of an intervention that could be effectively assessed.
Therefore, there were many ‘moving parts’ and it was not always possible to address some of
the development aspects or anticipate some of the issues that arose.
The benefits of using VR have been touched upon in this article. Literature suggests that most
serious games developed in the 2004-2014 period for communication and social skill training
for people with ASD were delivered on desktop screens or tablets (Zakari et al, 2014).
However, carrying out the intervention using a Head Mounted Display, would have made the
experience more immersive, by creating a feeling of presence within the environment
(Bimber, 2014), which has the potential to increase users’ motivation and control of the
interaction. There were financial constraints to take into account for this decision as well as
the added time needed and potential complications for the ethics approval process.
The VW did not have the level of customization initially envisaged. The participants could
pick among 9 avatar characters (male and female; younger and older – but not one
resembling themselves), they could choose their viewing perspective (eye level – top of head
– or through a drone); however, they could not change the colour scheme or more importantly
the training material could not be adjusted to each individual’s competence level.
The PowerPoint presentation materials were revised several times, initially by the lead
researcher and then by other colleagues, so that the language of the text was simplified and
mistakes were corrected. The intervention was going to be deployed in the US (but the text
was originally written in UK/Ireland English language), so the text was also checked that it
made sense in context to the specific environment. Finding appropriate videos for the training
sessions proved more difficult, so a couple of the videos were of British people speaking,
which may be difficult to understand for some participants (although the characters’ accents
would objectively be considered clear and neutral) or distracting from the task.
There may also be a need to re-examine the question set format, because it may prove
difficult to seamlessly include the 5 scripted questions into the conversation without it
appearing as being forced. Moreover, using the question sets in the same order may not give
us a clear indication of whether a participant’s like or dislike of a topic impacted on their
conversation performance.
Concluding Remarks
The intervention has taken place and the whole process is currently under review and as
stated earlier, the assessment tool is also undergoing development and will be validated in the
coming months. The development of the assessment tool will be presented in a publication in
the next 6 months and the analysis of the results from the MBD will be presented in a
separate article towards the end of the year.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by funding from the charity RESPECT and the People
Programme (Marie Curie Actions) of the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under REA grant agreement no. PCOFUND-GA-2013-608728.