Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 1
Framing Effects in Choices With Somewhat Risky Options
Prachiti P. Garge and Michael L. DeKay
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
Draft version, 12/30/2024. This paper has not been peer reviewed.
Author Note
The experiments and samples were preregistered on 8/18/2020, 11/8/2020, 1/13/2021, and
based partly on the undergraduate thesis completed by Garge (2021). We have no conflicts of
interest to disclose. This research was supported by a grant from The Ohio State University’s
Decision Sciences Collaborative. We thank Tim Pleskac and Yeonho Choi for very helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michael L. DeKay,
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, 224 Lazenby Hall, 1827 Neil Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, United States. Email: dekay.3@osu.edu
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 2
Abstract
When a certain option and a risky option are both described as potential gains, most people
choose the certain option. However, when the same two options are described as potential losses,
most people choose the risky option. This famous preference pattern is known as the risky-
choice framing effect. Despite the seeming rarity of sure things and all-or-none risks in real life,
surprisingly little research on this framing effect has involved options with intermediate levels of
risk. In this research, we identified four types of “somewhat risky” options, combined them with
each other and with certain and all-or-none options to create 15 risk comparisons in both gains
and losses in each of four domains (cancer, drought, investment, and wildfire), and conducted
two preregistered experiments in which we varied risk comparisons between or within
participants in both student and online samples (total N = 2,586 after exclusions). We found
significant framing effects in almost all risk comparisons, greatly expanding the range of
decisions in which framing is relevant. In addition, we used out-of-sample predictions from 13
versions of risky-choice theories to evaluate how well those theories accounted for participants’
choices. Versions of transfer-of-attention-exchange theory (TAX) generally outperformed
versions of prospect theory, fuzzy-trace theory, the priority heuristic, and other accounts,
although prospect theory without loss aversion outperformed TAX and the other accounts when
we used an alternate set of parameter values.
Keywords: decision making, risk, replication, generalizability
Public Significance Statement
Options in decisions about money, health, and other matters can often be described or
“framed” in terms of potential gains or potential losses, steering people’s preferences toward
safer or riskier options, respectively. This research shows that this well-known framing effect
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 3
applies not only to choices between riskless options and very risky options but also to choices
involving intermediate levels of risk, expanding the applicability of framing to a much wider set
of circumstances. For theories of risky choice, the results favor accounts based on the
expectations of options (i.e., weighting possible outcomes by their likelihoods) over accounts
based on simpler categorical comparisons, such as whether one, both, or neither of the options
includes the possibility of gaining (or losing) nothing.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 4
Framing Effects in Choices With Somewhat Risky Options
’[T]is impossible to be sure of any thing but Death and Taxes.
—Christopher Bullock, The Cobbler of Preston, a Farce
It’s not always All or Nothing. Sometimes something is Enough.
—Author unknown (seen on Pinterest)
These pearls of wisdom, one famous and one not, address two essential components of risk:
the lack of certainty and the range of possible outcomes. The first aphorism, a later version of
which is attributed to Benjamin Franklin, asserts that almost everything in life is uncertain. It is
hard to disagree. It might rain tomorrow, a business venture might succeed, a used car might be
reliable, a romantic interest might agree to a date, and so on.
The second aphorism counsels us to be satisfied with what we have, even if someone on
social media has more or if someone else’s football team wins the national championship. From
the perspective of risky choice, it reminds us that intermediate outcomes often exist alongside or
instead of all-or-none outcomes. Accidental injuries are much more common than accidental
deaths, for example. For people who play the lottery or bet on horse racing or other sports, most
options will yield less than the maximum outcome from the most lucrative (and most risky)
option even if one’s ticket or horse or team wins. For those of us more familiar with scratch-off
postcards from department stores, the revealed savings may be 10%, 20%, or 30%, but it is never
0% or 100%. Pleskac and Hertwig (2014) provided additional examples ranging from submitting
academic articles (journals vary in prestige) to purchasing bull semen for the artificial
insemination of dairy cows (sires vary in their genetic ability to produce offspring with the most
desirable traits).
Theories of risky choice should ideally be assessed over the full range of probabilities and
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 5
outcomes (as well as reasonable variations in other relevant factors such as option wording,
probability formats, and the like; DeKay et al., 2022). However, experiments too often focus on
established examples that do not adequately represent the variety of situations over which the
effects of interest are expected to apply and over which the theories that explain those effects are
intended to apply. As a result, we learn less about the effects and the theories than we could.
In our view, this has been the situation with research on the classic risky-choice framing
effect (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). In this effect, people tend to prefer a certain option over a
risky one with the same expected value (EV) when both options are described as gains (e.g.,
money or lives saved) but tend to prefer the opposite when the same two options are described as
losses (money or lives lost). Consider the prototypical disease problem, in which 600 lives are at
risk. In the gain frame, most people choose the certain option (“200 people will be saved”) over
the risky option (“a 1/3 probability that 600 people will be saved and a 2/3 probability that no
people will be saved”). In the loss frame, however, most people choose the risky option (“a 1/3
probability that no people will die and a 2/3 probability that 600 people will die”) over the
certain option (“400 people will die”).
As a practical matter, this effect is important because risk is ubiquitous in decisions about
finances, health, business, public policy, and other human endeavors ranging from recreation to
military conflict. Although the size of the original risky-choice framing effect can vary with
study details and participant populations (as should be expected; De Boeck & Jeon, 2018), its
robustness has been firmly established in reviews (e.g., Levin et al., 1998; Kühberger, 2023),
meta-analyses (Kühberger, 1998; Kühberger et al., 1999; Piñon & Gambara, 2005; Steiger &
Kühberger, 2018), and large-scale replication studies (Im & Chen, 2022; Klein et al, 2014).
The framing effect is also important for distinguishing among theories of risky choice.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 6
Indeed, it was first presented as evidence favoring prospect theory (PT; Kahneman & Tversky,
1979) over expected utility theory. Although explaining the original version of the framing effect
is now considered mandatory for any descriptive theory of risky choice, varying the choice
options can provide leverage for distinguishing among competing accounts.
Unfortunately, however, almost all research on the framing effect has involved choices
between a certain option and an all-or-none risky option, as in the original disease problem. The
proportion of the overall stakes. Outcomes in the original disease problem are divided by 600,
for example. The risky option in that problem is represented by the points (0, 2/3) and (1, 1/3) on
the left and right edges of the option space, connected by a line segment, while the corresponding
certain option is represented by the single point (1/3, 1) on the top edge of the space. Most
variants of the disease problem have the same form, perhaps with different probabilities in the
risky option and thus different certain options. When plotted in this manner, the options in the
classic effect appear as “edge cases.” This situation is not a problem if one is interested primarily
in the replicability of the original effect and its generalizability over different participant
populations (Im & Chen, 2022; Klein et al., 2014), but it is a huge problem if one is interested in
applying the results to situations involving intermediate levels of risk. It is also potentially bad
for theory, as it cannot be helpful to overlook choices that could distinguish between competing
accounts.
So why not fill in the option space? In this research, we consider a wider variety of option
options, we consider four types of intermediate, somewhat risky options (to be described shortly)
that have one or more of their possible outcomes in the interior of the space, as well as the
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 7
Options in Risky-Choice Framing Problems
Note. Options are shown for the gain frame, with outcomes scaled to proportions of the overall
stakes. In options with two possible outcomes, the outcomes are connected by a line segment. In
the left panel, traditional all-or-none risky options have possible outcomes of 1 (on the right edge
of the option space) and 0 (on the left edge of the space). Options with extreme probabilities
have rarely been studied. Certain options have only one outcome and appear on the top edge of
the space, at probability = 1. The options in Tversky and Kahneman’s (1981) original disease
problem are highlighted in black. The right panel shows six option types, including four types of
somewhat risky options (described in the text), for the scenarios used in this research. The
somewhat risky options have one or both of their possible outcomes in the interior of the option
space.
various choice types that can be constructed by pairing these options in different ways. We are
not the first researchers to consider framing effects involving such options, but the literature is
decidedly sparse. For example, only know of only three articles that considered choices between
somewhat risky options and traditional risky options (DeKay & Garge, 2023; DeKay et al., 2022;
Schneider, 1992) and only one that considered choices between two types of somewhat risky
options (Schneider, 1992).
One of the best ways to avoid empirical and theoretical blind spots like that in the left panel
ytilibaborP
Options in Most
Framing-Effect Research Options in This Research
1.0 1.0
Traditional Options
Certain
Risky
Certain (disease problem)
Risky (disease problem)
0.5 0.5
Somewhat Risky Options
SR (mismatched)
SR (matched)
SR (zero in losses)
SR (zero in gains)
0 0
0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1.0
Outcome as a Proportion of the Overall Stakes
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 8
studies with many conditions (as in metastudies; Baribault et al., 2018; De Boeck & Jeon, 2018;
DeKay et al., 2022), so that the variations of interest are not confounded with other differences in
stimuli, procedures, or participant populations across studies (a common problem in meta-
analyses; DeKay et al., 2022). For the framing effect, examples of this approach have included
varying the probabilities in the risky option over a wide range (.01 to .99; DeKay & Garge, 2023;
DeKay et al., 2022) and varying the completeness of the descriptions of the certain and risky
options (e.g., describing the certain option of the disease problem as “200 people will be saved
and 400 people will not be saved”) in a structured set of 18 combinations (DeKay & Dou, 2024a,
2024b). Both efforts have yielded new empirical results and theoretical insights.
Overview
The research reported in this article is our attempt to apply a similarly thorough and balanced
approach to assess framing effects in choices with different types of somewhat risky options.
Although we preregistered our experiments, they were predominantly exploratory. We expected
some previous results to replicate, but we did not preregister specific hypotheses. Similarly,
while we listed numerous theoretical accounts and described our primary analysis for comparing
them, we did not hypothesize a winner. To the contrary, we noted that “we do not have a horse in
this race.”
In the reminder of this Introduction, we describe four types of somewhat risky options;
discuss their relative riskiness; consider the various choice types or risk comparisons that can be
created by combining these options with a certain option, an all-or-none risky option, and each
other; and summarize the literature on framing effects in such choices. We also introduce 13
versions of theories and accounts for predicting framing effects, though we leave some details to
the Method section of Experiment 1. We then report two experiments in which we varied 15 risk
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 9
comparisons between participants (Experiment 1) or within participants (Experiment 2), with
two participant populations (students and online participants) in each case. For each of these four
samples, we report the magnitude of framing effects in the various risk comparisons and
compare the performance of the theories in predicting those results. We use out-of-sample
predictions so that theories with multiple parameters, PT and transfer-of-attention-exchange
theory (TAX; Birnbaum, 2008; Birnbaum & Navarrete, 1998), do not have an advantage over
those with no parameters, such as fuzzy-trace theory (FTT; Broniatowski & Reyna, 2018; Reyna,
2012; Reyna & Brainerd, 1995) and the priority heuristic (PH; Brandstätter et al., 2006; Pachur
et al., 2013). For PT and TAX, we use parameter values from the literature, though we later
revisit the implications of this choice. In our General Discussion, we update the literature and
summarize our theory comparisons.
A Variety of Somewhat Risky Options
Traditional framing effects modeled on the original disease problem involve a certain option
(C) and an all-or-none risky option (R) with the same EV. Consider, for example, a choice
between two treatment programs for a type of skin cancer that affects 9,000 patients. In the gain
frame, the certain option provides that 3,600 patients will be saved, while the risky option
provides a 2/5 probability that 9,000 patients will be saved and a 3/5 probability that no patients
will be saved. One can create intermediate, somewhat risky options by making the better
outcome of the traditional risky option worse, making the worse outcome of the traditional risky
option better, or both. We created four types of somewhat risky options for a total of six option
Making the better outcome of the traditional risky option worse (and increasing its
probability to maintain the same EV) yields an option with (for example) a 3/5 probability that
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 10
Six Option Types Used in Our Experiments, with Examples From the Gain Frame of the Cancer Domain
Expected utility a
Option Abbrev. Explanation Cancer example 𝐸𝑈 = ∑ 𝑝 × 𝑥 !.#
Certain C The traditional certain option 3,600 patients will be 60.0
saved
Somewhat risky SR Probabilities do not match those 1/4 probability that 7,500 57.6
MM
(mismatched) in the Risky option. Outcomes patients will be saved and
are nonzero in both frames. 3/4 probability that 2,300
patients will be saved
Somewhat risky SR Probabilities match those in the 2/5 probability that 6,300 57.2
(matched) Risky option. Outcomes are patients will be saved and
nonzero in both frames. 3/5 probability that 1,800
patients will be saved
Somewhat risky SR Includes a zero outcome in 1/4 probability that 9,000 55.5
ZL
(zero in losses) losses but not in gains. In gains, patients will be saved and
the better outcome matches that 3/4 probability that 1,800
in the Risky option. patients will be saved
Somewhat risky SR Includes a zero outcome in gains 3/5 probability that 6,000 46.5
ZG
(zero in gains) but not in losses. In losses, the patients will be saved and
worse outcome matches that in 2/5 probability that no
the Risky option. patients will be saved
Risky R The traditional all-or-none risky 2/5 probability that 9,000 37.9
option patients will be saved and
3/5 probability that no
patients will be saved
Note. Options are arranged from least risky (top) to most risky (bottom).
a An exponent of 0.5 is used for illustration. The riskiness order holds for any exponent 0.01 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 0.99.
6,000 patients will be saved and a 2/5 probability that no patients will be saved. When this option
is translated to the loss frame by subtracting 9,000 from each outcome, the better outcome is that
3,000 patients will die. Because this option includes a zero outcome in gains but not in losses, we
call it “somewhat risky (zero in gains)” or SR . Schneider’s (1992) “75/25” options were of this
ZG
type, but we prefer notation that is not tied to specific probabilities.
Making the worse outcome of the traditional risky option better (and increasing its
probability to maintain the same EV) yields an option with (for example) a 1/4 probability that
9,000 patients will be saved and a 3/4 probability that 1,800 patients will be saved. There is no
longer a zero outcome in gains. When this option is translated to losses, the better outcome is
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 11
that no people die. We call this option “somewhat risky (zero in losses)” or SR . Schneider’s
ZL
(1992) “25/75” options were of this type.
Changing both outcomes yields an option without a zero in either frame. We call such
options “somewhat risky (no zeros)” or SR . In choices between an SR option and the
NZ NZ
traditional risky option, the probabilities of the SR option may or may not match those of the
NZ
risky option. We call these more specific versions “somewhat risky (matched)” or SR and
“somewhat risky (mismatched)” or SR , respectively. For SR options, we followed DeKay et
MM M
al. (2022) and DeKay and Garge (2023) in maintaining the probabilities of the risky option while
moving each outcome halfway to the certain option. In the present case, doing so yields an
option with 2/5 probability that 6,300 patients will be saved and a 3/5 probability that 1,800
patients will be saved.
When creating SR options, the probability of the better outcome in the risky option can be
MM
increased or decreased. To keep the number of possible comparisons manageable, we took only
one of these approaches. Specifically, we decreased that probability to yield an option with (for
example) a 1/4 probability that 7,500 patients will be saved and a 3/4 probability that 2,300
patients will be saved.
Note that the distinction between SR and SR is meaningful only when the other option in
M MM
a choice is the traditional all-or-none risky option (or perhaps when a participant sees that option
elsewhere in a choice set). When referring to previous studies, we use the less specific label
SR when the choice does not include the all-or-none risky option. In our studies, however, it
NZ
remains useful to have separate labels for SR and SR options, and the matched versus
M MM
mismatched distinction is meaningful in at least some choices.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 12
Relative Riskiness
We followed Schneider’s (1992) approach to establish the relative riskiness of the six option
types. Assuming a power function for utility, the expected utility of an option is 𝐸𝑈 = ∑ 𝑝 × 𝑥 .
Risk averse decision makers are typically characterized as having concave utility functions (i.e.,
with 0 < 𝛼 < 1). If 𝐸𝑈(𝑂𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐴) > 𝐸𝑈(𝑂𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐵) for all values of 𝛼 in this range, it is
reasonable to say that Option A is less risky than Option B. For our six options and the specific
numbers used in our scenarios, we verified that the riskiness order was always C < SR < SR
MM M
< SR < SR < R for 0.01 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 0.99 (Schneider referred to 𝛼 = 0.10 as “ridiculously severe
ZL ZG
scenario are ordered from least risky to most risky.
We acknowledge at the outset that different definitions of riskiness can lead to different
riskiness orders, at least for two pairs of our option types. For example, utility can be defined
over total wealth (or another total amount in nonfinancial scenarios) rather than over changes in
wealth, in which case 𝐸𝑈 = ∑ 𝑝 × (𝑤 + 𝑥) . For large enough values of 𝑤, SR becomes
MM
riskier than SR , and SR becomes riskier than SR . A downside to this approach is that 𝑤 is
M ZL ZG
rarely if ever known or specified in risky-choice problems. If the standard deviation (or the
variance or the coefficient of variation) of each option is used as the riskiness metric, the
ordering of SR and SR and the ordering of SR and SR vary across our scenarios, with
MM M ZL ZG
ties in a few comparisons. Finally, with an S-shaped utility function (as in PT, but ignoring loss
aversion), the function in the loss frame is 𝐸𝑈 = ∑ 𝑝 × −(−𝑥) , with 0 < 𝛽 < 1 corresponding
to risk seeking. One can then define the more risky option in losses as the one with the higher
(less negative) 𝐸𝑈, which leads to SR being riskier than SR and SR being riskier than
MM M ZL
SR . The result is that one option of a pair (e.g., SR when paired with SR ) is labeled the
ZG MM M
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 13
less risky option in gains and the more risky option in losses, which can lead to difficulties in
interpreting framing effects.
Fortunately, ambiguity regarding relative riskiness is almost entirely a labeling issue with
can be paired to create 15 risk comparisons, the above concerns apply to only two of the 15:
SR vs. SR choices and SR vs. SR choices. Our primary approach is to use the riskiness
MM M ZL ZG
order C < SR < SR < SR < SR < R for labeling purposes in all risk comparisons in both
MM M ZL ZG
frames, but we also consider two alternative approaches. First, we reverse the riskiness labels of
the options in the loss frame of SR vs. SR choices and SR vs. SR choices. Second, we
MM M ZL ZG
exclude the data from SR vs. SR choices and SR vs. SR choices entirely, leaving only
MM M ZL ZG
13 of the 15 risk comparisons. The latter approach strikes us as too extreme. Regardless of how
the options are labeled, each of the theories we consider makes unambiguous predictions about
which option (if either) will be preferred, and those predictions should be fair game for
assessment. Nonetheless, it is important to gauge the robustness of our results to such analytical
choices.
Previous Results
If one distinguishes between SR and SR only when the other option in the choice is the risky
M MM
option, there are 11 risk comparisons involving the somewhat risky options described above. We
are aware of only seven articles (including two from our lab) that have reported results for
comparisons were not covered in any of these articles. The lack of SR vs. SR comparisons is
especially glaring. Three other comparisons were covered in only one article: In Schneider’s
(1992) study, the same 45 participants responded to six risk comparisons including the traditional
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 14
Previous Results for 11 Risk Comparisons Involving Somewhat Risky Options
Less More
risky risky Sample Framing effect Significance Summary for
option option Article size a (perc. pts.) b (p < .05) choice type
Somewhat risky vs. risky
SR R None? No data?
MM
SR R DeKay et al. (2022) 393, 206 35, 37 2 of 2 tests sig. c Larger FE d
DeKay & Garge (2023) 267 41 Sig. c
SR R Schneider (1992) e 45 21 (–2 to 39) 3 of 9 tests sig. f Smaller FE? d
ZL
SR R Schneider (1992) e 45 2 (–15 to 26) 0 of 9 tests sig. f No FE
ZG
Certain vs. somewhat risky
C SR van der Pligt & van Schie 111 32 Sig. Mixed results
NZ
(1990)
Miller & Fagley (1991) 46 26, 48, –22 1 of 3 tests sig. f
Christman & Jasper 93, 97 20, 32 g 1 of 2 tests sig. g
(2014)
Tombu & Mandel (2015) 68 –13 Not sig.
DeKay et al. (2022) 294 21 Sig.
DeKay & Garge (2023) 277 26 Sig.
C SR van der Pligt & van Schie 350 23 Sig. Mixed results
ZL
(1990)
Schneider (1992) e 45 –8 (–33 to 6) 1 of 9 tests sig. f
(reversed FE)
C SR van der Pligt & van Schie 111 to 352 16 (0 to 32) 6 of 12 tests sig. f Most results
ZG
(1990) favor an FE
Schneider (1992) e 45 49 (33 to 63) 9 of 9 tests sig. f
Somewhat risky vs. somewhat risky
SR SR None? No data?
NZ NZ
SR SR None? No data?
NZ ZL
SR SR None? No data?
NZ ZG
SR SR Schneider (1992) e 45 32 (22 to 42) 6 of 9 tests sig. f FE
ZL ZG
Note. SR = somewhat risky (mismatched); R = risky; SR = somewhat risky (matched); SR = somewhat risky
MM M ZL
(zero in losses); SR = somewhat risky (zero in gains); C = certain; SR = somewhat risky (no zeros); FE = framing
ZG NZ
effect.
a Number of participants in the relevant conditions. b Percentage of times the less risky option was chosen in gains
minus the corresponding percentage in losses. When results were reported separately for many scenarios, the mean and
range are shown. c Tests across four or five scenarios. d Compared to the standard C vs. R framing effect in the same
session in which frames were switched). f Separate test for each scenario. g Estimates based on reported results (see the
Supplemental Material).
C vs. R comparison. Miller and Fagley (1991) and Tombu and Mandel (2015) also had small
samples in the relevant conditions of their studies.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 15
For comparisons considered by more than one article, results have been mixed. Larger
studies appear more likely to have reported significant framing effects, but that could also reflect
the use of different scenarios, procedures, or participant populations. For option depictions like
The research reported in this article was motivated by the apparent spottiness of this literature
and by the inconsistencies for some risk comparisons. Our purpose was two-fold: to contribute
assess the performance of several theories in predicting the results.
Theoretical Explanations for Framing Effects
We consider several accounts of framing effects that are sufficiently specified to allow out-
of-sample predictions for the choices in our experiments. Even with this restriction, our
consideration set is necessarily incomplete.
Expectation-Based Theories
PT and TAX are both expectation-based theories, meaning that the overall evaluation of an
option is a weighted sum of the subjective values of the possible outcomes, with the weights
being a function of the probabilities of the outcomes.
Prospect Theory. PT holds that the wording of the options leads decision makers to adopt
different reference points in the gain and loss frames. C vs. R framing effects can then be
explained by the theory’s S-shaped value function (a two-part power function with exponents 𝛼
in gains and 𝛽 in losses), its inverse-S-shaped weighting function (with parameters 𝛾 in gains
and 𝛿 in losses), or their combination (for details, see DeKay & Garge, 2023). PT’s other
trademark feature, loss aversion (with parameter 𝜆), cannot generate framing effects on its own.
Separating the components of a theory in this way can help researchers understand why it
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 16
predicts response patterns well or poorly in a particular task. We consider four versions of PT,
with the relevant parameter values based on the median estimates from Tversky and Kahneman
(1992).1 The four versions are the value function alone, without loss aversion (PT , with 𝛼 =
vf
𝛽 = 0.88 and 𝛾 = 𝛿 = 𝜆 = 1); the weighting function alone (PT , with 𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 0.69,
wf
and 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 𝜆 = 1); the combination of these two functions (PT , with 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88, 𝛾 =
vf+wf
0.61, 𝛿 = 0.69, and 𝜆 = 1); and full PT with loss aversion as well (PT , with 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88,
full
𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 0.69, and 𝜆 = 2.25).2
Transfer-of-Attention-Exchange Theory. For TAX, we use a T subscript to differentiate
the parameters from those of PT. TAX’s value or utility function is a two-part power function
with (we assume here) the same exponent 𝛽 in gains and losses.3 The weighting function is a
power function with exponent 𝛾 , with the weights then normalized by the sum of the weights of
the possible outcomes, yielding an inverse-S-shaped function. The weight-transfer parameter is
𝛿 . For two-outcome options in the version of TAX considered here (special TAX; Birnbaum,
2008), a proportion 𝛿 ⁄3 of the weight of the more extreme outcome is transferred to the less
extreme outcome. Following DeKay and Garge’s (2023) application of TAX to risky-choice
framing effects, we assume that reference points work as in the usual PT explanation, leading
decision makers to treat outcomes as either gains or losses. TAX can then explain C vs. R
framing effects with its S-shaped value function, its weight-transfer mechanism, or both. Unlike
1 Cumulative PT (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) simplifies to original PT (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) when
options have no more than two possible outcomes.
2 Compared to our preregistrations, we made two changes to the theories considered. First, we consider PT
wf
instead of a version that omits only the weighting function. Second, we include versions of TAX. Both changes
follow from DeKay and Garge’s (2023) analysis of the components of PT and TAX that can lead to framing effects
in C vs. R choices.
3 Often, linearity is assumed in order to demonstrate that many of the theory’s predictions do not depend on the
value function (Birnbaum, 2008).
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 17
PT’s weighting function, TAX’s weighting function cannot generate framing effects on its own.4
We consider four versions of TAX, with the relevant parameter values based on the median
estimates from Birnbaum and Navarrete (1998). The four versions are the value function alone
(TAX , with 𝛽 = 0.41, 𝛾 = 1, and 𝛿 = 0), the weight-transfer function alone (TAX , with
vf wt
# # #
𝛽 = 𝛾 = 1 and 𝛿 = 0.95), the combination of these two functions (TAX , with 𝛽 = 0.41,
vf+wt
# # # #
𝛾 = 1, and 𝛿 = 0.95), and full TAX with the weighting function as well (TAX , with 𝛽 =
full
# # #
0.41, 𝛾 = 0.79, and 𝛿 = 0.95).
# #
Gist-Based and Heuristic Theories and Accounts
Fuzzy-Trace Theory. FTT uses the categorical gist of the options to explain framing effects.
In gains, options that include a zero outcome (e.g., no people will be saved) are categorically
worse than those to that do not. In losses, options that include a zero outcome (e.g., no people
will die) are categorically better than those that do not. These comparisons imply the usual
framing effect in C vs. R choices. FTT also includes ordinal gist comparisons and interval
“verbatim” comparisons, but those do not contribute to preferences in any of the choices in this
article.
The Explicated Valence Account. In the explicated valence account (EVA; Tombu &
Mandel, 2015), which followed FTT by over 20 years, preferences are based on categorical
comparisons of the valences of the option descriptions. In the gain frame of standard C vs. R
choices, the positive valence of the certain option is preferred to the mixed valence of the risky
option. In losses, the mixed valence of the risky option is preferred to the negative valence of the
certain option. For the choices considered in this article, EVA makes the same predictions as
4 In PT, the weighting function applies to the more extreme outcome in a two-outcome option (the better
outcome in gains and the worse outcome in losses); the less extreme outcome, which is zero in the traditional risky
option, gets the complement of that weight. In TAX, outcomes are weighted the same in gains and losses (for details
and figures, see DeKay & Garge, 2023).
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 18
FTT (for cases in which the accounts make different predictions, see DeKay & Dou, 2024a).
Fuzzy-Trace Theory Plus. Both DeKay et al. (2022) and DeKay and Garge (2023) reported
that framing effects nearly doubled in size in SR vs. R choices compared to C vs. R choices
that of C and R options and because neither PT nor FTT predicted the increase. DeKay et al.
suggested that the matched probabilities may have highlighted FTT’s categorical distinction
between the zero outcome in the R option of each frame and the corresponding nonzero outcome
of the SR option, thereby increasing the framing effect.5 We call this extension FTT+.
The Good-Bad Count. GBC is an ad hoc account designed to explain DeKay et al.’s (2022)
and DeKay and Garge’s (2023) results for SR vs. R choices. It can be viewed as an extension of
EVA in the sense that it relies on the valence of the aspects of the option descriptions. In GBC, a
score for each option is computed as the number of good aspects minus the number of bad
nonzero number of people will be saved is a good aspect and a chance that no people will be
saved is a bad aspect. The score for the certain option is 1 – 0 = 1, and the score for the risky
option is 1 – 1 = 0, so the certain option is preferred in C vs. R choices. The SR option has two
good aspects in gains (e.g., a 2/5 probability that 6,300 patients will be saved and a 3/5
probability that 1,800 patients will be saved), so its score is 2 – 0 = 2. These scores are mirrored
in the loss frame. As a result, GBC predicts a larger framing effect in SR vs. R choices, as
observed by DeKay et al. and DeKay and Garge. Because SR and SR are both “doubly
MM M
good” in gains and “doubly bad” in losses, several other interesting results are predicted. For
5 In a different situation, a similar FTT explanation holds that omitting the nonzero outcome from the
description of the risky option highlights the usual categorical comparison in C vs. R choices, thereby increasing the
framing effect (Chick et al., 2016; Reyna, 2012; Reyna & Brainerd, 1995; Reyna et al., 2014).
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 19
example, GBC predicts reversed framing effects in C vs. SR and C vs. SR choices because
MM M
results for C vs. SR choices, with no instances of significant reversed framing effects.
NZ
Sentiment Analysis. For sentiment analysis (SA), we followed Wall et al. (2020) in using
the sentimentr package in R (Rinker, 2021). Wall et al. used the package primarily to estimate
the positivity or negativity of participants’ written thoughts regarding the option descriptions, but
they also noted that it can be used to estimate the positivity or negativity of the option
descriptions themselves. We used the latter approach. In principle, SA could provide a more
nuanced linguistic assessment that captures some of the same features as FTT, EVA, and GBC.
Like the simple comparisons in these other accounts, sentimentr is insensitive to the numerical
values of the probabilities and outcomes.
The Priority Heuristic. PH is a “fast and frugal” heuristic in which the options’ aspects are
compared in a specific order until a difference on one aspect is large enough to justify a choice.
When there are two options with only one or two possible outcomes each, the steps in the gain
frame (for example) are as follows: Compare the options’ minimum gains. If they differ by at
least 10% of the maximum gain, rounded the nearest prominent number (e.g., 100, 200, 500,
1000, 2000, 5000), choose the option with the larger minimum gain. If not, compare the
probabilities of the minimum gains. If they differ by at least .10, choose the option with the
lower probability. If the difference is insufficient, choose the option with the larger maximum
gain regardless of the difference. In standard C vs. R choices without extreme probabilities
(DeKay & Garge, 2023), the certain option is preferred in gains because it has a larger minimum
gain, and the risky option is preferred in losses because it has a smaller minimum loss. Pachur et
al. (2013) reviewed the evidence regarding PH and tested its process predictions relative to those
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 20
of expectation-based models.
Transparency and Openness
This research was exempted from Institutional Review Board review by The Ohio State
University’s Office of Responsible Research Practices (ID: 2020E0121). The experiments (goals,
designs, samples, sample sizes, exclusion criteria, and analysis plans) were preregistered on
8/18/2020, 11/8/2020, 1/13/2021, and 2/3/2021, prior to collecting the corresponding data. See
analysis code, preregistrations, and other files are available at the Open Science Foundation:
data exclusions, all manipulations, and all measures. All preregistered analyses are reported in
the article or the Supplemental Material. Nontrivial deviations (e.g., additional theories, analyses,
Supplemental Material.
Experiment 1
Method
Participants
In fall 2020, we recruited 1,138 undergraduates from the Department of Psychology at The
Ohio State University. They received course credit for their participation. In winter 2021, we
recruited 1,024 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk via CloudResearch (CR) for an
incentive of $0.50. For the latter sample, we used only CR-approved participants from the United
States who had completed at least 100 previous tasks with at least a 99% approval rate. We
selected settings to block duplicate IP addresses, block suspicious geocode locations, and verify
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 21
participants’ country locations. We chose the student and CR samples for their convenience, but
we have recently replicated other framing-effect results from these participant pools in a more
representative sample well-matched to U.S. Census data (DeKay & Dou, 2024b).
Our target sample size of 900 in each sample (30 participants in each of 30 conditions) was
chosen to yield about 60 participants and 240 choices in each of 15 framing-effect comparisons.
We did not conduct formal power analyses because (a) different theories predict different
framing effects in different conditions, including no effect in some conditions, and (b) each of
these separate comparisons would involve only 7% of our data. Other studies using stimuli very
similar to ours (DeKay & Dou, 2024a, 2024b; DeKay & Garge, 2023; DeKay et al., 2022) have
been able to demonstrate numerous variations in framing effects using comparable total sample
sizes. For small subsets of their design, DeKay and Dou (2024a, in their Supplemental Material)
estimated power to be .83 for 60 participants and 240 choices, assuming an effect size like that in
the Many Labs replication of the original disease problem (d = 0.60; Klein et al., 2014) and using
Kumle et al.’s (2021) simulation-based procedures for statistical models like ours.
In order, we excluded participants who answered no questions (50 and 5 in the student and
CR samples, respectively); were flagged by Qualtrics as duplicates (87 and 1), potential frauds
(20 and 17), or bots (7 and 4); finished the task too quickly (13 and 18) or too slowly (11 and 7);
skipped more than one of the eight choice and rating questions (1 and 11); answered any pair of
choice and rating questions inconsistently (84 and 31); or whose answers to a debriefing question
about the purpose of the study indicated familiarity with framing effects (3 and 2). After
exclusions, 862 and 928 participants remained in the two samples, respectively. Participants in
the student sample were mostly from Ohio (77%) and were 18–47 years old (M = 19.0, SD =
2.3); those in the CR sample were from 49 states (plus Washington, DC, and Puerto Rico) and
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 22
were 18–89 years old (M = 40.6, SD = 13.3). Among student participants (and CR participants in
parentheses), 63% (52%) identified as female, 37% (47%) as male, and 0% (1%) as gender
nonconforming; 71% (76%) identified as White, 7% (8%) as Black or African American, 14%
(10%) as Asian, and 4% (3%) as another race or mixed race; 5% (5%) also identified as Hispanic
or Latino/a; 91% (98%) reported English as their first language (possibly among others).
Procedure
In an anonymous survey, participants considered four different scenarios in random order, in
either the gain or loss frame for all scenarios. In each scenario, participants chose between two
programs (A and B) that differed in riskiness but had equal EVs. Participants also indicated their
preference on a 7-point scale with endpoints labeled strong preference for Program A [B] and
the midpoint labeled no preference at all. Which program was called Program A and listed first
was randomly determined in each scenario for each participant. At the end of the survey,
participants answered a few demographic and debriefing questions.
Materials
The four scenarios involved a form of cancer with 9,000 patients at risk (based on Fagley &
Miller, 1987), a drought with 48,000 acres of crops at risk (based on Peters & Levin, 2008), an
investment with $72,000 at risk (based on Tombu & Mandel, 2015), and a wildfire with 6,000
animals at risk (based on Peters & Levin, 2008).
1 for examples). We used nine probabilities, always presented as fractions: 1/5, 1/4, 1/3, 2/5, 1/2,
3/5, 2/3, 3/4, and 4/5. Let 𝑃 and 𝑉 (with upper-case subscripts) be the probability and value of
$ $
the better outcome in the all-or-none risky option in the gain frame, and let 𝑃 and 𝑉 (with
% %
lower-case subscripts) be the corresponding numbers in the somewhat risky options. We set 𝑃
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 23
and 𝑉 equal to 2/5 and 9,000 for cancer, 1/2 and 48,000 for drought, 1/3 and 72,000 for
investment, and 3/5 and 6,000 for wildfire. In each domain, the worse outcome in the risky
option had probability 1 − 𝑃 and value 𝑉 = 0. The value of the certain option, 𝑉 , was equal
$ & ’
to the EV of the risky option, 𝑃 × 𝑉 .
$ $
For the SR option, we set 𝑃 two steps higher than 𝑃 in the above probability sequence
ZG
% $
(e.g., 3/5 rather than 2/5) and lowered 𝑉 from 𝑉 to maintain the EV. For the SR option, we
ZL
% $
set 𝑃 two steps lower than 𝑃 (e.g., 1/4 rather than 2/5) and increased 𝑉 from 0 to maintain the
% $ (
EV. For the SR option, we set 𝑉 = (𝑉 + 𝑉 )⁄2 and 𝑉 = 𝑉 ⁄2 while leaving 𝑃 = 𝑃 .
% ’ $ ( ’ % $
Constructing the SR option was slightly more complicated. We set 𝑃 two steps lower than 𝑃
MM
% $
(e.g., 1/4 rather than 2/5, as in SR ), set 𝑉 = [𝑉 (SR ) + 𝑉 ]⁄2, and increased 𝑉 from 0 to
ZL
% % )* $ (
maintain the EV. Compared to SR , SR had a lower value for 𝑃 and higher values for 𝑉 and
M MM
% %
𝑉 .
These procedures yielded round numbers for all outcomes, a mix of probabilities and
outcomes across domains for each option type (to reduce redundancy), and the same riskiness
order for the option types in each domain. To translate options to the loss frame, we subtracted
𝑉 from all outcomes and dropped the minus sign. Finally, we paired the six option types to
create 15 risk comparisons in each frame in each domain.
Design
Each participant was assigned to one of 30 between-participants conditions (15 risk
comparisons ´ 2 frames) and made one choice in each of the four domains. We varied frame
between participants because seeing the same scenarios in both frames could lead participants to
respond more consistently, yielding smaller framing effects (see Piñon & Gambara’s, 2005,
meta-analysis; but see Kühberger’s, 1998, meta-analysis for a null result for “reference point”
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 24
framing effects). Similarly, we varied risk comparison between participants because we wanted
to avoid possible carryover effects between different option types (e.g., with or without zero
outcomes) in the same scenarios. In Experiment 2, we varied risk comparison within participants.
Theoretical Predictions
Each theory’s predictions for the strength of preference (SoP) for less risky option in each of
the 120 choice problems (4 domains ´ 15 risk comparisons ´ 2 frames) appear in the
Supplemental Material.
For each version of PT (PT , PT , PT , and PT ), we computed the difference between
vf wf vf+wf full
the evaluations of the less risky and more risky options in each choice. We then divided the
result by 𝑉 to standardize the differences across domains. The predicted SoP for the less risky
option in each choice was thus [𝑃𝑇(𝐿𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦) − 𝑃𝑇(𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦)]⁄𝑉 . For PT , we
full
verified that the evaluations of all 48 options (4 domains ´ 6 options ´ 2 frames) matched those
from an online calculator (Köbberling, 2002).
Similarly, for each version of TAX (TAX , TAX , TAX , and TAX ), we computed the
vf wt vf+wt full
predicted SoP in each choice as [𝑇𝐴𝑋(𝐿𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦) − 𝑇𝐴𝑋(𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦)]⁄𝑉 $. For TAX ,
full
we verified that the evaluations of all 48 options matched those from an online calculator
(Birnbaum & Bailey, 1998).6
For FTT, we coded the predicted SoP in each choice as 1 if the categorical some-versus-none
comparison favored the less risky option (as in the gain frame of C vs. R comparisons), –1 if it
favored the risky option (as in the loss frame of C vs. R comparisons), and 0 if it favored neither
option (when both options contained a zero outcome or when neither option did). EVA makes
6 The online TAX calculator provided certainty equivalents, which we raised to the 0.41 power to get the TAX
evaluations. For the loss domain, we entered outcomes without minus signs and reversed the final result.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 25
the same predictions as FTT for the choices in this article.
In FTT+, the categorical some-versus-none distinction is highlighted when a nonzero
outcome in one option has the same probability as a zero outcome in the other option. In such
cases (SR vs. R choices and in losses only for SR vs. SR choices because of the way we
M MM ZL
created the options), we doubled the usual FTT scores to ±2. Possible SoP scores were thus –2,
–1, 0, 1, and 2.
For GBC, we computed each option’s score as the number of good aspects (nonzero gains or
zero losses) minus the number of bad aspects (zero gains or nonzero losses), with possible scores
of –2, –1, 0, 1, and 2. We then computed the predicted SoP in each choice as
𝐺𝐵𝐶(𝐿𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦) − 𝐺𝐵𝐶(𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦), with possible scores of –2, –1, 0, 1, and 2.
For SA, we used the sentimentr package in R (Rinker, 2021) to determine a score for each
option description and then computed the predicted SoP for in each choice as 𝑆𝐴(𝐿𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦) −
𝑆𝐴(𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑦). We omitted the phrase, “If Program A [B] is adopted,” from the descriptions
because participants’ choices are presumed to resolve whatever uncertainty it might imply (e.g.,
the certain option is treated as certain). For the SR , SR , and R options in the investment
ZL ZG
domain, we replaced four instances of “$0” with “no money.” We had used “$0” to match
Tombu and Mandel’s (2015) wording, but doing so had an unanticipated consequence. Because
sentimentr ignores numbers, it made no distinction between these options and SR options
without zeros, leaving the certain option as the only distinct option in each frame. That, in turn,
led to poor predictions, even when all domains were considered. Faced with the choice between
simply recounting this unfortunate tale and investigating the potential of SA in the absence of
such quirks, we chose the latter. Results for SA with the original “$0” appear in the
Supplemental Material.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 26
For PH, we followed the steps specified in Brandstätter et al. (2006). We coded the predicted
SoP in each choice as 1 if the discriminating comparison favored the less risky option and –1 if it
favored the more risky option. Interestingly, 81% of the predictions were based on the first
comparison (minimum gains or minimum losses).
Unlike the predictions of PT, TAX, and SA, the predictions of FTT, FTT+, GBC, and (with
theories’ SoP predictions with frame and each other for the 120 choice problems in our
experiments. Predictions from the two value functions (PT and TAX ) had the highest
vf vf
correlations with frame, whereas predictions from PT and GBC had the lowest. The pairwise
wf
correlations between theories’ predictions ranged from .52 to .998, with a median of .81. These
high correlations suggest that it may be difficult to differentiate between theories’ performance
in predicting participants’ choices. Among the three most prominent theories, it is interesting that
expectation-based TAX was more highly correlated with gist-based FTT (r = .97) than with
full
expectation-based PT (r = .88); the latter two theories were less correlated (r = .83).
full
Results
In the student sample, participants chose the less risky option 68.5% of the time in the gain
frame and 48.6% of the time in the loss frame. In the CR sample, the percentages were 70.9% in
gains and 49.7% in losses. Although there was substantial risk aversion in gains, there was
essentially no risk seeking in losses.7 To assess the significance of these effects, we used mixed-
effects logistic regression (run using the glmer function in R’s lmer package; Bates et al., 2015)
7 When we considered SR to be the riskier option in SR vs. SR choices in losses and SR to be the
MM MM M ZL
riskier option in SR vs. SR choices in losses (in accord with labels based on an S-shaped utility function), we
ZL ZG
observed slightly more risk seeking in losses, across all choices. With these labels, the less risky option was chosen
46.6% and 44.5% of the time in losses in the student and CR samples, respectively. When we excluded SR vs.
MM
SR choices and SR vs. SR choices entirely, student participants chose the less risky option 69.3% and 47.3%
M ZL ZG
of the time in gains and losses, respectively; for CR participants, the percentages were 71.9% and 46.6%.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 27
Correlations of Theories’ Strength-of-Preference (SoP) Predictions With Frame and Each Other Across the 120
Choice Problems in Our Experiments
emarF
TP
fv
TP
fw
TP
fw+fv
TP
lluf XAT
fv
XAT
tw
XAT
tw+fv
XAT
lluf
TTF
+TTF
CBG
AS
PT .78
vf
PT .41 .58
wf
PT .56 .75 .97
vf+wf
PT .47 .71 .92 .95
full
TAX .73 .99 .61 .78 .73
vf
TAX .69 .82 .83 .90 .90 .79
wt
TAX .72 .96 .77 .89 .86 .97 .90
vf+wt
TAX .70 .94 .80 .92 .88 .95 .90 .998
full
FTT .64 .89 .77 .88 .83 .93 .80 .97 .97
FTT+ .62 .85 .67 .79 .75 .89 .73 .91 .91 .95
GBC .43 .72 .65 .74 .68 .80 .54 .81 .82 .92 .89
SA .62 .81 .66 .77 .67 .85 .70 .86 .86 .87 .82 .77
PH .69 .79 .57 .69 .70 .77 .80 .81 .80 .73 .69 .52 .65
Note. Boldface type indicates the largest correlation between a theory’s SoP predictions and frame or between
two theories’ SoP predictions. Italic type indicates the smallest correlation between a theory’s SoP predictions and
frame or between two theories’ SoP predictions. Underlined type indicates correlations between the SoP
predictions of the three most prominent theories, PT , TAX , and FTT.
full full
to model the probability that participants chose the less risky option. We used Frame (coded –0.5
for losses and 0.5 for gains) as the primary predictor, Domain (dummy coded) as a covariate,
random intercepts for participants and risk comparisons (a 3-level model with participants nested
within risk comparisons), and a random slope for Frame to allow for heterogeneity of the
framing effect across risk comparisons, as in DeKay et al.’s (2022) metastudies approach. The
effect of Frame was significant in the student sample (b = 1.10, 95% CI = [0.90, 1.29], OR =
3.00, z = 11.00, p < .001) and in the CR sample (b = 1.55, 95% CI = [1.31, 1.79], OR = 4.71, z =
12.52, p < .001). In separate (and simpler) models for each domain in each sample, the framing
effect was always significant (all bs ≥ 0.75, all ps < .001).
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 28
Choice Proportions and Framing Effects in Experiment 1
Gains
Losses
Note. Panels show the proportion of time participants chose the less risky option in the gain and
loss frames (top row) and the corresponding framing effect (bottom row) for each of the 15 risk
comparisons in each sample in Experiment 1. Framing effects are the coefficients of Frame in
separate mixed-effects logistic regression models. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.
C = certain; R = risky; SR = somewhat risky (mismatched); SR = somewhat risky
MM M
(matched); SR = somewhat risky (zero in losses); SR = somewhat risky (zero in gains).
ZL ZG
Results for Separate Risk Comparisons
We also assessed the framing effect separately for each of the 15 risk comparisons in each
eht
rof
noitroporP
eciohC
noitpO
yksiR
sseL
Student Participants
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Standard Somewhat Certain vs. Somewhat
Risky vs. Somewhat Risky vs.
Risky Risky Somewhat
Risky
tceffE
gnimarF
)elacS
tigoL
no
ecnereffiD(
−1
−2
.sv
.sv
RS
MM
.sv
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
MM
RS
.sv
RS
.sv
LZ
RS
.sv
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
LZ
CloudResearch Participants
-1
-2
Standard Somewhat Certain vs. Somewhat
Risky vs. Somewhat Risky vs.
Risky Risky Somewhat
Risky
.sv
.sv
RS
MM
.sv
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
MM
RS
.sv
RS
.sv
LZ
RS
.sv
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
LZ
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 29
comparisons in the student sample and 11 of the 15 comparisons in the CR sample, despite the
relatively small number of participants (about 60) in each comparison.
The standard C vs. R framing effect was significant in the student sample (b = 0.99, 95% CI
= [0.33, 1.64], OR = 2.68, z = 2.93, p = .003) and in the CR sample (b = 1.72, 95% CI = [0.74,
2.70], OR = 5.59, z = 3.43, p < .001). Framing effects were also significant in all eight SR vs. R
comparisons and in seven of the eight C vs. SR comparisons. In contrast, there were six
nonsignificant effects among the 12 SR vs. SR comparisons, with the details differing in the two
samples.
Although we prefer to keep the student and CR samples separate to illustrate the
generalizability of our results, differences in the significance of results in the two samples are not
surprising with such small subsamples. When we combined the two samples to yield about 120
participants in each comparison, framing effects were significant in 13 of the 15 comparisons,
with only the SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR comparisons being nonsignificant.8
MM M ZL ZG
Comparisons to Previous Results. These combined-sample results may be compared to the
M MM NZ
options because there are no zero outcomes). We observed significant framing effects in all cases
in which previous results were mixed (all C vs. SR comparisons), in one case where Schneider
(1992) had found no framing effect (SR vs. R), and in three of the four cases in which there
ZG
had been no data (SR vs. R, SR vs. SR , and SR vs. SR ). In one new case (SR vs.
MM NZ ZL NZ ZG NZ
SR ; SR vs. SR in our data), we obtained a nonsignificant effect. Finally, we also observed
NZ MM M
8 These are the two risk comparisons for which the relative riskiness of the options depends on the labeling
convention. If SR is considered the riskier option in SR vs. SR choices in losses and SR is considered the
MM MM M ZL
riskier option in SR vs. SR choices in losses, the points for losses in these risk comparisons would move from
ZL ZG
positive and (in some cases) relatively large. However, we do not think the term framing effect should be used to
describe situations like these in which the proportions being compared are for different options (e.g., SR in gains
MM
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 30
a nonsignificant effect in SR vs. SR choices, where Schneider had reported a typical framing
ZL ZG
effect.9 Differences in participant populations, materials, and procedures make us hesitant to
interpret such discrepancies.
variety of theoretical accounts for framing effects make it easy to get lost in the weeds. In the
next section, we use mixed-effects logistic regression to compare theories’ performance in
predicting choice proportions for all 120 choice problems. Here, we use less formal comparisons
to highlight several things the theories got right and wrong in their predictions.10 To make
theories’ predictions for each risk comparison comparable to the empirical results (where we
controlled for domain), we also averaged each theory’s predictions across domains. For complete
results (13 theories ´ 15 risk comparisons, with empirical results averaged across the two
predict the absence of a framing effect if the difference between its predicted SoP for the less
risky option in gains and losses was less than 15% as large as its predicted difference for
standard C vs. R choices.11
All the theories correctly predicted the presence of framing effects in C vs. R and SR vs. R
choices. Only FTT+ and GBC correctly predicted the substantially larger framing effect in SR
vs. R choices, but this prediction is these theories’ raison d'être. Wall et al. (2020) suggested that
9 Schneider’s (1992) results for SR vs. SR choices (25/75 vs. 75/25 choices in her terminology) do not
ZL ZG
appear to be sensitive to which option is considered less risky in losses. Choice proportions for the option she
considered less risky (25/75) were close to .5 for most of her scenarios in losses, so reversing those choice
proportions would have little effect.
10 This analysis is more complete than the corresponding secondary analysis in our preregistrations. The main
differences are that we aggregate results and predictions over domains and then tally theories’ errors to yield a
comparison metric.
11 This arbitrary cutoff was lower than the smallest significant framing effect, which was 52% as large as the C
vs. R framing effect in the combined samples of Experiment 1 and 19% as large as the C vs. R framing effect in the
combined samples of Experiment 2.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 31
SA might also predict the amplification, but it did not do so for our options.
Performance was more varied for C vs. SR choices, though most theories still predicted
framing effects. However, for C vs. SR and C vs. SR choices, GBC incorrectly predicted
MM M
reversed framing effects, FTT and FTT+ incorrectly predicted no framing effects, and TAX and
vf
SA incorrectly predicted no framing effects according to the <15% rule specified above. For C
vs. SR and C vs. SR choices, GBC incorrectly predicted no framing effects.
ZL ZG
Moving to SR vs. SR choices, most theories correctly predicted the absence of framing
effects in SR vs. S and SR vs. SR choices, although PH predicted a sizeable reversed
MM M ZL ZG
MM M
and PT predicted a modest reversed framing effect in SR vs. SR choices (one of the point
full ZL ZG
wf ZL
vs. SR choices (24% and 31% as large as that in C vs. R choices, respectively), but we did not
ZG
charge them with an error because the predictions were so close to the nonsignificant observed
framing effect (27% as large as that in C vs. R choices). In SR vs. S and SR vs. SR
MM ZL MM ZG
choices, PH incorrectly predicted no framing effects, whereas the other accounts generally
predicted nonzero framing effects. Finally, PT and PT each failed to predict significant
wf full
framing effects twice in various SR vs. SR choices.
The above observations are more useful for understanding where individual theories made
(mostly categorical) errors than for comparing the relative performance of theories over the full
range of choices. Even so, GBC seems to have fared the worst, with five relatively clear
prediction errors resulting from its “double counting” in SR options with two positive or two
negative outcomes. GBC was followed by PH and PT , with four relatively clear errors each.
full
PT , PT , TAX , TAX , and TAX each made only one relatively clear error, which was
vf vf+wf wt vf+wt full
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 32
the failure to predict the larger framing effect in SR vs. R choices. The remaining theories
(PT , TAX , FTT, FTT+, and SA) fell in between.
wf vf
Results for All Choices
Primary Regression Models. To better assess the relative performance of theories in
predicting participants’ choices, we conducted a pair of mixed-effects logistic regression models
for each theory. In the first model, we used a theory-specific strength-of-preference variable
(SoP) as the primary predictor, Domain (dummy coded) as a covariate, and random intercepts for
participants and risk comparisons (with participants nested within risk comparisons). In the
second model for each theory, we added Frame (coded –0.5 for losses and 0.5 for gains) as an
additional predictor, with a random slope to allow for heterogeneity of the framing effect across
lines of results for each theory: one for the model without Frame and one for the model with
Frame. Recall that this was an exercise in out-of-sample prediction, not model fitting. No free
parameters were used to generate the SoP predictions, and all theories had the same number of
free parameters in the logistic regressions.
the p < .001 level in all 26 models without Frame and at the p < .05 level in 22 of the 26 models
with Frame, indicating that the theories predicted at least some of the variation in choice
proportions across the conditions of our experiment. Second, the coefficient for Frame was
significant at the p < .05 level in 22 of 26 tests, indicating that the theories generally did not
completely account for framing effects. Third, all the SoP coefficients were higher in the CR
sample than in the student sample, indicating that the theories did a better job of predicting
choices in the CR sample.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 33
Results of Mixed-Effects Logistic Regression Models for Predicting Choice of the Less Risky Option in Experiment 1
Student participants CR participants
SoP Frame SoP Frame
Theory or account coefficient coefficient BIC coefficient coefficient BIC
Frame only 1.00*** 4435.4 1.26*** 4509.0
Expectation-based theories
Prospect theory
Value function only 23.84*** 4429.9 34.66*** 4472.7
(𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88, 𝛾 = 𝛿 = 𝜆 = 1) 11.28* 0.62** 4438.8 31.06*** 0.23 4489.1
Weighting function only 11.35*** 4459.8 12.91*** 4544.7
(𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 0.69, 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 3.11† 0.84*** 4440.4 4.06* 1.05*** 4513.9
𝜆 = 1)
Value and weighting functions 8.62*** 4437.9 11.04*** 4507.4
(𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88, 𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 3.20* 0.73*** 4439.1 5.25** 0.81*** 4509.2
0.69, 𝜆 = 1)
Full, with TK92’s parameter values 4.31*** 4468.0 6.80*** 4509.7
(𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88, 𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 0.98 0.88*** 4441.5 3.76*** 0.82*** 4505.0
0.69, 𝜆 = 2.25)
Transfer-of-attention-exchange theory
Value function only 3.81*** 4430.0 5.55*** 4472.5
(𝛽 = 0.41, 𝛾 = 1, 𝛿 = 0) 1.92* 0.61** 4437.5 4.64*** 0.33 4488.4
! ! !
Weight-transfer function only 5.38*** 4455.4 7.46*** 4514.3
(𝛽 = 𝛾 = 1, 𝛿 = 0.95) 0.83 0.90*** 4443.0 3.36* 0.84*** 4513.0
! ! !
Value and weight-transfer functions 2.37*** 4429.6 3.40*** 4474.1
(𝛽 = 0.41, 𝛾 = 1, 𝛿 = 0.95) 1.10* 0.63** 4438.7 2.83*** 0.31 4493.2
! ! !
Full, with BN98’s parameter values 2.32*** 4430.6 3.33*** 4476.1
(𝛽 = 0.41, 𝛾 = 0.79, 𝛿 = 1.04* 0.64** 4438.8 2.67*** 0.36† 4495.0
! ! !
0.95)
Gist-based or heuristic theories and accounts
Fuzzy-trace theory a 0.78*** 4436.7 1.13*** 4485.1
0.33* 0.69*** 4438.7 0.78*** 0.54** 4499.8
Fuzzy-trace theory plus 0.61*** 4437.9 0.87*** 4483.7
0.27* 0.70*** 4436.9 0.62*** 0.56** 4495.7
Good-bad count 0.32*** 4475.0 0.48*** 4536.1
0.12† 0.86*** 4439.9 0.27*** 0.93*** 4507.3
Sentiment analysis 2.42*** 4411.1 2.76*** 4499.9
1.66*** 0.51** 4418.1 1.68*** 0.76*** 4494.5
Priority heuristic 0.52*** 4434.5 0.68*** 4503.7
0.24** 0.67*** 4435.4 0.38*** 0.75*** 4508.6
Note. Results for two models are presented for each theory or account. The first model omits the Frame predictor, whereas the
second model includes it. Boldface type indicates the best-performing model without the Frame predictor. Italic type indicates
the best-performing model with the Frame predictor. Underlined type indicates a model with a singular random-effects
structure. SoP = a theory’s predicted strength of preference for the less risky option; BIC = Bayesian information criterion;
TK92 = Tversky and Kahneman (1992); BN98 = Birnbaum and Navarrete (1998).
a For the choices in our experiments, the explicated valence account made the same predictions as fuzzy-trace theory.
†p < .10. *p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
We compare theories using two criteria: one general and one specific. For the former, we use
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 34
the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) to compare the fits of models that omit the Frame
predictor. Models without Frame provide the purest test of the theories’ ability to account for
variation in choice proportions within and across frames.12 A lower BIC indicates a better model,
with a difference of 0 to 2, 2 to 6, 6 to 10, or more than 10 indicating weak, moderate, strong, or
very strong support for the lower-BIC model, respectively (Raftery, 1995). For the latter
criterion, we use the coefficient of Frame in the second model for each theory. To the extent that
a theory accounts for framing effects (variation across frames rather than within frames), the
Frame coefficient should be small and nonsignificant.
In the student sample, SA had the lowest BIC for models without Frame, by a wide margin.
It was very strongly preferred over the next-closest theories, TAX , PT and TAX . In the
vf+wt vf, vf
CR sample, TAX had the lowest BIC. It was preferred weakly to PT and TAX ,
vf vf vf+wt
moderately to TAX , and very strongly to the remaining theories. SA ranked seventh in the CR
full
sample.
For the coefficient of Frame, the best-performing theories were the same as for BIC, though
in different orders. In the student sample, the coefficient was lowest for SA, followed by TAX ,
vf
PT , and TAX . In the CR sample, the coefficient was lowest for PT , followed by TAX ,
vf vf+wt vf vf+wt
TAX , and TAX , with the coefficients being nonsignificant at the p < .05 level in all four
vf full
cases.13 SA ranked eighth in the CR sample. The correlation between our two criteria was .95 in
12 In our preregistrations, we mentioned only the models with Frame, but the models without Frame provide the
lowest BIC is the same in models with and without Frame. We also mentioned using the Akaike information
criterion (AIC) in addition to BIC. However, because the logistic regression models for the different theories have
the same number of parameters, the ordering of theories by AIC and BIC is guaranteed to be the same.
13 The four corresponding mixed-effects models in the CR sample had singular random-effects structures. In
each case, the result was presumably related to the reduced heterogeneity of the Frame slope across risk
comparisons (reduced because the theory explained much of the original heterogeneity in the framing effect). To be
clear, the estimated variance of random slope was not zero, but the estimated correlation between the random slope
and the random intercept (by risk comparison) was –1 in each case. The usual solution is to simplify the random-
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 35
both samples.
The performance difference for SA in the two samples is tough to explain. Its predictions in
the cancer and wildfire domains and in the gain frame of the drought and investment domains
were similar to those of FTT in that it predicted strong preferences when only one of the two
options included a zero outcome. However, SA predicted only very weak preferences in the loss
frame of the drought and investment domains, where crops and money rather than human or
animal lives were at stake. Making fewer predictions of strong preferences apparently served SA
well in the student sample, but not in the CR sample. To foreshadow some of our later results,
SA’s exemplary performance in the student sample of Experiment 1 was not repeated in either
sample of Experiment 2.
The strong performance of PT , TAX , and TAX can be attributed in part to the
vf vf vf+wt
relatively high correlations between these theories’ predictions and the Frame variable (see
other components never improved BIC in models without Frame and never lowered the
coefficient of Frame when it was present. This is unsurprising for loss aversion, which has very
limited relevance for risky-choice framing effects (DeKay & Garge, 2023). Moreover,
participants made choices only in gains or losses, with no exposure to the other frame or to
mixed prospects. For TAX, the weighting function never helped, as TAX always
vf+wt
outperformed TAX . This is also unsurprising, given the function’s limited relevance for
full
framing effects (DeKay & Garge, 2023). It is more surprising that PT’s weighting function and
TAX’s weight-transfer function performed so poorly on their own (neither ranked better than
tenth on either measure) because either function is sufficient for generating framing effects in
theories.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 36
traditional C vs. R choices (DeKay & Garge, 2023). We speculate that making only four choices
in different substantive domains may not have prompted participants to engage with the
probabilities in the problems.
FTT, FTT+, and PH performed in the middle of the pack (just below TAX ), with ranks of
full
5–8 on our two criteria. It is puzzling that FTT+ did not outperform FTT in the regressions,
M MM ZL
(the only other risk comparison where the FTT versions make different predictions), the results
full
was dragged down by its weighting function and loss aversion, performed poorly in the
regressions, as did GBC (neither ranked better than tenth on either measure). We will summarize
these rankings along with those from Experiment 2 in our General Discussion.
prominent theories, PT , TAX , and FTT, in both samples (see the Supplemental Material for
full full
plots for other theories). Three features are prominent in each panel: The positive slope of the
lines depicts the coefficient of the theory’s SoP variable, the vertical separation between the lines
depicts the residual framing effect, and the scatter of points above and below the lines depicts the
unexplained variation in the observed choice proportions. Differences in the performance of
these three theories are somewhat easier to discern in the CR sample than in the student sample,
In the panels for PT , some points for gains appear to the left of the center line, indicating
full
predicted risk seeking, and some points for losses appear to the right of the center line, indicating
predicted risk aversion. This is partially the result of the weighting function, as in the well-
known fourfold pattern of risk attitudes (Tversky & Kahneman, 1992). For eight of the points for
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 37
Results for Three Prominent Theories in Experiment 1
Student Participants CloudResearch Participants
3 3
Gains
2 Losses 2
1 1
Prospect
0 0
Theory
−1 -1
−2 -2
−3 -3
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3
3 3
2 2
1 1
TAX
0 0
Theory
−1 -1
−2 -2
−3 -3
−0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4
3 3
2 2
1 1
Fuzzy-Trace
0 0
Theory
(with horizontal jitter)
−1 -1
−2 -2
−3 -3
−1 0 1 −1 0 1
Note. Panels show the results of mixed-effects logistic regressions for predicting choice of the
less risky option in 120 problems (4 domains ´ 15 risk comparisons ´ 2 frames) in Experiment 1.
Predictions from prospect theory and transfer-of-attention-exchange (TAX) theory are for the
full versions with parameter values from Tversky and Kahneman (1992) and Birnbaum and
Navarrete (1998), respectively.
losses, however, it is the result of labeling SR the less risky option in SR vs. SR choices
MM MM M
and labeling SR the less risky option in SR vs. SR choices (more on this below). The
ZL ZL ZG
)elacS
tigoL(
noitpO
yksiR
sseL
eht
rof
noitroporP
eciohC
Predicted Strength of Preference for the Less Risky Option
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 38
larger spread of predictions for losses than for gains is due to the amplifying effect of loss
aversion.
In the panels for TAX , the weighting and weight-transfer functions can also lead to
full
predictions of risk seeking in gains and risk aversion in losses, though there are fewer such cases
than for PT . The labeling issue mentioned above also accounts for eight of these points.
full
Additionally, the points for gains form two distinct clusters. The cluster with stronger predicted
preferences for the less risky option is for choices in which only one of the options has a zero
outcome, whereas the cluster with weaker predicted preferences is for choices in which neither
option has (or both options have) a zero outcome. Points for losses show a similar but weaker
pattern. It is interesting that, at least for the parameter values used here, TAX mimics this
full
feature of FTT (recall that the correlation between the theories’ predictions was .97 for our 120
Alternative Regression Models. To check the robustness of the above regression results, we
conducted two sets of additional regressions (see Tables S6 and S8 in the Supplemental
Material). In the first set, we reversed the labeling of the options in the loss frame for SR vs.
MM
SR and SR vs. SR choices. For these eight problems (four domains ´ two risk
M ZL ZG
comparisons), we reversed the coding of the binary choice variable and all theories’ SoP
(in the panels for FTT, four of these points have SoP values of zero). These reversals reduced the
variability in the framing effect across risk comparisons (see Footnote 8), resulting in singular
fits for all models with the Frame predictor. We therefore removed the random slope for Frame
in those models. The overall results were similar to those in our primary analyses. The
correlation between the BICs of models without Frame and the BICs of the corresponding
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 39
Frame, the correlations were .87 and .86 in the two samples. SA again had the lowest BIC and
the smallest residual framing effect in the student sample, while TAX (rather than TAX or
vf+wt vf
PT ) had the best performance on both criteria in the CR sample. Compared to the results in
vf
apparent framing effects increased in SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR choices (see Footnote 8).
MM M ZL ZG
In the second set of additional regressions, we excluded all SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR
MM M ZL ZG
choices in both frames. To avoid singular fits, we again removed the random slope for Frame in
models that included that predictor. In models without Frame, the theories’ BICs with 13 and 15
risk comparisons were correlated .92 in the student sample and .98 in the CR sample. For the
coefficients of Frame, the correlations were .76 and .96. In the student sample, TAX had the
vf+wt
lowest BIC (SA placed third), while SA again had the smallest residual framing effect. In the CR
sample, TAX had the best performance on both criteria. As might be expected, excluding
vf+wt
the coefficient of Frame in all models that included that predictor.
Summary
Framing effects were significant in most risk comparisons in both samples and in 13 of the
15 risk comparisons when we combined the samples. Interestingly, almost all theories correctly
predicted the absence of framing effects in SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR choices. Theories’
MM M ZL ZG
most common errors were the failure to predict the larger framing effects in SR vs. R choices
and the failure to predict typical framing effects in C vs. SR and C vs. SR choices.
MM M
In our regressions, all theories predicted variation in choice proportions, but the residual
framing effect almost always remained significant. Theory comparisons yielded relatively
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 40
consistent results, with one clear exception: SA did very well on both our metrics in the student
sample, but not in the CR sample. PT TAX , and TAX were among the best models on
vf, vf vf+wt
both metrics in both samples. TAX , FTT, FTT+, and PH tended to perform more poorly,
full
though TAX was fourth best on both metrics in the CR sample. Other versions of PT
full
performed much more poorly, as did GBC. Alternative regression models that addressed the
labeling issue in SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR choices yielded very similar results.
MM M ZL ZG
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to assess whether the above results would generalize to a
different experimental design in which each participant considered all 15 risk comparisons. As in
Experiment 1, we did not preregister specific hypotheses.
Method
Participants
In fall 2020 and winter 2021, we recruited 476 undergraduates from the Department of
Psychology at The Ohio State University. They received course credit for their participation.
Also in winter 2021, we recruited 483 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk via CR for an
incentive of $1.00, using the same data-quality settings as before.
Our target sample size was 400 in each sample (50 participants in each of eight conditions).
In terms of the total number of observations, our target was higher than in Experiment 1 (400
participants ´ 15 choices each = 6,000 choices per sample, compared to 900 participants ´ 4
choices each = 3,600 choices per sample). We did not conduct a formal power analysis, but we
assumed power would be higher in each of the 15 framing-effect comparisons because about 400
participants would contribute to each, compared to about 60 participants per comparison in
Experiment 1.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 41
In order, we excluded participants who answered no questions (11 and 14 in the student and
CR samples, respectively); were flagged by Qualtrics as duplicates (13 and 1), potential frauds (6
and 6), or bots (3 and 1); finished the task too quickly (19 and 30) or too slowly (5 and 7);
skipped more than one of the 30 choice and rating questions (4 and 8); answered more than one
pair of choice and rating questions inconsistently (20 and 15); or whose answers to a debriefing
question indicated familiarity with framing effects (0 and 0). After exclusions, 395 and 401
participants remained in the two samples, respectively. Participants in the student sample were
mostly from Ohio (84%) and were 18–37 years old (M = 19.2, SD = 2.1); those in the CR sample
were from 45 states (plus Washington, DC) and were 18–78 years old (M = 40.5, SD = 13.1).
Among student participants (and CR participants in parentheses), 54% (50%) identified as
female, 45% (48%) as male, and 1% (2%) as gender nonconforming; 69% (77%) identified as
White, 7% (7%) as Black or African American, 12% (8%) as Asian, and 8% (2%) as another
race or mixed race; 5% (6%) also identified as Hispanic or Latino/a; 94% (98%) reported
English as their first language (possibly among others).
Procedure and Materials
Each participant considered 15 risk comparisons in random order, in one of the four domains
and in either gains or losses for all choices. Otherwise, the procedure and materials were the
same as in Experiment 1.
Design
Each participant was assigned to one of eight between-participants conditions (four domains
´ two frames). Because we varied risk comparison within participants, we varied domain
between participants to keep the task short.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 42
Theoretical Predictions
None of the theories considered provides a mechanism for adjusting predictions in response
to the mix of problems. As a result, theories’ SoP predictions were the same as before.
Results
In the student sample, participants chose the less risky option 70.8% of the time in the gain
frame and 49.5% of the time in the loss frame. In the CR sample, the percentages were 72.4%
and 46.7% in gains and losses, respectively.14 In mixed-effects logistic regressions like those in
Experiment 1 (but with the random intercepts for participants and risk comparisons now crossed
rather than nested), the framing effect was significant in the student sample (b = 1.06, 95% CI =
[0.74, 1.38], OR = 2.89, z = 6.47, p < .001) and in the CR sample (b = 1.36, 95% CI = [0.91,
1.81], OR = 3.91, z = 5.96, p < .001). These effect sizes were very similar to those in Experiment
1. In separate (and simpler) models for each domain in each sample, the framing effect was
always significant (all bs ≥ 0.72, all ps ≤ .002).
Results for Separate Risk Comparisons
Because of the experimental design, we used regular (rather than mixed-effects) logistic
regression models for the separate risk comparisons. Framing effects were significant at the p
< .05 level in 12 of the 15 comparisons in both samples, though the details differed by sample
1.86, 95% CI = [1.38, 2.37], OR = 6.41, z = 7.37, p < .001) and in the CR sample (b = 2.05, 95%
CI = [1.59, 2.54], OR = 7.78, z = 8.43, p < .001). These C vs. R effects were larger than those in
14 When we considered SR to be the riskier option in SR vs. SR choices in losses and SR to be the
MM MM M ZL
riskier option in SR vs. SR choices in losses, the less risky option was chosen 44.9% and 39.9% of the time
ZL ZG
across all choices in the student and CR samples, respectively. When we excluded SR vs. SR choices and SR
MM M ZL
vs. SR choices entirely, student participants chose the less risky option 70.6% and 46.7% of the time in gains and
ZG
losses, respectively; for CR participants, the percentages were 72.3% and 42.3%.
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 43
Choice Proportions and Framing Effects in Experiment 2
Gains
Losses
Note. Panels show the proportion of time participants chose the less risky option in the gain and
loss frames (top row) and the corresponding framing effect (bottom row) for each of the 15 risk
comparisons in each sample in Experiment 2. Framing effects are the coefficients of Frame in
separate regular (not mixed-effects) logistic regression models. Error bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals. C = certain; R = risky; SR = somewhat risky (mismatched); SR =
MM M
somewhat risky (matched); SR = somewhat risky (zero in losses); SR = somewhat risky
ZL ZG
(zero in gains).
Experiment 1. When we combined the two samples, framing effects were significant in 14 of the
eht
rof
noitroporP
eciohC
noitpO
yksiR
sseL
Student Participants
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Standard Somewhat Certain vs. Somewhat
Risky vs. Somewhat Risky vs.
Risky Risky Somewhat
Risky
tceffE
gnimarF
)elacS
tigoL
no
ecnereffiD(
−1
.sv
.sv
RS
MM
.sv
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
MM
RS
.sv
RS
.sv
LZ
RS
.sv
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
LZ
CloudResearch Participants
-1
Standard Somewhat Certain vs. Somewhat
Risky vs. Somewhat Risky vs.
Risky Risky Somewhat
Risky
.sv
.sv
RS
MM
.sv
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
MM
RS
.sv
RS
.sv
LZ
RS
.sv
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
MM
RS
.sv
RS
LZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
RS
.sv
RS
GZ
LZ
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 44
15 comparisons, with the SR vs. SR comparison being the only exception.15
MM M
effect observed for SR vs. R choices in Experiment 1 (and in DeKay et al., 2022, and DeKay
MM
& Garge, 2023) did not appear in Experiment 2. We speculate that the within-participants
manipulation of risk comparison in Experiment 2 made the riskiness order C < SR < R more
salient to participants, so that in gains (for example) the preference for C over SR was less
likely to exceed the preference for C over R. A second difference between the results of
Experiments 1 and 2 was that (when the student and CR samples were combined) the framing
effect in SR vs. SR choices was significant in Experiment 2, consistent with Schneider’s
ZL ZG
(1992) result (see Footnote 9). A third difference was the greater similarity between the student
and CR samples: For the 15 framing effects, the correlation between samples increased from .49
in Experiment 1 to .86 in Experiment 2. This increase was due mostly to changes in the students’
results: The correlation between framing effects in the two experiments was .61 for students
and .92 for CR participants.
Comparisons to Theories’ Predictions. Considering theories’ categorical errors (e.g.,
predicting no framing effect when there was one), most theories performed about as well as they
GBC fared worse than before because they incorrectly predicted a larger framing effect in SR
vs. R choices, whereas the other theories did not. In addition, all theories except PT , PT ,
wf vf+wf
and SA failed to predict the significant (but small) framing effect in SR vs. SR choices in the
ZL ZG
15 If SR is considered the riskier option in SR vs. SR choices in losses and SR is considered the riskier
MM MM M ZL
option in SR vs. SR choices in losses, the points for losses in these risk comparisons would move from above
ZL ZG
and relatively large, but the term framing effect would no longer be appropriate (see Footnote 8).
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 45
combined sample. We did not charge PT with an error because its predicted framing effect in
vf+wf
SR vs. SR choices (14.9% as large as that in C vs. R choices) was so close to the observed
ZL ZG
framing effect (19% as large as that in C vs. R choices). GBC again made the most relatively
clear prediction errors, with seven, followed by FTT+ and PH with four each. PT made no
vf+wf
such errors, while PT , TAX , TAX , and TAX again made only one each. The remaining
vf wt vf+wt full
theories (PT , PT , TAX , FTT, and SA) fell in between.
wf full vf
Results for All Choices
Primary Regression Models. As in Experiment 1, we conducted a pair of mixed-effects
logistic regressions for each theory to predict participants’ choices. Both models included a
theory-specific SoP variable and dummy codes for Domain as predictors. The second model also
included Frame as a predictor. In both models, the random intercepts for participants and risk
comparisons were crossed rather than nested. In addition, both models included a random slope
for SoP, to allow the relationship between a theory’s predictions and participants’ choices to vary
across participants (the design of Experiment 1 did not allow for this effect). As in Experiment 1,
the model with Frame included a random slope for that variable, to allow for heterogeneity in the
domain may have encouraged participants in Experiment 2 to think more carefully and
consistently about the options. However, the inclusion of a random slope for SoP in our logistic
regression models also appears to have contributed to the increase in SoP coefficients.16
16 In logistic regression models, the variance of the error term is held constant at 𝜋 % /3. Adding random effects
partitions the error variance into level-1 and level-2 (and possibly level-3) components, but the entire model is
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 46
Results of Mixed-Effects Logistic Regression Models for Predicting Choice of the Less Risky Option in Experiment 2
Student participants CR participants
SoP Frame SoP Frame
Theory or account coefficient coefficient BIC coefficient coefficient BIC
Frame only 1.06*** 7262.5 1.36*** 6873.3
Expectation-based theories
Prospect theory
Value function only 34.51*** 7115.7 47.43*** 6745.5
(𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88, 𝛾 = 𝛿 = 𝜆 = 1) 30.45*** 0.20 7138.9 46.01*** 0.09 6750.1
Weighting function only 14.67*** 7133.7 19.25*** 6760.3
(𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 0.69, 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 8.09*** 0.88*** 7085.2 13.04*** 0.96*** 6693.4
𝜆 = 1)
Value and weighting functions 12.50*** 7066.3 16.38*** 6691.5
(𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88, 𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 9.18*** 0.52** 7071.5 13.62*** 0.51** 6682.1
0.69, 𝜆 = 1)
Full, with TK92’s parameter values 6.81*** 7099.7 9.67*** 6723.2
(𝛼 = 𝛽 = 0.88, 𝛾 = 0.61, 𝛿 = 3.78*** 0.76*** 7078.5 7.62*** 0.68*** 6705.3
0.69, 𝜆 = 2.25)
Transfer-of-attention-exchange theory
Value function only 5.56*** 7108.2 7.34*** 6771.8
(𝛽 = 0.41, 𝛾 = 1, 𝛿 = 0) 5.01*** 0.21† 7129.7 7.21*** 0.18 6753.9
! ! !
Weight-transfer function only 7.32*** 7178.5 10.63*** 6796.4
(𝛽 = 𝛾 = 1, 𝛿 = 0.95) 4.10** 0.71*** 7142.6 9.73*** 0.39 6766.0
! ! !
Value and weight-transfer functions 3.41*** 7078.2 4.64*** 6714.3
(𝛽 = 0.41, 𝛾 = 1, 𝛿 = 0.95) 3.09*** 0.19 7100.8 5.11*** –0.09 6714.4
! ! !
Full, with BN98’s parameter values 3.36*** 7073.5 4.56*** 6709.9
(𝛽 = 0.41, 𝛾 = 0.79, 𝛿 = 3.03*** 0.21 7095.3 5.03*** –0.07 6708.2
! ! !
0.95)
Gist-based or heuristic theories and accounts
Fuzzy-trace theory a 1.07*** 7123.2 1.33*** 6793.4
0.91*** 0.37* 7132.9 1.48*** 0.23 6738.6
Fuzzy-trace theory plus 0.85*** 7151.2 1.08*** 6814.2
0.66*** 0.50** 7159.9 1.15*** 0.33 6760.6
Good-bad count 0.34*** 7251.3 0.32*** 6952.0
0.29*** 0.84*** 7180.6 0.57*** 0.87** 6765.7
Sentiment analysis 3.28*** 7133.5 3.68*** 6847.7
2.75*** 0.42* 7142.3 3.05*** 0.70** 6762.6
Priority heuristic 0.48*** 7247.3 0.66*** 6883.8
0.37*** 0.58** 7206.8 0.46*** 0.78** 6836.1
Note. Results for two models are presented for each theory or account. The first model omits the Frame predictor, whereas the
second model includes it. Boldface type indicates the best-performing model without the Frame predictor. Italic type indicates
the best-performing model with the Frame predictor. SoP = a theory’s predicted strength of preference for the less risky option;
BIC = Bayesian information criterion; TK92 = Tversky and Kahneman (1992); BN98 = Birnbaum and Navarrete (1998).
a For the choices in our experiments, the explicated valence account made the same predictions as fuzzy-trace theory.
†p < .10. *p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
scaled to maintain constant level-1 error variance, yielding larger coefficients (see Snijders & Bosker, 2012, pp.
307–309). To gauge the magnitude of this effect, we reran the first model (without Frame) for PT , TAX , and
full full
FTT in both samples while omitting the random slope for SoP. The coefficients for SoP were larger than in
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 47
Based on the BICs for models without Frame, PT was the clear winner in both samples,
vf+wf
being strongly or very strongly supported over all other theories. The next-best theories in both
samples were TAX , TAX , and PT , in that order. In terms of reducing the residual
full vf+wt full
framing effect, the best theories were TAX , PT , TAX , and TAX in the student sample
vf+wt vf full vf
and TAX , TAX , PT , and TAX in the CR sample (the order in the latter sample is based
full vf+wt vf vf
on absolute values because two of the Frame coefficients were slightly negative). These theories
had nonsignificant coefficients in both samples, while three additional theories (FTT, FTT+, and
TAX ) also had nonsignificant coefficients in the CR sample.
wt
Overall, our two metrics diverged more in Experiment 2 (rs = .54 and .55 in the two samples)
than in Experiment 1 (both rs = .95). For example, while PT had the lowest BIC in both
vf+wf
samples of Experiment 2, it ranked eighth on the residual-framing-effect metric in both samples.
Even so, PT still had the lowest BIC among models with the Frame predictor, by a wide
vf+wf
margin in both samples.
Relative to Experiment 1, the more complex versions of TAX and PT fared better in
Experiment 2. TAX and TAX outperformed TAX on both metrics in both samples, with
full vf+wt vf
TAX usually being the best version. PT and PT bested PT on BIC but not on the
full vf+wf full vf
residual framing effect. PT again surpassed PT in all comparisons, highlighting the
vf+wf full
unhelpful effect of loss aversion in PT . Among other accounts, FTT consistently outperformed
full
FTT+, which consistently outperformed PH and GBC. SA, which performed so well in the
student sample of Experiment 1, did not excel on either metric in either sample of Experiment 2.
full full
In addition, there is less scatter above and below the lines. This is partly due the larger number of
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 48
Results for Three Prominent Theories in Experiment 2
Student Participants CloudResearch Participants
3 3
Gains
2 Losses 2
1 1
Prospect
0 0
Theory
−1 -1
−2 -2
−3 -3
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3
3 3
2 2
1 1
TAX
0 0
Theory
−1 -1
−2 -2
−3 -3
−0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4
3 3
2 2
1 1
Fuzzy-Trace
0 0
Theory
(with horizontal jitter)
−1 -1
−2 -2
−3 -3
−1 0 1 −1 0 1
Note. Panels show the results of mixed-effects logistic regressions for predicting choice of the
less risky option in 120 problems (4 domains ´ 15 risk comparisons ´ 2 frames) in Experiment 2.
Predictions from prospect theory and transfer-of-attention-exchange (TAX) theory are for the
full versions with parameter values from Tversky and Kahneman (1992) and Birnbaum and
Navarrete (1998), respectively.
participants contributing to each proportion (about 200 participants per point instead of about
30), but greater consistency may also have played a role.
)elacS
tigoL(
noitpO
yksiR
sseL
eht
rof
noitroporP
eciohC
Predicted Strength of Preference for the Less Risky Option
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 49
Alternative Regression Models. As in Experiment 1, we checked the robustness of our
results by conducting two sets of additional regressions (see Tables S7 and S9 in the
Supplemental Material). When we reversed the riskiness labels of options in the loss frame for
SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR choices, the correlation between the BICs of models without
MM M ZL ZG
and .93 in the CR sample. PT again had the lowest BIC in both samples, by a wide margin.
vf+wf
For the coefficients of Frame, the correlations with our primary analyses were .94 and .95 in the
11 nonsignificant coefficients remained so.
When we excluded all SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR choices, the correlation between the
MM M ZL ZG
BICs of models without Frame for 13 and 15 risk comparisons was .98 in both samples. PT
vf+wf
retained the lowest BIC in both samples, though it was only moderately preferred to TAX and
full
strongly preferred to TAX in the student sample (it was very strongly preferred to all other
vf+wt
models in both samples). For the coefficients of Frame, the correlations with our primary
analyses were .98 and .92 in the two samples. Again, the coefficients were almost all larger than
Summary
Overall, the results for framing effects in Experiment 2 were very similar to those in
Experiment 1. The primary exceptions involved SR vs. R choices, where the framing effect was
no longer amplified, and SR vs. SR choices, where the framing effect was significant but
ZL ZG
still small. The results of our theory comparisons were somewhat different, however. PT without
loss aversion (PT ) had the lowest BIC in both samples, with the closest competitors (none of
vf+wt
which was very close) all being versions of PT or TAX. The only theories to eliminate the
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 50
framing effect in both samples were PT and three versions of TAX (TAX , TAX , and
vf vf vf+wt
TAX ).
full
General Discussion
Our results indicate that the well-established risky-choice framing effect for C vs. R choices
also holds for SR vs. R choices, C vs. SR choices, and some SR vs. SR choices, although the
effects are smaller in some situations. Given the apparent prevalence of intermediate risks
relative to sure things and all-or-none risks, these results greatly expand the range of personal,
1 with a variety of somewhat risky options has also provided new evidence for evaluating
competing theories of risky choice. We recap our empirical results before turning to the
implications for theory.
Empirical Results
framing effects in 11 different choice types involving somewhat risky options (recall that the
MM M NZ
new results. By our count, the new experiments reported here nearly double the number of
participants in framing-effect conditions with somewhat risky options, from 2,649 to 5,119 (see
the Supplemental Material).
For four of the 11 risk comparisons, we are aware of no previous data. We found significant
framing effects in three of these apparently novel comparisons: SR vs. R comparisons were
MM
significant in four of four tests, SR vs. SR comparisons were significant in six of eight tests
NZ ZL
(four of four tests when the student and CR samples were combined in each experiment), and
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 51
SR vs. SR comparisons were significant in five of eight tests (four of four tests when
NZ ZG
samples were combined in each experiment).
For a fourth apparently novel comparison, we found no evidence of a framing effect in SR
NZ
vs. SR comparisons (SR vs. SR comparisons in our experiments) in any of four tests.
NZ MM M
However, it is plausible (or likely, in our view) that framing effects can be found for SR vs.
NZ
SR comparisons in which the options differ more in riskiness (e.g., when the options are closer
NZ
to the usual C and R options). Consider the very straightforward example in which $1000 is at
risk and the choice in gains (losses) is between a less risky option with a 50:50 chance of saving
$400 or $600 (losing $600 or $400) and a riskier option with a 50:50 chance of saving $100 or
$900 (losing $900 or $100). We would expect a framing effect in this situation, consistent with
the predictions of PT , TAX , and PH (but not FTT).
full full
framing effects. The one exception was in SR vs. SR comparisons, where the evidence from
ZL ZG
our experiments was mixed (significance in two of four tests and in one of two tests when the
samples were combined in each experiment). Interestingly, we observed significant framing
effects for this comparison in the student samples, but not in the CR samples. Schneider’s (1992)
results, which were more positive than ours, were also from a student sample.
The results of Experiment 1 for SR vs. R choices replicate the finding that such choices lead
to larger framing effects than those in C vs. R choices (DeKay & Garge, 2023; DeKay et al.,
2), but it was not significant even when the samples were combined (p = .051). The results of
Experiment 2 revealed no such increase when participants considered both risk comparisons
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 52
condition for the amplification.
Finally, our consideration of SR vs. SR and SR vs. SR choices highlighted a
MM M ZL ZG
potentially confusing labeling issue for choices between somewhat risky options that are close in
riskiness. Specifically, whether an option is considered less risky or more risky may depend on
the riskiness metric and (for metrics based on an S-shaped utility function) may be different in
gains and losses. In our view, the term framing effect should be reserved for situations in which a
choice proportion (or other measure indicating degree of support) for the same option differs
significantly as a function of frame. The term should not be used to describe a significant
difference when the options being assessed in the two frames are different, even if they are
labeled the same (e.g., as less risky). Fortunately, this issue appears to arise only for SR vs. SR
choices, not for C vs. R choices, SR vs. R choices, or C vs. SR choices. Regardless, this labeling
issue should not be viewed as an impediment to research.
Comparisons of Theories
We took two approaches to comparing the performance of several theoretical accounts. The
first was to note theories’ relatively clear prediction errors, such as predicting no framing effect
when the data indicate a significant effect. This approach tended to favor versions of the
expectation-based theories, PT and TAX, though notably not PT . Gist-based and heuristic
full
accounts typically fared slightly worse (FTT, FTT+, and SA) or much worse (PH and especially
GBC). This approach was useful for seeing where theories made their worst errors, but it had its
shortcomings. For example, we aggregated the data over the four domains (see Figures 2 and 4)
and over the two samples in each experiment to reduce the variability for each risk comparison.
Perhaps more importantly, the approach focused mostly on categorical errors rather than errors
of degree (e.g., predicting that a framing effect would be 30% as large as that for C vs. R choices
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 53
when it was actually 90% as large). Our threshold for counting a continuous prediction as being
a prediction of “no framing effect” (less than 15% as large as the predicted effect in C vs. R
choices) may also have favored PT and TAX over other theories. Using a higher percentage
would have increased the error counts for PT and TAX.
Our second approach to comparing theories avoided the above issues. We evaluated the
logistic regression models in Tables 4 and 5 in terms of their BICs and the residual effect of
Frame. The top-line conclusions from these tables and from the scatterplots in Figures 3 and 5
are that (a) all the theories successfully predicted variation in participants’ choices across the
many conditions of our experiments, (b) most theories did not completely account for the
observed faming effects, and (c) there was still substantial unexplained variation in choice
proportions even for the most successful theories.
ranked the theories’ performance in each sample of each experiment, with a rank of 1 being the
best-performing (lowest-BIC) model among models that omitted Frame. To get a sense of
overall performance across experiments and samples, we averaged these ranks for each theory
and then ranked the averages. For our second criterion, elimination of the framing effect, we
ranked models that included Frame according to the absolute value of the coefficient of that
predictor (smaller is better). As for BIC, we averaged these ranks across experiments and
samples and then ranked the averages.
Looking first at the overall rankings, three versions of TAX (TAX , TAX , and TAX )
vf vf+wt full
placed in the top four spots on both criteria, with TAX being first or tied for first on both.
vf+wt
These theories succeeded by almost never doing poorly; the primary exception was that TAX
vf
performed less well on BIC in Experiment 2. TAX , which isolates TAX’s signature weight-
wt
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 54
Rankings of Theories and Accounts According to the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and the Residual Framing Effect in
Each Experiment and Sample
Ranking by BIC Ranking by residual framing effect
Theory or account 1S 1CR 2S 2CR Overall a 1S 1CR 2S 2CR Overall a
Expectation-based theories
Prospect theory
Value function only 3 2 6 5 3 3 1 2 3 1.5
Weighting function only 11 13 9 6 11 10 13 13 12 13
Value and weighting functions 8 9 1 1 5 9 9 8 8 9
Full 11 10 4 4 8 12 10 11 9 11
Transfer-of-attention-exchange theory
Value function only 4 1 5 7 4 2 3 4 4 3.5
Weight-transfer function only 10 11 11 9 12 13 11 10 7 10
Value and weight-transfer functions 2 3 3 3 1 4 2 1 2 1.5
Full 5 4 2 2 2 5 4 3 1 3.5
Gist-based or heuristic theories and accounts
Fuzzy-trace theory b 7 6 7 8 7 7 5 5 5 5
Fuzzy-trace theory plus 8 5 10 10 9 8 6 7 6 7
Good-bad count 13 12 13 13 13 11 12 12 12 12
Sentiment analysis 1 7 8 11 6 1 8 6 10 6
Priority heuristic 6 8 12 12 10 6 7 9 11 8
Note. A rank of 1 indicates the best model: the one with the lowest BIC or the one with the smallest absolute value of the
coefficient for Frame. Rankings are based on the models in Tables 3 and 4. Rankings by BIC are for models that omit the Frame
predictor. Rankings by residual framing effect are for models that include the Frame predictor. 1S = Experiment 1, student
sample; 1CR = Experiment 1, CR sample; 2S = Experiment 2, student sample; 2CR = Experiment 2, CR sample.
a For each theory or account, the overall rank is the average of its ranks from the four samples, then reranked. b For the choices in
our experiments, the explicated valence account makes the same predictions as fuzzy-trace theory.
transfer function, performed poorly in all four samples, even though the weight-transfer function
is sufficient for generating framing effects in traditional C vs. R choices (DeKay & Garge, 2023).
The rankings for PT were more variable. PT ranked third overall on BIC and tied for first
vf
overall on the residual framing effect. Like TAX , it performed slightly worse on BIC in
vf
Experiment 2. PT took the top spot on BIC in Experiment 2 but otherwise performed poorly.
vf+wf
Even so, it always outperformed PT , which includes loss aversion. This is not surprising
full
because loss aversion plays essentially no role in framing effects and because each participant
made choices in only one frame. Finally, it is interesting that PT performed so poorly, given
wf
that PT’s weighting function is sufficient for generating framing effects in traditional C vs. R
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 55
choices (DeKay & Garge, 2023).
FTT and FTT+ displayed middling performance, with rankings rarely straying from the 5–8
range. Interestingly, FTT+ outperformed FTT in only one of eight comparisons, despite the
larger framing effects in SR vs. R choices in Experiment 1, which should have given FTT+ the
edge.
SA performed excellently in the student sample of Experiment 1, ranking first on both
criteria, but its performance was mediocre or worse in the other three samples. We have no
explanation for this variability. Overall, SA performed similarly to FTT and FTT+. This makes
sense because the sentiment scores of the options closely tracked FTT’s some-versus-none
distinction in most options. The only exceptions were in the loss frame of the drought and
investment domains, where SA made much smaller distinctions. We remind the reader that the
sentiment scores in the investment domain reflected our substitution of “no money” for “$0” in
the option text. Without that substitution, the overall ranks for SA would drop from 6 to 12 for
BIC and from 6 to 11 for the residual framing effect.
The remaining accounts (GBC and PH) performed poorly across the board, with overall
rankings of eighth or worse. This summary of our regression-based assessment of theories’
performance is fairly consistent with our initial tallying of theories’ relatively clear errors. PT ,
vf
TAX , and TAX performed very well in both approaches; PT , GBC, and PH performed
vf+wt full full
poorly in both; and FTT, FTT+, and SA were in between on both. However, other versions of
TAX and PT performed better in the regressions than in the error counts (e.g., TAX , which,
vf
among its other errors, incorrectly predicted very small framing effects in C vs. SR choices) or
NZ
better in the error counts than in the regressions (e.g., PT , whose only clear error was its
vf+wf
failure to predict the larger framing effect in SR vs. R choices in Experiment 1). We reiterate
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 56
that regression results are more useful than error counts for comparing theories’ overall
performance.
TAX as a Theory of Framing Effects
To our knowledge, TAX had not been applied to framing effects prior to DeKay and Garge’s
(2023) article. In that investigation, framing effects in C vs. R choices and SR vs. R choices
(but not in C vs. SR choices) were smaller for extreme probabilities (e.g., .01, .99) than for
moderate probabilities, but framing effects remained substantial for extreme probabilities. TAX
(called TAX here) outperformed PT (called PT here), FTT, a modified version of FTT in
full full
which extreme probabilities were rounded to 0 or 1, and PH in accounting for the results.
Moreover, both of TAX’s mechanisms for generating framing effects were required to predict
the observed pattern: The S-shaped value function predicted the inverted-U pattern, and the
weight-transfer function predicted nonzero framing effects at all probabilities, including the
extremes.
The present results, together with those of DeKay and Garge (2023), suggest that TAX
should be considered a leading theory for explaining framing effects. Note, however, that our
application of TAX assumes that the wording of the options leads people to adopt different
reference points in the two frames, as in the original PT explanation for framing effects. In
addition, the S-shaped value function that contributed to TAX’s performance here and in DeKay
and Garge’s experiment is the same as that in PT, but without loss aversion. While TAX clearly
allows for such a function, a linear function often used to show that many of TAX’s predictions
do not depend on such curvature (Birnbaum, 2008). Our application of TAX was closer to PT in
these regards.
Despite TAX’s promising performance, it does not account for all results involving risky-
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 57
choice framing effects. Numerous studies of C vs. R framing effects have involved complete
descriptions of the certain option (e.g., “200 people will be saved and 400 people will not be
saved” in the gain frame), incomplete descriptions of the risky option, or both (Broniatowski &
Reyna, 2018; DeKay & Dou, 2024a, 2024b). PT cannot explain the observed variation in the
direction and magnitude of framing effects across such problems, for reasons that also apply to
TAX. For example, it is not clear how to apply PT’s (or TAX’s) functions to negations like “400
people will not be saved” (Kühberger & Tanner, 2010; Mandel, 2001). Categorical accounts,
including versions of EVA and FTT, can explain such variation, though a residual framing effect
may remain even when those accounts predict no effect (DeKay & Dou, 2024a, 2024b).
Critical Tests of FTT versus PT (and Other Expectation-Based Theories)
Versions of framing problems in which participants choose between the usual certain option
and an incomplete or truncated risky option have been especially popular as critical tests of FTT
versus PT and other expectation-based theories (Broniatowski & Reyna, 2018; Chick et al.,
2016; Kühberger & Tanner, 2010; Reyna, 2012; Reyna & Brainerd, 1995; Reyna et al., 2014,
2021, 2023). When the nonzero component of the risky option is omitted so that only the zero
component remains, framing effects are typically amplified, presumably because FTT’s
categorical some-versus-none comparison is highlighted (but see Broniatowski & Reyna, 2018,
for a different FTT explanation). When the zero component of the risky option is omitted so that
only the nonzero component remains, framing effects are typically eliminated, presumably
because the some-versus-none comparison is absent. These moderating effects are observed even
when participants are trained to fill in the missing information correctly (Chick et al., 2016;
Reyna et al., 2021). The elimination of framing effects in choices between certain and “zero-
truncated” risky options (C vs. R choices) is particularly problematic for expectation-based
ZT
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 58
theories like PT and TAX because omitting the zero component of the risky option should have
no effect on the calculation of its overall value and thus no effect on choices.
However, there is more than one way to create a risky option without a zero component. One
is to hide the zero, as in C vs. R choices, and another is to replace the usual risky option with a
ZT
somewhat risky option that does not include a zero in either frame, as in C vs. SR choices (C
NZ
vs. SR and C vs. SR choices in our experiments). Despite occasional null results in smaller
MM M
(Christman & Jasper, 2014; DeKay & Garge, 2023; DeKay et al., 2022; Miller & Fagley, 1991;
Tombu & Mandel, 2015; van der Pligt & van Schie, 1990) strongly indicates a framing effect in
C vs. SR choices. The apparent contradiction between results for C vs. R choices and C vs.
NZ ZT
SR choices is intriguing. If C vs. R choices constitute a critical test favoring FTT over PT
NZ ZT
and TAX, then C vs. SR choices constitute a countervailing critical test favoring PT and TAX
NZ
over FTT. To the extent that C vs. SR choices provide more of the relevant information
NZ
directly, rather than requiring participants to remember or infer the missing pieces, we think they
provide a stronger, more transparent basis for theory comparisons.
Limitations
We consider two limitations related to our analyses. First, although we used fixed, literature-
based parameter values for PT and TAX to make out-of-sample predictions rather than fitting the
models to the data, it can be argued that we still gave PT and TAX too many chances to win.
This concern may be alleviated by comparing only the standard versions of PT, TAX, and FTT.
full full
metrics, and FTT was better than PT on both metrics. Based on separate comparisons for
full
experiments and samples, TAX was better than FTT and PT in all comparisons, while FTT
full full
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 59
was better than PT in six of eight comparisons (the only exceptions involved the relatively
full
strong performance of PT on the BIC metric in Experiment 2).
full
A second concern is that the specific, literature-based parameter values for PT (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992) and TAX (Birnbaum & Navarrete, 1998) may have given one theory or the
other an edge in some comparisons. The most obvious difference is that we used value-function
exponents of 0.88 for PT and 0.41 for TAX. These values favored PT over TAX in five of the
vf vf
slightly favored PT in more complex versions of PT and TAX, where TAX generally
outperformed PT.
To assess the importance of this concern, we reran our logistic regression models with
“generic” sets of parameters that included the same value-function exponent in both theories.
Specifically, we used 𝛼 = 𝛽 = 𝛾 = 𝛿 = 0.7 and 𝜆 = 2 for PT and 𝛽 = 𝛾 = 0.7 and 𝛿 = 1 for
# # #
TAX. For PT, these parameter values are well within the range of previous observations (Fox &
median value from Birnbaum and Navarrete (1998) and the value for a linear function (0.41 and
1, respectively). The values of 𝛾 = 0.7 and 𝛿 = 1 have been used (along with a linear value
# #
function) in what Brinbaum (2008) called prior TAX, a simple specification used to illustrate the
theory’s predictions. Compared to the initial parameter sets, the generic PT parameters placed
more emphasis on the value function (via its increased curvature) and less on the weighting
function (via its decreased curvature), whereas the generic TAX parameters placed less emphasis
on the value function and more on the weighting and weight-transfer functions.
17 Based on brute-force analyses of different exponents in our random-effects logistic regression models, the
0.61, 0.47, and 1.61(!) for models without Frame and 0.14, 0.59, 0.37, and 1.38 for models with Frame (see the
Supplemental Material).
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 60
The results of these analyses appear in Tables S10–S12 in the Supplemental Material. The
common value function with exponent 0.7 performed very well, ranking second on BIC and first
on the residual framing effect (note that ranks are now out of 12 models rather than 13). Among
more complex versions of PT and TAX, PT and PT tended to perform better, whereas
vf+wf full
TAX and TAX tended to perform slightly worse, at least in relative terms.
vf+wt full
In the overall results, the most notable movement was for PT , which improved from fifth
vf+wf
(out of 13) to first (out of 12) on BIC and from ninth to second on the residual framing effect.
This improvement made PT competitive with the common value function (ranks = 2 and 1)
vf+wf
and placed it the ahead of TAX (ranks = 3 and 3) and TAX (ranks = 4 and 5). PT
vf+wt full full
improved a bit but remained uncompetitive, with ranks of 5 and 9 on the two metrics. The
overall rankings of the other theories did not change much.
On the one hand, the dramatically improved performance of PT warrants a correction to
vf+wf
our top-level conclusions. On the other hand, the new analyses may be considered a way of
giving PT even more chances to win and thus an abuse of experimenter degrees of freedom. For
this reason, we prefer to base our primary conclusions on our preregistered plan to use Tversky
and Kahneman’s (1992) median parameter estimates for PT. Even so, a caveat is clearly in order.
As Birnbaum (2008) noted, it is difficult to distinguish PT and TAX when the options have only
one or two possible outcomes (but see DeKay & Garge, 2023, for an exception involving options
with extreme probabilities).
Constraints on Generality
We assessed framing effects and the ability of several theories to predict those effects across
15 risk comparisons, four scenarios, two participant populations, two experimental designs, and
several variations on our primary analyses. With a few notable exceptions (e.g., larger framing
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 61
effects for SR vs. R choices in Experiment 1 but not Experiment 2), the results were very
consistent.
Given the similarity between the results for our student and CR samples, we would expect
the results to generalize to a more representative sample of adults in the United States. In related
research on framing effects, DeKay and Dou (2024b) recently replicated results from student and
CR samples (DeKay & Dou, 2024a) almost exactly in a more representative sample well-
matched to U.S. Census data on age, gender, race, ethnicity, region, and personal income. More
broadly, Coppock et al. (2018) reported a “strong correspondence” (p. 12441) between the
results from online convenience samples and those from nationally representative samples for 27
effects in “the sorts of persuasion, attitude-formation, and decision-making studies that are
common in social-science experiments” (p. 12442). We are less sure about generalization to
other countries or cultures, though we note that framing effects in a version of the original
disease problem have been observed worldwide (Im & Chen, 2022).
We advise against generalizing results from between-participants comparisons (e.g., for
framing effects in our experiments) to individual participants. Even when between-participants
effects are large and significant, it is possible that a minority of participants would exhibit the
effect in a within-participants design, as has been demonstrated for the reflection effect (Hershey
& Shoemaker, 1980), certainty and possibility effects (DeKay et al., 2016), and various other
effects involving risky choices (Regenwetter et al., 2022; Regenwetter & Robinson, 2017).
we note that framing effects were most reliable in C vs. R and SR vs. R choices, followed by C
vs. SR choices. We would expect to find similar effects in choices between other options that
clearly differ in riskiness. We are less confident that the results for SR vs. SR choices would
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 62
generalize to other choices with the same types of risk comparisons if the details of the options
were different. For example, framing effects were never significant in our SR vs. SR (SR
NZ NZ MM
vs. SR ) choices, but that need not be the case for other SR vs. SR choices between options
M NZ NZ
with larger riskiness differences.
Finally, we do not know whether the performance of SA in our experiments would generalize
to other language-based models. We expect that more sophisticated models can do better,
especially if they are able to make comparisons based on the numerical properties of options in
addition to the textual elements that differentiate the gain and loss frames.
Conclusion
This research represents a major contribution to the literature on framing effects in choices
with somewhat risky options, nearly doubling the number of participants in the relevant
conditions. We have demonstrated framing effects for three apparently novel choice types and
either corroborated evidence for framing effects or helped resolve mixed results for several other
choice types. There now is strong evidence for framing effects in most of these risk comparisons.
As a result, financial advisors, healthcare practitioners, and other risk communicators (for
example) can be more confident that the implications of the classic framing effect also apply in
situations involving intermediate levels of risk.
Overall, these results favor versions of expectation-based theories—especially TAX but also
PT without loss aversion—over gist-based or heuristic accounts like FTT and PH. One reason for
this performance difference was that the categorical predictions of the latter accounts proved
costly when they were wrong (e.g., FTT’s predictions of no framing effects in some C vs. SR
choices).
As with other recent work on framing effects (DeKay & Dou, 2024a, 2024b; DeKay &
Framing Effects With Somewhat Risky Options 63
Garge, 2023; DeKay et al., 2022), this research highlights the benefits of exploring variation in
the aspects of stimulus materials thoroughly and systematically. That this approach continues to
uncover new results and informative theoretical comparisons for a phenomenon as well known
as the risky-choice framing effect is a testament to its merit.