The dual foundations of political ideology are ubiquitous across human social life
a b a,c
Guy A. Lavender Forsyth , Ananish Chaudhuri , Quentin Douglas Atkinson
a b
School of Psychology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; Department
of Economics, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; Centre for the Study
of Social Cohesion, School of Anthropology and Museum Ethnography, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
ORCID IDs
Guy Lavender Forsyth 0000-0003-3077-7112
Ananish Chaudhuri 0000-0003-4862-6523
Quentin Douglas Atkinson 0000-0002-8499-7535
Important note
This is a version of an article that has been accepted for publication at Current
Anthropology. A revised version of this article is in press and under embargo. This
version is the Author’s Submitted Manuscript (i.e., the manuscript of initial
submission, pre-peer review). The revised article features changes including greater
detail about the procedures we used for dealing with eHRAF data, clarification of the
predictions made by the Dual Foundations Framework, greater information about
the difference between the Dual Foundations Framework and self-interest, and
expanded discussion on the role of values in the Dual Foundations Framework. For
more information, please feel free to email Quentin Atkinson
(q.atkinson@auckland.ac.nz)
Abstract
The contemporary political landscape is often represented by a single dimension of conflict:
authority, hierarchy, and tradition on the right versus greater freedom, equality, and
systemic change on the left. Here, we argue that politics comprises not one, but two
dimensions. Moreover, these two dimensions are not unique to modern nations, but reflect
a psychology shaped by two evolutionary trade-offs which we call the ‘dual foundations’ of
politics and argue are inherent to human social life. One foundation concerns the trade-off
between cooperation and competition and gives rise to contestation over levels of
inequality and provision of public goods. The other foundation concerns the trade-off
between autonomy and conformity, leading to contestation over the extent of social
control. Drawing on anthropological, psychological, and historiographical evidence, we
argue that these dual foundations are contested across the diversity of human lifeways and
represent two cross-culturally ubiquitous dimensions of ideology. As such, the dual
foundations provide a common evolutionary framework for studying human politics across
geography, history, subsistence styles, levels of social organisation, and academic
disciplines. We end by outlining how quantitative approaches to studying the dual
foundations beyond industrialised nations can advance research on both the anthropology
and psychology of political ideology.
All human politics is characterised by tensions and conflicts (Balandier 1970; Silverman and
Salisbury 1977). Decades of anthropological research highlights the fundamentally
contested nature of human social organisation (Leach 1954; Asad 1972; Barth 1959).
Indeed, many anthropological analyses interpret social structure as the result of people’s
active manipulations and negotiations, highlighting individuals’ and communities’ agency
and intentions in shaping social structures (Wiessner 2002; Blanton and Fargher 2008;
Graeber and Wengrow 2021; Hayden 1995). But this literature has had less to say about
where these political intentions come from (Arkush 2012). The attention paid to agency
raises questions ultimately psychological in nature: what ideas do people use in political
decision-making, what is their structure, and how do they vary and change? To answer
these questions, we need to understand the psychology of ideology and how it manifests in
diverse societies around the world.
Psychological research on political ideology has undergone something of a renaissance over
the past 25 years (Jost, Halperin, and Laurin 2020), but has had limited conversation with
anthropological studies of politics across non-industrialised, industrialising, and politically
peripheral contexts. Despite its relevance for anthropological research, anthropology is
currently removed from other disciplines’ engagements with ideology (Haugbolle 2018:191).
As a result, our understanding of the psychology of ideology draws largely from
industrialised nations and overlooks anthropological research on the politics of non-state
societies. This separation has likely been reinforced by the prominence of the ‘left versus
right’ metaphor for describing political differences in industrialised nations (see Claessens,
Fischer, et al. 2020) and a concomitant explanation of the origins of contemporary political
differences in the changes brought about by modernisation, industrialisation, and Liberal
Enlightenment ideas (Baron 2020; cf. Muhlberger and Paine 1993) – indeed, the terms ‘left’
and ‘right’ originate from the French legislative assembly, in which the revolutionaries sat
on the left and supporters of the Ancien Régime on the right (Gauchet 1994). As
Kemmelmeier et al. (2003:305) describe it:
“Historically, individualism is a product of the ideology of liberalism whose emphasis
on civic liberties and freedom emerged in opposition to authoritarian oppression
during the late 18th and 19th century . . . The central idea of these and similar
political movements was the recognition of individual self-determination, individual
human rights, and the limitation of state control over the individual—ideas that form
the philosophical cornerstone of today’s civic democracies. As a consequence, the
cultural ideology of individualism appears to be diametrically opposed to the notion
of conformity to the group and subordination to authority.”
The modernisation narrative suggests current political contestations between left and right
are not to be found in more ‘traditional’ societies, where people acquiesce to authorities
and uphold prescribed roles, “define themselves as extensions of other people,” and view
themselves in harmony with others (Lee, Pratto, and Johnson 2011:1030; see also Daloz
2018:184-185). Rather, the structure of modern political contestation is seen as the product
of modernisation, which led to shifts in values, with inequities challenged by recognition of
the fundamental equality of people (Hofstede 1980) and traditional authorities undermined
by personal self-expression (Inglehart and Welzel 2005).
This explanation for the state of contemporary politics has been challenged by two
important lines of research. First, researchers have found that a single left-right dimension
cannot adequately capture contemporary political variation because people can and
frequently do combine elements of both ‘left-wing’ and ‘right-wing’ attitudes (Aspelund,
Lindeman, and Verkasalo 2013; Treier and Hillygus 2009). Instead, numerous researchers
have independently converged on a two-dimensional model of politics (Claessens, Fischer,
et al. 2020; Duckitt and Sibley 2010): the first dimension is represented by a suite of
psychological scales such as Social Dominance Orientation (SDO), Equality, and Self-
Enhancement, while the second is represented by scales such as Right-Wing
scales that represent the two dimensions). Moreover, these two dimensions are not just
outcomes of a peculiar Western European political history – research indicates they have
relevance across various industrialised nations (Malka, Lelkes, and Soto 2019; Stankov
2017). Contemporary politics therefore has two dimensions to explain, not just one.
The second challenge is an emerging understanding that politics expresses evolutionary
tensions produced by group-living. If politics arises from basic problems of group-living, at
least some components of political life are not unique to humans (e.g., Bissonnette et al.
2015). Indeed, some primatologists have drawn attention to the political nature of
chimpanzee and baboon societies (De Waal 1998; Strum and Latour 1987). Psychologists are
also increasingly using evolutionary perspectives that explain human political psychology as
a phenotypic reaction to the challenges of social life (Petersen 2015) that arises predictably
across different times and places (Sheehy-Skeffington and Thomsen 2020; Kessler and Cohrs
2008). A range of researchers are thus interested in uncovering the evolutionary roots of
contemporary politics.
The recently proposed dual foundations of political ideology addresses both of these
challenges in a unified theoretical framework to describe and explain contemporary politics
(Claessens, Fischer, et al. 2020). The dual foundations framework links the two ideological
dimensions of contemporary politics to the need to navigate two key trade-offs that
emerged as human group-living evolved to become increasingly interdependent (Aktipis et
al. 2018) – the trade-off between competition and cooperation across social networks and
the trade-off between autonomy and social control as humans became more group-minded,
conforming to and enforcing social norms (Tomasello et al. 2012; Burkart, Brügger, and van
Schaik 2018; Jensen, Vaish, and Schmidt 2014).
What we shall here call the inequality foundation concerns the dilemma of cooperation
versus competition: how to share the costs and benefits of working together. Any people
who collaborate to gain a resource (material or otherwise; Smith et al. 2010) must make
decisions about how to share the rewards. When collaboration benefits the common good,
we call this cooperative (Dugatkin 1997:14). Competition occurs when collaboration
benefits some at the expense of others (Johnson and Johnson 2015). Cooperation is linked
to the contestation of inequality because cooperation generally favours more egalitarian
social relations (Townsend 2018; Hooper, Kaplan, and Jaeggi 2021). More equal resource
distributions mean actors have more equal bargaining power when deciding the payoff
structure of the next collaboration, leading to more even resource distribution in turn
(Ostrom 1995). Since competition results in more uneven resource distributions, it favours
inequalities (Mandalaywala 2019). When unchecked, unequal payoffs leave some actors
more likely to gain further advantages in subsequent collaborations (Hickey and Davidsen
2019; Wilson and Codding 2020). Once influential actors emerge, they can manipulate social
structures to favour greater inequality (Hayden and Villeneuve 2010). By shaping
collaborative activities into more competitive forms, greater benefit accrues to them while
lower-ranking collaborators get marginally less (Pandit, Pradhan, and van Schaik 2020;
Powers, Schaik, and Lehmann 2021; Singh, Wrangham, and Glowacki 2017), leading to
exploitation (Thielmann, Spadaro, and Balliet 2020). Nevertheless, lower-ranking actors may
collaborate with higher-ranking actors for unequal payoffs, if this brings greater or more
certain rewards than an alternative (Henrich and Gil-White 2001; von Rueden, Gurven, and
Kaplan 2008). Contestation is thus engendered between people with different preferences
for cooperation and equality and competition and inequality.
The second foundation, which we call social control, corresponds to the challenge of
coordinating collective activities: whether to follow group norms and leadership and punish
non-conformists. This is because collective action is notoriously difficult to maintain. It
features ‘start-up’ problems, issues of generating trust and confidence, changes in
incentives as activities progress, as well as coordination issues (Bissonnette et al. 2015:30-
32; Wiessner 2019). Given extensive collaboration with genetic non-relatives (Cronk et al.
2019), people solve these issues by relying on cultural markers to signal group membership
and impose normative expectations (Padilla-Iglesias, Foley, and Shneidman 2020; Bowser
2000; Sterelny and Hiscock 2014). These norms enable collaboration by signalling
commitment and reducing uncertainty in social behaviour (Gintis 2010; Hawkins, Goodman,
and Goldstone 2019). Leadership plays a similar role in collective action, also by decreasing
uncertainty in social interaction (J. E. Smith et al. 2016; von Rueden et al. 2014). Both norms
and leadership thus provide means of overcoming between-individual differences in
incentives and establishing and maintaining collective activities (Pietraszewski 2020).
Departing from normative expectations or disobeying leaders’ authority can thereby be
perceived as a threat to collective action and is often subject to sanctions (Ostrom 2000;
Garfield, Syme, and Hagen 2020). Sanctions vary significantly cross-culturally, from gossip
and withdrawal of social support to wholesale ostracism and institutionalised punishment
(Eriksson et al. 2021; Wiessner 2020). Perception of inadequate social support or
commitment can thus lead to preferences for tighter control of others through upholding
norms, expanding leaders’ authority, and more severely sanctioning deviance. Conversely,
subjection to norms, authority, and punishment can reduce the ability to innovate
autonomously and learn independently (Rogers 1988; Kendal et al. 2005), thus making anti-
conformism appealing (Whitehead and Richerson 2009). Contestation is thereby
engendered between people with different preferences for conformity to traditional norms
and authorities and more autonomous decision-making.
The dual foundations framework both explains past findings and finds support for its own
novel predictions. It explains why psychologists find two dimensions of ideology and why
these dimensions independently predict attitudes towards various policy and social issues
(e.g., Satherley, Sibley, and Osborne 2021; Osborne et al. 2021; Thomsen, Green, and
Sidanius 2008) – because the two dimensions correspond to two independent trade-offs in
established tripartite structure of contemporary authoritarianism: subordination to group
norms, submission to leadership, and punishment of deviance (Duckitt et al. 2010), each of
which maps onto a well-established means of overcoming collective action problems. In
addition, the dual foundations framework finds support for its own predictions for
relationships between political values and preferences in incentivised behavioural tasks. A
link between inequality and dilemmas of cooperation is supported by evidence that SDO is
predicted by preferences for fairness in abstract incentivised tasks that model trade-offs
between cooperation and competition, such as the Dictator and Public Goods Games
(Claessens, Sibley, et al. 2020). Authoritarian values, meanwhile, are related to incentivised
measures of conformity, rule following, punishment, in-group bias, and distrust of strangers
(K. Fischer, Atkinson, and Chaudhuri 2021). Ongoing research thus supports the aim of the
dual foundations framework to ground the two dimensions of contemporary politics in
trade-offs inherent to human social life.

While the dual foundations framework was created to describe and explain contemporary
political ideology, if the dual foundations are inherent to human group-living, they should be
contested across a wide array of social groups. Social groups vary dramatically across
geography and history. Even at a single place and time, people depend on a variety of
groups that have overlapping memberships, are organised in nested structures, and exhibit
fission-fusion dynamics (Bird et al. 2019; K. R. Hill et al. 2011; Sikora et al. 2017). Few
individuals rely on all of the same groups and only some groups will be active or relevant at
a given time (Smaldino 2019), meaning that ingroup-outgroup boundaries are constructed
and maintained across various levels of social organisation (Hirschfeld 2018). Across all of
these groups, within and across societies, decisions must be taken about fair distributions of
resources and the optimum extent of social control. The two trade-offs should thus arise
outside of industrialised nation-states: in human groups across geography and history and
across various levels of social organisation.
We here aim to go beyond psychological evidence from industrialised societies to explore
whether the dual foundations of ideology are represented in ethnographic and
historiographic records. We do this by evaluating five predictions about the nature of
political contestation against cross-cultural evidence from anthropology and related
disciplines. Though ethnographic records understandably provide limited information about
ideology at the psychological level (discussed below), their attention to political
contestation allows us to examine evidence that people everywhere grapple with
independent trade-offs over inequality and social control.
1) The dual foundations are contested across human societies. If the dual foundations are
inherent to human social life, they should be contested in all human social groups. While
some cross-national psychological research has already been conducted on the two
dimensions of political ideology, to our knowledge no attempt currently exists to extend this
research to non-industrialised societies. We therefore use the Probability Sample of the
Human Relations Area Files to show that the dual foundations are contested across a
diversity of human societies. Furthermore, if the dual foundations are contested in all social
groups, they should be contested even in contexts where one extreme of the political
spectrum is dominant. We thus use additional ethnographic examples to show that even at
the political extremes people contest the extent of inequality and social control.
2) The dual foundations exist in groups both large and small. If the dual foundations exist in
all human groups, they should be contested across different levels of social organisation,
from polities to families. Psychological evidence indicates that the dual foundations
structure individuals’ preferences about both political and family values (Feinberg et al.
2020). We show, with ethnographic and historical examples, that the dual foundations are
also contested across different levels of social organisation in non-industrialised societies.
3) The dual foundations are combined in different ways across different contexts. If the dual
foundations represent independent trade-offs, they should be combined differently in
different places. Psychological research finds this to be the case across industrialised nations
and we provide evidence that ethnographic descriptions of political differences show the
same patterns.
4) The dual foundations are expressed relative to a specific context. The dual foundations
framework expects differences in how cooperation and inequality, and social control and
autonomy, are contested across different contexts. While the dual foundations should
always be contested, this contestation will look quite different in contexts characterised by
different baseline levels of inequality and social control. We use ethnographic materials to
demonstrate the context-sensitive ways the dual foundations are contested in different
societies.
5) The dual foundations give rise to individual variation along two dimensions of political
values. Psychological research indicates that the dual foundations lead to individual
variation in values about inequality and social control. If the dual foundations are also
present in non-industrialised contexts, then we should also expect to find individual
variation in values about inequality and social control in non-industrialised contexts. While
ethnographic evidence of differences between individuals’ values is limited, we provide
examples that offer some support for this prediction.
In sum, we aim to show that the dual foundations of political ideology, well-documented in
industrialised nations, are also politically contested in non-industrialised contexts. We
argue, on this basis, that across non-industrialised contexts too, the two dimensions of
political ideology will likely be useful predictors of individuals’ political attitudes and
behaviours. We end by outlining ways to study the nature of political ideology across non-
industrialised, industrialising, and economically peripheral contexts.
1) The dual foundations are present across human societies
While many anthropologists have written about the widespread nature of political
contestation, more explicit definitions of human universals emphasise the immutable rather
than contestable aspects of inequality and social control. For example, Antweiler (2016:114-
116) lists several such universals: all societies show inequality in status, demonstrate pursuit
of power, recognise some kind of social authority, impose sanctions on those stepping
beyond accepted norms, and punish perceived group-damaging behaviour. We suggest this
is half the story. In all societies, people contest the degree of inequality and social control,
creating political tensions and conflicts.
Existing psychological evidence shows that across industrialised societies, disagreements
over the degree of inequality and social control structure the political landscape. The SDO
and RWA scales, for example, document between-individual variation in these values across
countries with diverse political histories, including countries that are non-Western (Vargas-
Salfate, Liu, and Gil de Zúñiga 2020), that have a history of communism (Duriez, Van Hiel,
and Kossowska 2005), and that have non-democratic institutions (R. Fischer, Hanke, and
Sibley 2012). Furthermore, SDO and RWA explain variation in individuals’ attitudes towards
various political issues across these contexts. For example, SDO and RWA respectively
predicted attitudes towards economic inequality and social traditionalism in both Belgium
and post-communist Poland (Duriez, Van Hiel, and Kossowska 2005). They also generally
predicted anti-immigrant attitudes across seventeen countries, SDO for reasons of economic
advantage and RWA for fear of social instability (Cohrs and Stelzl 2010). SDO negatively
predicted gender egalitarianism and aid for the poor across 20 countries (Pratto et al. 2013),
as well as negative opinions about poor people amongst high-status people in the
Philippines (Bernardo 2013), and claims to engage in political violence in South Africa
(Bartusevičius, van Leeuwen, and Petersen 2020). RWA, meanwhile, predicted religious
fundamentalism and prejudice towards women and gay people in Ghana (Hunsberger,
Owusu, and Duck 1999), national identification across 19 countries (Vargas-Salfate, Liu, and
Gil de Zúñiga 2020), and even support for government-sanctioned multiculturalism in
Singapore (Roets, Au, and Van Hiel 2015). Other measures of the two dimensions have also
found cross-national support. The two central dimensions of Schwartz’s value theory, Self-
Enhancement versus Self-Transcendence and Conservation versus Openness-to-Change,
seem to reflect the inequality and social control dimensions and are stable across large
samples from a diverse range of countries (Schwartz et al. 2014; Cieciuch et al. 2014). This
evidence supports the argument that the two dimensions characterise political ideology in
both Western and non-Western industrialised nations. Ideological differences reflecting the
dual foundations’ trade-offs may therefore be cross-culturally widespread.
To what extent, then, does the dual foundations framework apply across a larger variety of
social systems? This question is an important one because human politics is remarkable in
its variability: societies vary dramatically in the nature and extent of inequality and social
control (Knauft, 1991). We cannot rely on psychological research to answer this question
since it is limited to industrialised societies. Instead, we turn to ethnographic materials. The
Probability Sample Files (PSF) of the electronic Human Relations Area Files (“eHRAF World
Cultures” 2021) is a dataset of ethnographic materials from 60 societies. It was created to
provide a diverse sample of cross-societal variation and minimise issues of statistical non-
independence from spatial proximity and shared cultural ancestry (Lagacé 1979). Moreover,
by surveying every society in this pre-assembled dataset, we prevent any possibility that we
might have cherry-picked societies that support our predictions. While ethnographic
databases have been used to show differences between societies in constructs related to
the dual foundations, such as sharing of food and labour (Ember et al. 2018), modes of
leadership (Garfield, Syme, and Hagen 2020), socialisation for collectivism/obedience
(Cashdan and Steele 2013), ethnocentrism and xenophobia (Cashdan 2001), and cultural
‘tightness’ and prejudice (Jackson et al. 2019), our aim is different. We aim to test whether
the dual foundations of politics are contested within the societies of the PSF.
We examined the ethnographic materials to find at least one example of contestation of
inequality and one example of contestation of social control in each of the 60 societies.
Criteria for operationalising this contestation are available in the Supplementary Materials.
In short, contestation can be attested to by ethnographic reports of practices being
challenged by either criticism or alternative practices. This evidence should indicate the
presence of either ‘tensions’, defined as people’s disagreement with contemporary
practices of inequality/equality or social control/autonomy, or ‘conflicts’, defined as
arguments between different people who disagree about these practices. Our results
indicate that in all PSF societies people do contest both inequality and social control. The full
list of examples from the 60 societies and explanations of how each example relates to the
It might be argued, though, that the PSF examples do not capture the most extreme
examples of human political variability. We know that inequalities can be deeply
entrenched, as when Roman senators killed Tiberius Gracchus for attempting to rally
popular support for land redistribution (Mann 1986:256-257). Meanwhile other inequalities
are effectively suppressed, such as Trobriand Kiriwina chiefs being “challenged from below”
with reduced yam tribute when people perceived them to be less than generous in
providing benefits (Liep 1991:36-37). Similarly, the degree of social control varies
significantly between different contexts. Batek De’ foragers in Malaysia exercised their
autonomy by moving between residential groups and even children could refuse their
parents (Endicott 2011:68, 1988:122; see also Woodburn 1982 on Hadza residential
movement). By contrast, lineage leaders of Somali pastoralists used violence to dissuade
noncompliance; a common adage was “the man who breaks the customary rulings is the
enemy of all” (Lewis 1961:232-233). Do people contest the two dimensions even within the
constraints of politically extreme institutions?
The dual foundations framework expects that people should. Even in severely unequal
contexts, where inequalities might appear irresistibly entrenched, levelling movements
should exist. Indeed this was the case for the Roman Republic, which saw tax rebellions and
targeted murder of tax collectors (Levi 1988:85), while the first well-known slave revolt was
around 200,000-strong and overcome only after a four-year conflict (Mann 1986:256).
Likewise, we find movements towards inequality in egalitarian settings: Northern American
Netsilik shamans sometimes attempted to use their positions for personal gain (Oosten
1986:73), for which they were sometimes killed (Balikci 1970).
In contexts with tight social control, we find those willing to deviate. Centralised control in
Egypt’s Old Kingdom was in spite of local resentment and resistance to royal power, not due
to its absence (Morris 2019), as seems true for other authoritarian projects including Mayan
Teotihuacan and the Mesopotamian city-states (McAnany 2019; Yoffee and Seri 2019).
Finally, even where actors have considerable autonomy, movements exist that push
towards greater social control. Yahgan people of Argentina were generally acephalous
mobile foragers. Yet when a whale beached, some men took opportunity to marshal groups
as big as eighty, using coercion and violence to organise men and women’s daily activities
(Lowie 1948). The two trade-offs thus lead to political contestation even when extremes of
the dual foundations are dominant, supporting our claim that contestation over the dual
foundations is inherent to human social life.
2) The dual foundations exist in groups both large and small
The dual foundations should also be ubiquitous in a second respect, as trade-offs regarding
resource distribution and conformity exist not only in large social groups but also smaller
groups such as households (Jennings 2020). Some psychological research already supports
this idea. Stellmacher and Petzel’s (2005) Group Authoritarianism scale explicitly expects
values about social control to be found across different levels of social organisation. Across
several German samples, factor analytic methods reveal a single dimension of social control
for various groups: the nation, political parties, and a university department. Other
researchers have investigated politics at even smaller scales by measuring authoritarianism
in parenting values (Stenner 2005). Recent findings show that values about family
relationships mirror political ideology’s two-dimensional structure. Cooperative ‘nurturant’
parenting values and controlling ‘strict’ parenting values each cluster together across
American, Austrian, German, and French samples, and respectively correlate with SDO and
RWA (Feinberg et al. 2020).
Supporting this psychological evidence from modern industrialised societies, contestation of
the dual foundations can also be seen in descriptions of politics at different levels of social
organisation, from large polities to small-scale residential groups and villages, and even
individual households. At the larger scale, England’s Great Rising of 1381 is an example of a
broad pattern of conflict over inequalities in Medieval Europe. Radical clergy rallied
peasants and townspeople against a feudal system that was intensifying tributary payments,
while their bloody repression indicates others’ motives to uphold inequalities (Hilton and
Ashton 1987). At the level of a residence group, contestation of inequality can be seen
among Brazilian Akwe Xavante, when Chief Apewe manipulated the age-set system to put
close kin into desirable positions (Maybury-Lewis 1967:193-194). Young men’s progression
through the system was controlled by elders, with young men complaining that, for both
food and manufactured goods, mature men ‘take everything’ and ‘give nothing’ (Maybury-
Lewis 1967:157-158). Within families, women have frequently used claims of spiritual
afflictions to leverage fairer treatment, as Lewis (2003:71-77) describes in rural Sri Lanka,
Heian period Japan, Uttar Pradesh, and amongst West African Hausa and south Kenyan
Swahili. Somalian Hubeer wives requested expensive treatment for afflictions of sar spirits,
which affected women suffering the precarity caused by powerful and often absent
husbands. Men responded often with violence and divorce threats, with women developing
“a strong and explicit sense of sexual solidarity” in return (Lewis 2003:67-68).
Social control too is contested across larger and smaller social levels. Religion was a vehicle
for contestation of social control within the eighteenth-century Burmese Empire. While
clergy of the nine recognised Buddhist orders legitimised state control, charismatic and
mystical forest monks subverted religious and political norms. Alaunghpaya of the
Konbaung Dynasty mandated tattoos to mark the heterodoxy of those failing to pass the
state-sponsored religious ordination ceremony, but contraventions, including animist
syncretism, were re-established wherever royal power was weakest (Scott 2009:299-300).
Disagreements intermittently broke Ju/’hoansi San inter-family solidarity (Lee 1979:201)
and, in the past, order was sometimes restored by execution (Draper 1978:40; Lee
1979:392-395). As Ju/’hoansi settled in villages, some asserted moral control by verbally
chastising individuals whose moral transgressions seemed to threaten community harmony
(Wiessner 2005). At the family level, Lugbara referred to bad behaviour as ezata, actions
which ‘destroy the home’, most commonly expressed in disobedience to husbands and
senior kinsmen. When social control, in the form of supernatural threats, was no longer
adequate to maintain the senior kinsman’s authority, a family subcluster took the
opportunity to leave (Middleton 1963:258-260). Across different societies, then, the dual
foundations are contested at different levels of social organisation, supporting the
argument that the two trade-offs cause political tensions within all kinds of human groups.
3) The dual foundations are combined in different ways across different contexts
The dual foundations are conceptually independent since each represents a separate trade-
off. This contrasts with some previous anthropological work that combines examples of the
contestation of inequality and social control into a single dimension (e.g., Boehm 1999;
Scott 2009; Gibson and Sillander 2011). Independence does not mean that all political issues
can neatly be sorted into one political foundation or the other. Most political issues likely do
bear on both foundations by combining issues regarding both equality and social control.
However, independence does mean that across societies, someone’s opinion about one
foundation should not invariantly predict their opinion about the other. Some existing
psychological findings support this. While someone from Western Europe or the USA who
favours inequality is likely to also favour social control (Nilsson and Jost 2020), this is not
always the case. Some people combine the dimensions in different ways, like American
Libertarians who tend to accept social inequality but reject traditionalism (Iyer et al. 2012).
In other countries, as in Eastern European post-Communist nations, the dominant pattern
pairs pro-equality with pro-social control attitudes (Malka, Lelkes, and Soto 2019). In line
with these findings, ethnographic and historiographic sources illustrate examples of every
combination of the dual foundations:
(1) Pro-inequality and pro-social control: Across the New Guinea Highlands,
influential men used war to extend both the degree of social control and the extent
of inequality (Hayden 1995:33-34). Because they would gain resources and prestige
from settling peace negotiations, leaders would start conflicts themselves with
feeble excuses such as theft of a single sugar cane stalk or even by paying individuals
to commit murder to elicit retaliation. Yet leaders couldn’t be seen to profit
excessively. They therefore ‘feigned poverty’ and tried to justify their aggrandising
through appeals to the common good. This led to them becoming both feared and
respected. Chimbu leader Matoto was known as “a terrible man … half good, half
bad” and “the one on whom all the rest lean” (Roscoe 2000:106).
(2) Pro-inequality and anti-social control: Coast Salish elites defended inequality
distributed across numerous independent households. These households were
interdependent, especially in defence and warfare. But the coalitions they formed
for these purposes were quickly disbanded and autonomy reasserted wherever
possible. This resistance to centralisation defended the autonomy of the household
elites whilst not challenging the significant inequalities in status and resource control
visible amongst Coast Salish groups (Angelbeck 2016; Angelbeck and Grier 2012).
(3) Anti-inequality and pro-social control: Mobile hunter-gatherers frequently
enforce norms that suppress inequalities. People closely observe the distribution of
hunting spoils across the group and are quick to challenge those who break
egalitarian norms by stingily refusing to share (Wiessner 1996). Some mobile hunter-
gatherers also enforce relative gender egalitarianism through upholding established
norms. BaYaka women, for instance, suppressed male aggrandisement by
collectively embarrassing them with sexualised taunts (Finnegan 2013; Townsend
2015).
(4) Anti-inequality and anti-social control: Maya peasantry’s relationships with the
elites were characterised by movements that pushed against both inequality and
social control. Patron-client relationships were always intermittently broken by flight
and armed revolt (Pohl and Pohl 1994:143). Guerrilla warfare was intended to
prevent Maya leaders collecting tribute and confirming land titles. Later Hacienda
owners said it took only a fishhook and a gun for peasants to cease work and
withdraw from the unequal, controlling Hacienda system (Scott 2009:206).
This lack of universal covariance between the dual foundations across different societies
supports our claim that they arise due to independent trade-offs in group living.
4) The dual foundations are expressed relative to a specific context
The dual foundations will be contested differently in different places because different
contexts have different baseline levels of inequality and social control. While we expect the
dual foundations to be contested ubiquitously, this contestation will always be expressed
relative to a baseline level of inequality and social control. Rather than the content of any
given strain of ideology, therefore, it is the structure of the dual foundations’ contestation
that is invariant. This is something under-acknowledged in psychological work, where scales
designed for Western nations are often simply translated into different languages. RWA, for
example, assigns ‘universal’ political valences to issues that are specific to the Western
context (Gray and Durrheim 2006).
In fact, even similar political strategies can be used in the service of opposing ideological
ends. One example is individual feasting which, in nineteenth century highland Myanmar
and China, was supported by both Wa people and Pau Chin Hau’s movement to oppose
community feasting, which was being used to build inequalities (Scott 2009:212-213). By
contrast, individual feasting to support equality might be alien to egalitarian hunter-
gatherers. Mbendjele BaYaka women even refused to cook a man’s game due to the feeling
that he was building undue power by supplying too much meat, thus fostering unequal
dependence (Lewis 2014).
Another example is religious reinvention, which has been used for both social control and
deviation. The Chingichgnish religious reinvention staged by Gabrielino leaders following
Spanish contact in present-day California extolled submission to traditional authority,
individual self-sacrifice, and suppression of noncompliance with punishment and
supernatural threat from spiritual ‘avengers’ (Aldenderfer, 1993:25). Meanwhile, as one
English Civil War Royalist stated, “heresy is always the fore-runner of rebellion” (Hill
1972:28). The 1650 Blasphemy Act targeted the Ranters, a religious sect whose denial of
“the necessity of civil and moral righteousness among men” led “to the dissolution of all
human society” (Hill 1972:166-167). Thus, while the dual foundations are ubiquitous, their
manifestations are relative to particular historical contexts.
5) The dual foundations give rise to individual variation along the two dimensions of
values
The dual foundations framework argues that the two ubiquitous trade-offs mean individuals
will differ in the extent to which they support inequality and social control. This is because
the dual foundations’ trade-offs imply a mix of both advantages and disadvantages for
relying on social strategies that are either cooperative or competitive, or either pro-control
or pro-autonomy (Claessens, Fischer, et al. 2020). That no one strategy can out-compete the
others across different situations maintains between-individual variation in these strategies,
as well as favouring within-individual plasticity by making it advantageous for individuals to
hone their strategies to changing environmental conditions. More specifically, we expect
these strategies to be expressed as values about inequality and social control. By values, we
mean ideas regarding collective goals and general principles of conduct, in contrast to
personal goals, though the two are related in psychologically complex ways (D’Andrade
2008; Bergh and Sidanius 2021). It is values like these that are measured by psychological
scales of political ideology. These scales measure values by asking respondents whether
they agree with statements such as “An ideal society requires some groups to be on the top
and others to be on the bottom” (Ho et al. 2015) and “Our country will be great if we show
respect for authority and obey our leaders” (Duckitt et al. 2010). These measures of
between-individual differences in political values are relatively stable across time and
causally precede changes in other behaviours (Satherley, Sibley, and Osborne 2021;
Osborne et al. 2021). If the dual foundations lead to two dimensions of values in
industrialised societies, and – as we have tried to show – the dual foundations are also
fundamental to politics in non-industrialised societies, then we should expect the two value
dimensions to exist in non-industrialised societies too.
Anthropologists do also study values – values of clear relevance for our two dimensions of
ideology – but as group-level phenomena. For example, egalitarian values are a common
explanation for the maintenance of egalitarian social systems (Cashdan 1980; Gintis, van
Schaik, and Boehm 2019; Woodburn 1982), while anti-egalitarian values explain the
maintenance of inequality (Ku and Gibson 2019; Wiessner 2002), and values of autonomy
and control each take roles in explaining more authoritarian versus libertarian social
systems (Gardner 1991; Gibson and Sillander 2011). Nevertheless, these analyses stop short
of examining individual-level variation.
It is therefore difficult to evaluate predictions about individuals’ values due to, on the one
hand, the dearth of psychological research in non-industrialised societies, and on the other,
the ethnographic record’s lack of granularity at the level of differences between individuals
(Boehm 1999:245-246). Partly this is because ethnographic observation of politics is
difficult. People are often constrained from acting on their values for fear of consequences
(Scott 1990; Bloch 1975). Ethnographers’ traditional agendas are also partly responsible.
These analyses can reify individuals as examples of cultural types, rather than viewing them
as persons in their own right (Asad 1986; Abu-Lughod 2006).
Despite limitations, anthropological accounts do provide tantalising evidence that
individuals in non-industrialised societies hold the kind of political values predicted by the
dual foundations framework. First, some individuals’ statements seem to imply both
normative content and concern for collective ends. Regarding equality, one Ju/’hoansi
healer stated: “When a young man kills much meat, he comes to think of himself as a chief
or a big man, and he thinks of the rest of us as his servants or inferiors. We can’t accept this.
We refuse one who boasts” (Lee 1979:246). And concerning autonomy, one BaYaka healer
said: “(n)ever in life can you force someone to do something that is beyond his or her
abilities, against his or her will, or contrary to his or her well-being” (Moïse 2014:89).
Second, individuals seem to care about the values held by others. The advice given to Nuu-
chah-nulth chiefs’ children is pertinent for the inequality dimension: “take care of” your
people, for “if your people don’t like you, you’re nothing” (Drucker 1951:131). Meanwhile,
regarding autonomy, Xerénte chiefs regularly addressed villagers on the need for harmony,
preservation of traditional ways of living, and conformity to moral conventions (Lowie
1948). Third, political values may be reflected in evidence that people are divided by opinion
in ways that cannot be attributed straightforwardly to self-interest. While wealthy
agriculturalist villagers in Korea embraced a stratified, lineage-oriented tradition, this was
opposed by an egalitarian mutual-aid focused tradition mostly embraced by the poor. In
contrast to what we might assume to be their self-interest, though, portions of the wealthy
also embraced these more egalitarian practices (Brandt 1971:238). Mathew and Boyd
(2011) report disagreement over the stringency of norms and punishment regarding
battlefield cowardice amongst Turkana pastoralists. Some warriors said it was justified for
the man to save himself and so should not be punished, while others argued punishment
was necessary to prevent future wrongdoings. Examples like these are insightful and
encouraging. To explore the structure of individual-level differences in values in greater
detail, though, requires psychological analyses. In the next section, we argue that greater
collaboration between anthropologists and psychologists will shed new light on the dual
foundations of political ideology and their manifestation across divergent modes of human
group-living.
Four key steps for future research
The evidence we have presented provides support for key predictions of the dual
foundations framework: that two inherent trade-offs of human group living lead to the
ubiquitous contestation of inequality and social control, and form a common foundation to
political ideologies in all human groups. We hope this will provide a common framework for
anthropologists and psychologists to build upon by developing new ways of studying
ideology across diverse cultural contexts. Here, we identify four key questions that will allow
researchers to explore the structure, consequences, and causes of political ideology in
diverse contexts around the world.
The first question represents a test of a key prediction of the dual foundations framework:
do political values show a two-dimensional structure in different societies around the
world? While the dual foundations predicts two dimensions, anthropologists have tended to
either aggregate political struggles into a single dimension of ‘equality and freedom’ versus
‘inequality and control’ (e.g., Boehm 1999; Scott 2009) or examine politics in a localised way
to emphasise its many-sided complexities (e.g., Daloz 2018). A way to test the predictive
value of the dual foundations against alternatives is to operationalise its two trade-offs in
the form of a psychometric scale. While existing scales of ideology are limited by their
design for use in industrialised, mostly Western nations, a new scale that operationalises the
trade-offs of the dual foundations framework could be both abstract enough to transcend
the Western political context and concrete enough to pose actual political issues to
respondents. It would thus allow questions about the structure of political ideology to be
investigated cross-culturally: whether the abstract scale items capture the same two
dimensions of ideology already well studied in industrialised countries, and whether they
demonstrate the same two-dimensional structure in contexts where the structure of
political ideology is less well known, across non-industrialised, industrialising, and politically
peripheral communities.
Second, are ideological values and policy views predicted by behavioural preferences for
inequality and social control measured using incentivised tasks? As we note above, recent
findings indicate that people who espouse social equality act more cooperatively in
economic games, while people who espouse social control are more conformist in
incentivised tasks (Claessens, Sibley, et al. 2020; K. Fischer, Atkinson, and Chaudhuri 2022).
These findings come from Western nations, but incentivised tasks are readily adaptable to
different sociocultural contexts and have several advantages. By giving individuals real,
incentivised choices that embody tensions between cooperation and competition, and
social control and autonomy, they can directly model the trade-offs described by the dual
foundations and thus get at the general social preferences that individuals have towards
them. Given the limitations noted above in ethnographically observing between-individual
variation in political values, like psychometric scales that measure ideology more abstractly,
these abstract tasks are a potentially valuable tool with which to study ideology in non-
industrialised, industrialising, and politically peripheral contexts (see Naar 2020; Pisor,
Gervais, Purzycki, and Ross 2020). As it stands, more research is needed into the
relationship between behaviour in incentivised tasks and other measures of ideology in such
contexts.
Third, do abstract ideological values predict attitudes towards contemporary political
issues? This question provides an opportunity for more anthropologically informed
approaches to cross-cultural research (Broesch et al. 2020). Opening this research to
collaboration with community members will be vital in understanding what these concrete
issues are and how to record individuals’ opinions (see Jogdand, Khan and Mishra 2016), as
well as building trust and revealing avenues by which fieldworkers can make themselves
useful to the community. It will, moreover, enable researchers working with non-
industrialised, industrialising, and politically peripheral communities to employ
psychological methods to understand responses to diverse contemporary issues, including
global warming (Stanley and Wilson 2019) and public health (K. Fischer, Chaudhuri, and
Atkinson 2021) among many others (e.g., Becker 2020; Lindén, Björklund, and Bäckström
2016; Reese, Proch, and Cohrs 2014).
Fourth, what factors explain variation in the two dimensions of ideology? Many potential
sources of variation exist between both individuals and groups. One that has received
psychological attention is family values, which some identify as the origin of political values
(Lakoff 2016). Supporting this, two dimensions of family values correlate with the two
dimensions of politics among Western participants (Feinberg et al. 2020). Other scholars,
though, question whether this relationship depends on a particular sociocultural context
(Pérez and Hetherington 2014; Fried 1967:83), making it an interesting question to explore
cross-culturally. Another potential source of variation is social mobility, since gaining social
power may make people more favourable of inequality and social control (Liu, Huang, and
McFedries 2008). At the group level, effects of market integration require careful study.
Evidence indicates that market integration makes people more cooperative in anonymous
economic games (Henrich et al. 2010; Stagnaro, Stibbard-Hawkes, and Apicella 2022), while
others are sceptical that people from non-industrialised societies have less cooperative
values (Haagsma and Mouche 2013; Hruschka et al. 2014:575). Measures of the effect of
market integration on the dual foundations of political ideology may help clarify the
psychological mechanisms linking market integration with the cooperative preferences
revealed in anonymous games. In particular, is market integration associated with greater
acceptance of or aversion to inequality across cultures? Is it associated with the social
control dimension, as well as the inequality dimension of ideology? Further sources of
group-level variation could include the extent of social interdependence required by
different subsistence practices, which affects people’s reliance on social information
(Glowacki and Molleman 2017), ability to perform rule-switching (Legare et al. 2018), and
espousal of collectivism (Dong, Talhelm, and Ren 2019; Talhelm et al. 2014), or historical
experience under state bureaucracy, which may lead to reduced norm following and
teaching of norm-following behaviour to children (Lowes et al. 2017). Cross-cultural
research would allow exploration of whether these group-level factors do indeed predict
political values. Finally, there is little consensus concerning why pro-inequality and pro-
social control views are coupled the way they are in Western countries, whether this
relationship is exceptional, and what factors might predict an inverse relationship. Some
argue the cross-cultural evidence indicates a psychological affinity between
authoritarianism and support for inequality (Nilsson and Jost 2020) and others that it
indicates the more common alignment is between social control and egalitarianism, which
transforms into the left-right alignment with modernisation (Malka, Lelkes, and Soto 2019).
Resolving these questions will require research across a much broader range of
communities using instruments appropriate for diverse cultural contexts.
Conclusion
We have argued that the dual foundations framework is a useful model of politics and
ideology across industrialised and non-industrialised contexts. In doing this, we have shown
how gaps can be bridged between the study of politics in anthropology and psychology. A
key barrier we have tried to eliminate is the idea that politics’ two dimensions, as studied by
psychologists, are themselves products of industrialisation and modernisation. The
ethnographic and other evidence presented here challenge this account of ideology and
indicate it has deeper roots in human social life. Moreover, the dual foundations provide the
theoretical framework that can bring together the study of political ideology across
disciplines and societies. By anchoring the two dimensions of ideology in two trade-offs
inherent to human group living, the dual foundations framework becomes relevant to
politics across all human groups, whilst recognising diversity and flexibility in people’s
political values. By ending with steps for further research, we encourage anthropologists
and psychologists to collaborate to better understand politics and ideology. This will allow
psychologists to test their theories across a wider plane of human variation, while
anthropologists gain a person-centric and quantitative framework that provides insight into
a big question in current theory: What is the structure of the values central to political
agency? Ultimately, questions about the intersection of the personal with the social, as
posed by the study of politics, will only be addressed through inter-disciplinary
collaboration. We hope the work presented here will provide a foundation for such
collaboration.
Abu-Lughod, Lila. 2006. Writing Against Culture. In Anthropology in Theory: Issues in
Epistemology. H. Moore and T. Sanders, eds. Pp. 466–479. Oxford: Blackwell.
Aktipis, Athena, Lee Cronk, Joe Alcock, Jessica D. Ayers, Cristina Baciu, Daniel Balliet, Amy M.
Boddy, et al. 2018. Understanding Cooperation through Fitness Interdependence.
Nature Human Behaviour 2(7):429–431, doi:10.1038/s41562-018-0378-4.
Angelbeck, Bill. 2016. The Balance of Autonomy and Alliance in Anarchic Societies: The
Organization of Defences in the Coast Salish Past. World Archaeology 48(1):51–69,
doi:10.1080/00438243.2015.1131620.
Angelbeck, Bill, and Colin Grier. 2012. Anarchism and the Archaeology of Anarchic Societies.
Current Anthropology 53(5):547–587, doi:10.1086/667621.
Antweiler, Christoph. 2016. Our Common Denominator: Human Universals Revisited. D.
Kerns, trans. New York: Berghahn Books.
Arkush, Elizabeth. 2012. Commentary on ‘Anarchism and the Archaeology of Anarchic
Societies: Resistance to Centralization in the Coast Salish Region of the Pacific
Northwest Coast.’ Current Anthropology 53(5):569–570.
Asad, Talal. 1986. The Concept of Cultural Translation in British Social Anthropology. In
Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Culture. James Clifford and George E.
Marcus, eds. Pp. 141–164. Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 1972. Market Model, Class Structure and Consent: A Reconsideration of Swat
Political Organisation. Man 7(1):74–94, doi:10.2307/2799857.
Aspelund, Anna, Marjaana Lindeman, and Markku Verkasalo. 2013. Political Conservatism
and Left-Right Orientation in 28 Eastern and Western European Countries. Political
Psychology 34(3):409–417, doi:10.1111/pops.12000.
Balandier, Georges. 1970. Political Anthropology. A. M. Sheridan Smith, trans. New York:
Random House, Pantheon Books.
Balikci, Asen. 1970. The Netsilik Eskimo. Prospect Heights: Waveland.
Baron, Jonathan. 2020. Religion, Cognitive Style, and Rational Thinking. Current Opinion in
Behavioral Sciences 34(August):64–68, doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2019.12.015.
Barth, Fredrik. 1959. Political Leadership among Swat Pathans. London: Athlone Press.
Bartusevičius, Henrikas, Florian van Leeuwen, and Michael Bang Petersen. 2020.
Dominance-Driven Autocratic Political Orientations Predict Political Violence in
Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) and Non-WEIRD
Samples. Psychological Science 31(12):1511–1530, doi:10.1177/0956797620922476.
Becker, Julia C. 2020. Ideology and the Promotion of Social Change. Current Opinion in
Behavioral Sciences 34(August):6–11, doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2019.10.005.
Bergh, Robin, and Jim Sidanius. 2021. Domineering Dispositions and Hierarchy Preferences:
Differentiating the Impact of Traits and Social Values in Economic Games. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin 47(8):1264–1278, doi:10.1177/0146167220965292.
Bernardo, Allan B. I. 2013. Social Dominance Orientation and Attitudes towards the Poor:
Contrasting Lower and Higher Socioeconomic Groups in the Philippines. Phillippine
Bird, Douglas W., Rebecca Bliege Bird, Brian F. Codding, and David W. Zeanah. 2019.
Variability in the Organization and Size of Hunter-Gatherer Groups: Foragers Do Not
Live in Small-Scale Societies. Journal of Human Evolution 131(June):96–108,
doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2019.03.005.
Bissonnette, Annie, Susan Perry, Louise Barrett, John C. Mitani, Mark Flinn, Sergey Gavrilets,
and Frans B. M. de Waal. 2015. Coalitions in Theory and Reality: A Review of Pertinent
Variables and Processes. Behaviour 152(1):1–56, doi:10.1163/1568539X-00003241.
Blanton, Richard, and Lane Fargher. 2008. Collective Action in the Formation of Pre-Modern
States. In Fundamental Issues in Archaeology. New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-0-
387-73877-2.
Bloch, Maurice. 1975. “Introduction.” In Political Language and Oratory in Traditional
Society. Maurice Bloch, eds. Pp. 1–28. London: Academic Press.
Boehm, Christopher. 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bowser, Brenda J. 2000. From Pottery to Politics: An Ethnoarchaeological Study of Political
Factionalism, Ethnicity, and Domestic Pottery Style in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Journal
of Archaeological Method and Theory 7(3):219–248, doi:10.1023/A:1026510620824.
Brandt, Vincent S. R. 1971. A Korean Village: Between Farm and Sea. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Broesch, Tanya, Alyssa N. Crittenden, Bret A. Beheim, Aaron D. Blackwell, John A. Bunce,
Heidi Colleran, Kristin Hagel, et al. 2020. Navigating Cross-Cultural Research:
Methodological and Ethical Considerations. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 287(1935):20201245, doi:10.1098/rspb.2020.1245.
Burkart, Judith M., Rahel K. Brügger, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2018. Evolutionary Origins of
Morality: Insights From Non-Human Primates. Frontiers in Sociology 3(17),
doi:10.3389/fsoc.2018.00017.
Cashdan, Elizabeth A. 1980. Egalitarianism among Hunters and Gatherers. American
Anthropologist 82(1):116–120, doi:10.1525/aa.1980.82.1.02a00100.
———. 2001. Ethnocentrism and Xenophobia: A Cross‐Cultural Study. Current Anthropology
42(5):760–765, doi:10.1086/323821.
Cashdan, Elizabeth A., and Matthew Steele. 2013. Pathogen Prevalence, Group Bias, and
Collectivism in the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample. Human Nature 24(1):59–75,
doi:10.1007/s12110-012-9159-3.
Cieciuch, Jan, Eldad Davidov, Michele Vecchione, and Shalom H. Schwartz. 2014. A
Hierarchical Structure of Basic Human Values in a Third-Order Confirmatory Factor
Analysis. Swiss Journal of Psychology 73(3):177–182, doi:10.1024/1421-0185/a000134.
Claessens, Scott, Kyle Fischer, Ananish Chaudhuri, Chris G. Sibley, and Quentin D. Atkinson.
2020. The Dual Evolutionary Foundations of Political Ideology. Nature Human
Behaviour 4(4):336–345, doi:10.1038/s41562-020-0850-9.
Claessens, Scott, Chris G. Sibley, Ananish Chaudhuri, and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2020.
Cooperative Phenotype Predicts Economic Conservatism, Policy Views, and Political
Party Support. PsyArXiv. doi:10.31234/osf.io/t7rqb.
Cohrs, J. Christopher, and Monika Stelzl. 2010. How Ideological Attitudes Predict Host
Society Members’ Attitudes toward Immigrants: Exploring Cross-National Differences.
Journal of Social Issues 66(4):673–694, doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.2010.01670.x.
Cronk, Lee, Dieter Steklis, Netzin Steklis, Olmo R. van den Akker, and Athena Aktipis. 2019.
Kin Terms and Fitness Interdependence. Evolution and Human Behavior 40(3):281–291,
doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2018.12.004.
D’Andrade, Roy. 2008. A Study of Personal and Cultural Values: American, Japanese, and
Vietnamese. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Daloz, Jean-Pascal. 2018. Comparative Political Analysis and the Interpretation of Meaning.
In Handbook of Political Anthropology. Harald Wydra and Bjørn Thomassen, eds. Pp.
177–190. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing. doi:10.4337/9781783479016.00018.
Dong, Xiawei, Thomas Talhelm, and Xiaopeng Ren. 2019. Teens in Rice County Are More
Interdependent and Think More Holistically Than Nearby Wheat County. Social
Psychological and Personality Science 10(7):966–976, doi:10.1177/1948550618808868.
Draper, Patricia. 1978. “The Learning Environment for Aggression and Anti-Social Behavior
among the !Kung.” In Learning Non-Aggression: The Experience of Non-Literate
Societies. Ashley Montagu, eds. Pp. 31–53. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drucker, Philip. 1951. The Northern and Central Nootkan Tribes. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 144:1–480.
Duckitt, John, Boris Bizumic, Stephen W. Krauss, and Edna Heled. 2010. A Tripartite
Approach to Right-Wing Authoritarianism: The Authoritarianism-Conservatism-
Traditionalism Model. Political Psychology 31(5):685–715, doi:10.1111/j.1467-
9221.2010.00781.x.
Duckitt, John, and Chris G. Sibley. 2010. “Personality, Ideology, Prejudice, and Politics: A
Dual-Process Motivational Model.” Journal of Personality 78(6):1861–1894,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2010.00672.x.
Dugatkin, Lee Alan. 1997. Cooperation Among Animals: An Evolutionary Perspective. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Duriez, Bart, Alain Van Hiel, and Malgorzata Kossowska. 2005. Authoritarianism and Social
Dominance in Western and Eastern Europe: The Importance of the Sociopolitical
Context and of Political Interest and Involvement. Political Psychology 26(2):299–320,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9221.2005.00419.x.
“EHRAF World Cultures.” 2021. Human Relations Area Files. Accessed November 2.
Ember, Carol R., Ian Skoggard, Erik J. Ringen, and Megan Farrer. 2018. Our Better Nature:
Does Resource Stress Predict Beyond-Household Sharing? Evolution and Human
Behavior 39(4):380–391, doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2018.03.001.
Endicott, Kirk. 1988. Property, Power and Conflict among the Batek of Malaysia. In Hunters
and Gatherers, Vol. II: Property, Power and Ideology. T. Ingold, D. Riches, and J.
Woodburn, eds. Pp. 110–127. Oxford: Berg.
———. 2011. Cooperative Autonomy: Social Solidarity among the Batek of Malaysia. In
Anarchic Solidarity: Autonomy, Equality, and Fellowship in Southeast Asia. T. Gibson
and K. Sillander, eds. Pp. 62–87. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asia Studies.
Eriksson, Kimmo, Pontus Strimling, Michele Gelfand, Junhui Wu, Jered Abernathy, Charity S.
Akotia, Alisher Aldashev, et al. 2021. Perceptions of the Appropriate Response to Norm
Violation in 57 Societies. Nature Communications 12(1):1481, doi:10.1038/s41467-021-
21602-9.
Feinberg, Matthew, Elisabeth Wehling, Joanne M. Chung, Laura R. Saslow, and Ingrid
Melvær Paulin. 2020. Measuring Moral Politics: How Strict and Nurturant Family Values
Explain Individual Differences in Conservatism, Liberalism, and the Political Middle.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 118(4):777–804,
doi:10.1037/pspp0000255.
Finnegan, Morna. 2013. The Politics of Eros: Ritual Dialogue and Egalitarianism in Three
Central African Hunter-Gatherer Societies. Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute 19(4):697–715, doi:10.1111/1467-9655.12060.
Fischer, Kyle, Quentin D. Atkinson, and Ananish Chaudhuri. 2021. Experimental Approaches
to Political Psychology. In Research Agenda in Experimental Economics. Ananish
Fischer, Kyle, Ananish Chaudhuri, and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2022. Dual Evolutionary
Foundations of Political Ideology Predict Divergent Responses to COVID-19. PsyArXiv.
Fischer, Ronald, Katja Hanke, and Chris G. Sibley. 2012. Cultural and Institutional
Determinants of Social Dominance Orientation: A Cross-Cultural Meta-Analysis of 27
Societies. Political Psychology 33(4):437–467, doi:10.1111/j.1467-9221.2012.00884.x.
Fried, Morton H. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology.
London: McGraw-Hill.
Gardner, Peter M. 1991. Foragers’ Pursuit of Individual Autonomy. Current Anthropology
32(5):543–572, doi:10.1086/203999.
Garfield, Zachary H., Kristen L. Syme, and Edward H. Hagen. 2020. Universal and Variable
Leadership Dimensions across Human Societies. Evolution and Human Behavior
41(5):397–414, doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2020.07.012.
Gauchet, Marcel. 1994. Right and Left. In Realms of Memory: Rethinking the French Past,
Vol. 1, Conflicts and Divisions. Pierre Nora, eds. Lawrence D. Kritzman, trans. Pp. 241-
298. New York: Columbia University Press.
Gibson, T, and K Sillander, eds. 2011. Anarchic Solidarity: Autonomy, Equality, and
Fellowship in Southeast Asia. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asian Studies.
Gintis, Herbert. 2010. “Social Norms as Choreography.” Politics, Philosophy & Economics
9(3):251–264, doi:10.1177/1470594X09345474.
Gintis, Herbert, Carel van Schaik, and Christopher Boehm. 2019. Zoon Politikon: The
Evolutionary Origins of Human Socio-Political Systems. Behavioural Processes
161(April):17–30. doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2018.01.007.
Glowacki, Luke, and Lucas Molleman. 2017. Subsistence Styles Shape Human Social Learning
Strategies. Nature Human Behaviour 1(5):0098, doi:10.1038/s41562-017-0098.
Graeber, David, and David Wengrow. 2021. The Dawn of Everything: A New History of
Humanity. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Gray, Debra, and Kevin Durrheim. 2006. The Validity and Reliability of Measures of Right-
Wing Authoritarianism in South Africa. South African Journal of Psychology 36(3):500–
520, doi:10.1177/008124630603600305.
Haagsma, Rein, and Pierre v. Mouche. 2013. Egalitarian Norms, Economic Development, and
Ethnic Polarization. Journal of Comparative Economics 41(3):719–744,
doi:10.1016/j.jce.2012.10.005.
Haugbolle, Sune. 2018. Anthropology and Political Ideology. In Handbook of Political
Anthropology. Harald Wydra and Bjørn Thomassen, eds. Pp. 191–204. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar Publishing. doi:10.4337/9781783479016.00019.
Hawkins, Robert X. D., Noah D. Goodman, and Robert L. Goldstone. 2019. The Emergence of
Social Norms and Conventions. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 23(2):158–169,
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2018.11.003.
Hayden, Brian. 1995. Pathways to Power: Principles for Creating Socioeconomic Inequalities.
In Foundations of Social Inequality. T Douglas Price and Gary M Feinman, eds. Pp. 15–
86. New York: Plenum Press. doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-1289-3_2.
Hayden, Brian, and Suzanne Villeneuve. 2010. Who Benefits from Complexity? A View from
Futuna. In Pathways to Power: New Perspectives on the Emergence of Social Inequality.
T Douglas Price and Gary M Feinman, eds. Pp. 95–145. New York: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-6300-0_5.
Henrich, J., J. Ensminger, R. McElreath, A. Barr, C. Barrett, A. Bolyanatz, J. C. Cardenas, et al.
2010. Markets, Religion, Community Size, and the Evolution of Fairness and
Punishment. Science 327(5972):1480–1484, doi:10.1126/science.1182238.
Henrich, Joseph, and Francisco J Gil-White. 2001. The Evolution of Prestige: Freely Conferred
Deference as a Mechanism for Enhancing the Benefits of Cultural Transmission.
Evolution and Human Behavior 22(3):165–196, doi:10.1016/S1090-5138(00)00071-4.
Hickey, Joseph, and Jörn Davidsen. 2019. Self-Organization and Time-Stability of Social
Hierarchies. PLOS ONE 14(1):e0211403, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0211403.
Hill, Christopher. 1972. The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas During the English
Revolution. London: Temple Smith.
Hill, K. R., R. S. Walker, M. Bozicevic, J. Eder, T. Headland, B. Hewlett, A. M. Hurtado, F.
Marlowe, P. Wiessner, and B. Wood. 2011. Co-Residence Patterns in Hunter-Gatherer
Societies Show Unique Human Social Structure. Science 331(6022):1286–1289,
doi:10.1126/science.1199071.
Hilton, R. H., and T. H. Ashton, eds. 1987. The English Rising of 1381. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hirschfeld, Lawrence A. 2018. The Rutherford Atom of Culture. Journal of Cognition and
Culture 18(3–4):231–261, doi:10.1163/15685373-12340029.
Ho, Arnold K., Jim Sidanius, Nour Kteily, Jennifer Sheehy-Skeffington, Felicia Pratto, Kristin E.
Henkel, Rob Foels, and Andrew L. Stewart. 2015. The Nature of Social Dominance
Orientation: Theorizing and Measuring Preferences for Intergroup Inequality Using the
New SDO₇ Scale. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 109(6):1003–1028,
doi:10.1037/pspi0000033.
Hofstede, Geert. 1980. Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-Related
Values. London: Sage.
Hooper, Paul L., Hillard S. Kaplan, and Adrian V. Jaeggi. 2021. Gains to Cooperation Drive the
Evolution of Egalitarianism. Nature Human Behaviour 5(7):847–856,
doi:10.1038/s41562-021-01059-y.
Hruschka, Daniel, Charles Efferson, Ting Jiang, Ashlan Falletta-Cowden, Sveinn Sigurdsson,
Rita McNamara, Madeline Sands, Shirajum Munira, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph
Henrich. 2014. Impartial Institutions, Pathogen Stress and the Expanding Social
Network. Human Nature 25(4):567–579, doi:10.1007/s12110-014-9217-0.
Hunsberger, Bruce, Vida Owusu, and Robert Duck. 1999. Religion and Prejudice in Ghana
and Canada: Religious Fundamentalism, Right-Wing Authoritarianism and Attitudes
toward Homosexuals and Women. International Journal for the Psychology of Religion
9(3):181–194, doi:10.1207/s15327582ijpr0903_2.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Christian Welzel. 2005. Modernization, Cultural Change, and
Democracy: The Human Development Sequence. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Iyer, Ravi, Spassena Koleva, Jesse Graham, Peter Ditto, and Jonathan Haidt. 2012.
Understanding Libertarian Morality: The Psychological Dispositions of Self-Identified
Libertarians. PLoS ONE 7(8):e42366, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0042366.
Jackson, Joshua Conrad, Marieke van Egmond, Virginia K. Choi, Carol R. Ember, Jamin
Halberstadt, Jovana Balanovic, Inger N. Basker, et al. 2019. Ecological and Cultural
Factors Underlying the Global Distribution of Prejudice. PLOS ONE 14(9):e0221953,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0221953.
Jennings, Julia A. 2020. Cooperation and Competition Begin at Home: Bridging Household
Ecology and Human Evolutionary Demography. In Human Evolutionary Demography.
Jensen, Keith, Amrisha Vaish, and Marco F. H. Schmidt. 2014. The Emergence of Human
Prosociality: Aligning with Others through Feelings, Concerns, and Norms. Frontiers in
Psychology 5(July), doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00822.
Jogdand, Yashpal A., Sammyh S. Khan, and Arvind Kumar Mishra. 2016. Understanding the
Persistence of Caste: A Commentary on Cotterill, Sidanius, Bhardwaj and Kumar (2014).
Journal of Social and Political Psychology 4(2):554–570, doi:10.5964/jspp.v4i2.603.
Johnson, David W., and Roger T. Johnson. 2015. Cooperation and Competition. In
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences. 2nd edition. James D
Wright, eds. 856–861. Amsterdam: Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.24051-8.
Jost, John T, Eran Halperin, and Kristin Laurin. 2020. Editorial Overview: Five Observations
about Tradition and Progress in the Scientific Study of Political Ideologies. Current
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 34(August): iii–vii, doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2020.09.001.
Kemmelmeier, Markus, Eugene Burnstein, Krum Krumov, Petia Genkova, Chie Kanagawa,
Matthew S. Hirshberg, Hans-Peter Erb, Grazyna Wieczorkowska, and Kimberly A. Noels.
2003. Individualism, Collectivism, and Authoritarianism in Seven Societies. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology 34(3):304–322, doi:10.1177/0022022103034003005.
Kendal, Rachel L., Isabelle Coolen, Yfke van Bergen, and Kevin N. Laland. 2005. Trade‐Offs in
the Adaptive Use of Social and Asocial Learning. In Advances in the Study of Behavior,
vol. 35. Pp. 333–379. doi:10.1016/S0065-3454(05)35008-X.
Kessler, Thomas, and J. Christopher Cohrs. 2008. The Evolution of Authoritarian Processes:
Fostering Cooperation in Large-Scale Groups. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and
Practice 12(1):73–84, doi:10.1037/1089-2699.12.1.73.
Knauft, Bruce M. 1991. Violence and Sociality in Human Evolution. Current Anthropology
32(4):391–428, doi:10.1086/203975.
Ku, Kun-Hui, and Thomas Gibson. 2019. Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Austronesia.
Anthropological Forum 29(3):205–215, doi:10.1080/00664677.2019.1626216.
Lagacé, Robert O. 1979. The HRAF Probability Sample: Retrospect and Prospect. Behavior
Science Research 14(3):211–229, doi:10.1177/106939717901400304.
Lakoff, George. 2016. Moral Politics. 3rd edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
doi:10.7208/chicago/9780226411323.001.0001.
Leach, Edmund R. 1954. Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of Kachin Social
Structure. London: Bell.
Lee, I-Ching, Felicia Pratto, and Blair T. Johnson. 2011. Intergroup Consensus/Disagreement
in Support of Group-Based Hierarchy: An Examination of Socio-Structural and Psycho-
Cultural Factors. Psychological Bulletin 137(6):1029–1064, doi:10.1037/a0025410.
Lee, Richard B. 1979. The !Kung San: Men, Women, and Work in a Foraging Society.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Legare, Cristine H., Michael T. Dale, Sarah Y. Kim, and Gedeon O. Deák. 2018. Cultural
Variation in Cognitive Flexibility Reveals Diversity in the Development of Executive
Functions. Scientific Reports 8(1):16326, doi:10.1038/s41598-018-34756-2.
Levi, M. 1988. Of Rule and Revenue. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lewis, Ioan M. 1961. A Pastoral Democracy: A Study of Pastoralism and Politics Among the
Northern Somali of the Horn of Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2002. Ecstatic Religion: A Study of Shamanism and Spirit Possession. 3rd edition.
London: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203241080.
Lewis, Jerome. 2014. Egalitarian Social Organization: The Case of the Mbendjele BaYaka. In
Hunter-Gathers of the Congo Basin: Cultures, Histories, and Biology of African Pygmies.
Barry S Hewlett, eds. Pp. 219–244. Abingdon: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203789438-
8.
Liep, John. 1991. Great Man, Big Man, Chief: A Triangulation of the Massim. In Big Men and
Great Men: Personifications of Power in Melanesia. M. Godelier and M. Strathern, eds.
Pp. 28–47. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lindén, Magnus, Fredrik Björklund, and Martin Bäckström. 2016. What Makes Authoritarian
and Socially Dominant People More Positive to Using Torture in the War on Terrorism?
Personality and Individual Differences 91(March):98–101,
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2015.11.058.
Liu, James H., Li-Li Huang, and Catherine McFedries. 2008. Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal
Differences in Social Dominance Orientation and Right Wing Authoritarianism as a
Function of Political Power and Societal Change. Asian Journal Of Social Psychology
11(2):116–126, doi:10.1111/j.1467-839X.2008.00249.x.
Lowes, Sara, Nathan Nunn, James A. Robinson, and Jonathan L. Weigel. 2017. The Evolution
of Culture and Institutions: Evidence From the Kuba Kingdom. Econometrica
85(4):1065–1091, doi:10.3982/ECTA14139.
Lowie, Robert H. 1948. Some Aspects of Political Organization Among the American
Aborigines. The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and
Ireland 78(1/2):11–24, doi:10.2307/2844522.
Malka, Ariel, Yphtach Lelkes, and Christopher J. Soto. 2019. Are Cultural and Economic
Conservatism Positively Correlated? A Large-Scale Cross-National Test. British Journal
of Political Science 49(3):1045–1069, doi:10.1017/S0007123417000072.
Mandalaywala, Tara M. 2019. Emergence of Social Reasoning About Hierarchies. In
Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Psychological Science. T. Shackelford and V. Weekes-
Shackelford, eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
16999-6_2628-1.
Mann, Michael. 1986. The Sources of Social Power, Volume I: A History of Power from the
Beginning to A.D. 1760. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mathew, Sarah, and Robert Boyd. 2011. Punishment Sustains Large-Scale Cooperation in
Prestate Warfare. PNAS 108(28):11375–11380, doi:10.1073/pnas.1105604108.
Maybury-Lewis, David. 1967. Akwe-Shavante Society. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
McAnany, P. A. 2019. Fragile Authority in Monumental Time: Political Experimentation in
the Classic Maya Lowlands. In The Evolution of Fragility: Setting the Terms. Norman
Yoffee, eds. Pp. 47–59. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
doi:10.17863/CAM.40698.
Middleton, John. 1963. Witchcraft and Sorcery in Lugbara. In Witchcraft and Sorcery in East
Africa. John Middleton and E. H. Winter, eds. Pp. 257–275. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Moïse, Robert E. 2014. ‘Do Pygmies Have a History?’ Revisited: The Autochthonous Tradition
in the History of Equatorial Africa. In Hunter-Gathers of the Congo Basin: Cultures,
Histories, and Biology of African Pygmies. Barry S. Hewlett, eds. Pp. 85–116. New
Brunswick: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203789438-4.
Morris, E. 2019. Ancient Egyptian Exceptionalism: Fragility, Flexibility and the Art of Not
Collapsing. In The Evolution of Fragility: Setting the Terms. Norman Yoffee, eds. Pp. 61–
87. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
doi:10.17863/CAM.40699.
Muhlberger, Steven, and Phil Paine. 1993. Democracy’s Place in World History. Journal of
World History 4(1):23–45.
Naar, Nicole. 2020. Gaming Anthropology: The Problem of External Validity and the
Challenge of Interpreting Experimental Games. American Anthropologist 122(4): 784–
798, doi:10.1111/aman.13483.
Nilsson, Artur, and John T. Jost. 2020. The Authoritarian-Conservatism Nexus. Current
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 34(August):148–154, doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2020.03.003.
Oosten, Jarich Gerlof. 1986. The ‘Big-Man’ and Ihumatar: Personal Power and Leadership in
Melanesia and the Canadian Arctic. In Private Politics: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach to
“Big-Man” System. Martin A. van Bakel, Renée R. Hagesteijn, and Pieter van de Velde,
eds. Pp. 67–75. Leiden: E J Brill.
Osborne, Danny, Nicole Satherley, Todd D. Little, and Chris G. Sibley. 2021. Authoritarianism
and Social Dominance Predict Annual Increases in Generalized Prejudice. Social
Psychological and Personality Science 12(7):1136–1145,
doi:10.1177/1948550620969608.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1995. Self-Organization and Social Capital. Industrial and Corporate Change
4(1):131–159, doi:10.1093/icc/4.1.131.
———. 2000. Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14(3):137–158, doi:10.1257/jep.14.3.137.
Padilla-Iglesias, Cecilia, Robert A. Foley, and Laura A. Shneidman. 2020. Language as a
Marker of Ethnic Identity among the Yucatec Maya. Evolutionary Human Sciences
2(June):e38, doi:10.1017/ehs.2020.39.
Pandit, Sagar A., Gauri R. Pradhan, and Carel P. van Schaik. 2020. Why Class Formation
Occurs in Humans but Not among Other Primates. Human Nature 31(2):155–173,
doi:10.1007/s12110-020-09370-9.
Pérez, Efrén O., and Marc J. Hetherington. 2014. Authoritarianism in Black and White:
Testing the Cross-Racial Validity of the Child Rearing Scale. Political Analysis 22(3):398–
412, doi:10.1093/pan/mpu002.
Petersen, Michael Bang. 2015. Evolutionary Political Psychology. In The Handbook of
Evolutionary Psychology. David M. Buss, eds. Pp. 1084–1102. Hoboken: John Wiley &
Sons. doi:10.1002/9781119125563.evpsych247.
Pietraszewski, David. 2020. The Evolution of Leadership: Leadership and Followership as a
Solution to the Problem of Creating and Executing Successful Coordination and
Cooperation Enterprises. The Leadership Quarterly 31(2):101299,
doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.05.006.
Pisor, Anne C., Matthew M. Gervais, Benjamin G. Purzycki, and Cody T. Ross. 2020.
Preferences and Constraints: The Value of Economic Games for Studying Human
Behaviour. Royal Society Open Science 7(6):192090, doi:10.1098/rsos.192090.
Pohl, Mary E D, and John M D Pohl. 1994. Cycles of Conflict: Political Factionalism in the
Maya Lowlands. In Factional Competition and Political Development in the New World.
Elizabeth M. Brumfiel and John W. Fox, eds. Pp. 138–57. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Powers, Simon T., Carel P. Schaik, and Laurent Lehmann. 2021. Cooperation in Large‐scale
Human Societies — What, If Anything, Makes It Unique, and How Did It Evolve?
Evolutionary Anthropology 30(4):280–293, doi:10.1002/evan.21909.
Pratto, Felicia, Atilla Çidam, Andrew L. Stewart, Fouad Bou Zeineddine, María Aranda,
Antonio Aiello, Xenia Chryssochoou, et al. 2013. “Social Dominance in Context and in
Individuals.” Social Psychological and Personality Science 4(5):587–599,
doi:10.1177/1948550612473663.
Reese, Gerhard, Jutta Proch, and J. Christopher Cohrs. 2014. Individual Differences in
Responses to Global Inequality. Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy 14(1):217–
238, doi:10.1111/asap.12032.
Roets, Arne, Evelyn W. M. Au, and Alain Van Hiel. 2015. Can Authoritarianism Lead to
Greater Liking of Out-Groups? The Intriguing Case of Singapore. Psychological Science
26(12):1972–1974, doi:10.1177/0956797615605271.
Rogers, Alan R. 1988. Does Biology Constrain Culture? American Anthropologist 90(4):819–
831, doi:10.1525/aa.1988.90.4.02a00030.
Roscoe, Paul. 2000. New Guinea Leadership as Ethnographic Analogy: A Critical Review.
Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 7(2):79–126,
doi:10.1023/A:1009512726844.
Rueden, Christopher von, Michael Gurven, and Hillard Kaplan. 2008. The Multiple
Dimensions of Male Social Status in an Amazonian Society. Evolution and Human
Behavior 29(6):402–415, doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2008.05.001.
Rueden, Christopher von, Michael Gurven, Hillard Kaplan, and Jonathan Stieglitz. 2014.
Leadership in an Egalitarian Society. Human Nature 25(4):538–566,
doi:10.1007/s12110-014-9213-4.
Satherley, Nicole, Chris G. Sibley, and Danny Osborne. 2021. Ideology before Party: Social
Dominance Orientation and Right‐wing Authoritarianism Temporally Precede Political
Party Support. British Journal of Social Psychology 60(2):509–523,
doi:10.1111/bjso.12414.
Schwartz, Shalom H., Gian Vittorio Caprara, Michele Vecchione, Paul Bain, Gabriel Bianchi,
Maria Giovanna Caprara, Jan Cieciuch, et al. 2014. Basic Personal Values Underlie and
Give Coherence to Political Values: A Cross National Study in 15 Countries. Political
Behavior 36(4): 899–930, doi:10.1007/s11109-013-9255-z.
Scott, James C. 1990. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
———. 2009. The Art of Not Being Governed: An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sheehy-Skeffington, Jennifer, and Lotte Thomsen. 2020. Egalitarianism: Psychological and
Socio-Ecological Foundations. Current Opinion in Psychology 32(April):146–152,
doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2019.08.014.
Sikora, Martin, Andaine Seguin-Orlando, Vitor C. Sousa, Anders Albrechtsen, Thorfinn
Korneliussen, Amy Ko, Simon Rasmussen, et al. 2017. Ancient Genomes Show Social
and Reproductive Behavior of Early Upper Paleolithic Foragers. Science 358(6363):659–
662, doi:10.1126/science.aao1807.
Silverman, Marilyn, and Richard Frank Salisbury, eds. 1977. A House Divided?
Anthropological Studies of Factionalism. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Singh, Manvir, Richard Wrangham, and Luke Glowacki. 2017. Self-Interest and the Design of
Rules. Human Nature 28(4):457–480, doi:10.1007/s12110-017-9298-7.
Smaldino, Paul E. 2019. Social Identity and Cooperation in Cultural Evolution. Behavioural
Processes 161(April): 108–116, doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2017.11.015.
Smith, Eric Alden, Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, Samuel Bowles, Michael Gurven, Tom Hertz,
and Mary K. Shenk. 2010. Production Systems, Inheritance, and Inequality in
Premodern Societies. Current Anthropology 51(1):85–94, doi:10.1086/649029.
Smith, Jennifer E., Sergey Gavrilets, Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, Paul L. Hooper, Claire El
Mouden, Daniel Nettle, Christoph Hauert, et al. 2016. Leadership in Mammalian
Societies: Emergence, Distribution, Power, and Payoff. Trends in Ecology & Evolution
31(1):54–66, doi:10.1016/j.tree.2015.09.013.
Stagnaro, Michael N., Duncan N. E. Stibbard-Hawkes, and Coren L. Apicella. 2022. Do
Religious and Market-Based Institutions Promote Cooperation in Hadza Hunter-
Gatherers? Religion, Brain & Behavior 12(1–2):171–189,
doi:10.1080/2153599X.2021.2006293.
Stankov, Lazar. 2017. “Conservative Syndrome: Individual and Cross-Cultural Differences.”
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 48(6):950–960, doi:10.1177/0022022117709984.
Stanley, Samantha K., and Marc S. Wilson. 2019. Meta-Analysing the Association between
Social Dominance Orientation, Authoritarianism, and Attitudes on the Environment and
Climate Change. Journal of Environmental Psychology 61(February):46–56,
doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2018.12.002.
Stellmacher, Jost, and Thomas Petzel. 2005. Authoritarianism as a Group Phenomenon.
Political Psychology 26(2):245–274, doi:10.1111/j.1467-9221.2005.00417.x.
Stenner, Karen. 2005. The Authoritarian Dynamic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511614712.
Sterelny, Kim, and Peter Hiscock. 2014. Symbols, Signals, and the Archaeological Record.
Biological Theory 9(1): 1–3, doi:10.1007/s13752-013-0154-7.
Strum, Shirley S., and Bruno Latour. 1987. Redefining the Social Link: From Baboons to
Humans. Social Science Information 26(4):783–802,
doi:10.1177/053901887026004004.
Talhelm, T., X. Zhang, S. Oishi, C. Shimin, D. Duan, X. Lan, and S. Kitayama. 2014. Large-Scale
Psychological Differences Within China Explained by Rice Versus Wheat Agriculture.
Science 344(6184):603–608, doi:10.1126/science.1246850.
Thielmann, Isabel, Giuliana Spadaro, and Daniel Balliet. 2020. Personality and Prosocial
Behavior: A Theoretical Framework and Meta-Analysis. Psychological Bulletin
146(1):30–90, doi:10.1037/bul0000217.
Thomsen, Lotte, Eva G. T. Green, and Jim Sidanius. 2008. We Will Hunt Them down: How
Social Dominance Orientation and Right-Wing Authoritarianism Fuel Ethnic Persecution
of Immigrants in Fundamentally Different Ways. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 44(6):1455–1464, doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2008.06.011.
Tomasello, Michael, Alicia P. Melis, Claudio Tennie, Emily Wyman, and Esther Herrmann.
2012. Two Key Steps in the Evolution of Human Cooperation. Current Anthropology
53(6):673–692, doi:10.1086/668207.
Townsend, Cathryn. 2015. Baka Ritual Flow Diverted. Hunter Gatherer Research 1(2):197–
224, doi:10.3828/hgr.2015.11.
———. 2018. Egalitarianism, Evolution of. In The International Encyclopedia of
Anthropology. Hilary Callan, eds. Pp. 1–7. Hoboken: Wiley.
doi:10.1002/9781118924396.wbiea1826.
Treier, Shawn, and D. Sunshine Hillygus. 2009. The Nature of Political Ideology in the
Contemporary Electorate. Public Opinion Quarterly 73(4):679–703,
doi:10.1093/poq/nfp067.
Vargas-Salfate, Salvador, James H Liu, and Homero Gil de Zúñiga. 2020. “Right-Wing
Authoritarianism and National Identification: The Role of Democratic Context.”
International Journal of Public Opinion Research 32(2):318–331,
doi:10.1093/ijpor/edz026.
Waal, F B M De. 1998. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Amongst Apes. 2nd edition.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Whitehead, Hal, and Peter J. Richerson. 2009. The Evolution of Conformist Social Learning
Can Cause Population Collapse in Realistically Variable Environments. Evolution and
Human Behavior 30(4):261–273, doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2009.02.003.
Wiessner, Polly. 1996. Leveling the Hunter: Constraints on the Status Quest in Foraging
Societies. In Food and the Status Quest: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. Polly Wiessner
and Wulf Schiefenhovel, eds. Pp. 171–191. Oxford: Berghahn Books.
———. 2002. The Vines of Complexity. Current Anthropology 43(2):233–269,
doi:10.1086/338301.
———. 2005. Norm Enforcement among the Ju/’hoansi Bushmen. Human Nature
16(2):115–145, doi:10.1007/s12110-005-1000-9.
———. 2019. Collective Action for War and for Peace: A Case Study among the Enga of
Papua New Guinea. Current Anthropology 60(2):224–244, doi:10.1086/702414.
———. 2020. The Role of Third Parties in Norm Enforcement in Customary Courts among
the Enga of Papua New Guinea. PNAS 117(51):32320–32328,
doi:10.1073/pnas.2014759117.
Wilson, Kurt M., and Brian F. Codding. 2020. The Marginal Utility of Inequality. Human
Nature 31(4):361–386, doi:10.1007/s12110-020-09383-4.
Woodburn, James. 1982. Egalitarian Societies. Man 17(3):431–451, doi:10.2307/2801707.
Yoffee, Norman, and Andrea Seri. 2019. Negotiating Fragility in Ancient Mesopotamia:
Arenas of Contestation and Institutions of Resistance. In The Evolution of Fragility:
Setting the Terms. Norman Yoffee, eds. Pp. 183–196. Cambridge: McDonald Institute
for Archaeological Research. doi:10.17863/CAM.40694.