MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 1
Entertainment contributes to adaptive coping: A longitudinal investigation of the
interplay between hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment, escapism, and meaning
making
Rebekka J. Kreling & Leonard Reinecke
Department of Communication, Johannes-Gutenberg University of Mainz, Germany
Corresponding author: Rebekka Kreling (rebekka.kreling@uni-mainz.de)
This is a preprint version that has not undergone peer-reviewed yet.
Abstract
Traditionally, research has focused on investigating short-term effects of
entertainment media use. This paper, however, takes a salutogenetic perspective in exploring
the potential long-term effects of entertainment use on meaning making as an adaptive coping
skill. We propose three theoretical pathways explaining potential effects of hedonic and
eudaimonic entertainment, as well as escapist media use on meaning making—through
vicarious experiences of adversity, experiencing positive affect, and distraction. In two
preregistered longitudinal studies with varying time intervals (6 months, weekly, and daily
observations), both hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment use showed positive within-person
relationships with meaning making daily and weekly, but not over six months. Escapist
media use negatively predicted meaning making across all time intervals. Additionally,
vicarious experience and positive affect, but not distraction, mediated these effects. Our
findings shed light on temporal dynamics of entertainment use and emphasize its role in
fostering meaning making.
Keywords: hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment, meaning making, escapism, meaning in
life, coping, longitudinal, random-intercept cross-lagged panel model, multilevel models
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 2
Entertainment contributes to adaptive coping: A longitudinal investigation of the
interplay between hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment, escapism, and meaning
making
From watching short-videos on social media while waiting for the bus to a movie
night with friends: entertainment permeates everyday life. Despite concerns over
dysfunctional usage of media entertainment that have been prevalent since the early days of
media uses and effects research (e.g., Katz & Foulkes, 1962), a long-standing tradition of
research has identified a plethora of beneficial short-term effects of consuming entertainment.
Media entertainment can help successfully regulate emotions (Zillmann, 1988), satisfy
intrinsic needs (Reinecke et al., 2011; Tamborini et al., 2011), and recover from stress and
strain (Rieger et al., 2014; Wolfers & Schneider, 2021). Research on whether these
established short-term effects translate into (beneficial) long-term effects on mental health,
however, is largely missing but might be crucial in uncovering the potentials that lie in
entertaining media. The model of recovery and resilience in entertaining media use (R2EM,
Reinecke & Rieger, 2021) proposes the concept of psychological resilience to grasp such
prospective (positive) outcomes of entertainment on mental health.
Resilience describes the process and outcome of protecting mental health from
adverse life events and circumstances (Kalisch et al., 2015). Different characteristics, such as
hope, social support, or positive appraisal styles—so called resilience factors—support
resilient outcomes (Kalisch et al., 2015). The R²EM suggests that using media entertainment
can strengthen such resilience factors (Reinecke & Rieger, 2021). Bridging between research
on media as coping tools, entertainment experiences, and resilience, we were interested in
whether and how media entertainment can strengthen the tendency to adaptively cope with
adversities and stressors over time. As two-factor models of entertainment (Vorderer &
Reinecke, 2015) recognize that—next to fun and pleasure—meaningful experiences are at the
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 3
heart of entertainment (Oliver et al., 2018), we suggest meaning-focused coping as an
adaptive coping style that might benefit from entertainment use. The ability to find positive
meaning in adverse situations is a key resilience factor (Kalisch et al., 2015). Other resilience
factors (e.g., hope or optimism) are thought to contribute to mental health not only directly,
but through fostering positive (re)appraisal (Kalisch et al., 2015). Although a considerable
body of research has explored the connection of media (entertainment) use to different
coping strategies (Wolfers & Schneider, 2021), to our knowledge, no research exists that
quantitatively addresses meaning-focused coping in the context of media use. In the
following, we argue that there are various reasons to assume a positive link between different
types of entertainment and meaning-focused coping.
Building on two-factor models of entertainment and literature on meaning making and
coping, we propose a positive link between entertainment use and meaning making through
different pathways. We further extend existing literature on entertainment effects with a
longitudinal perspective: We empirically tested our assumptions in two longitudinal studies
with N = 1,263 and N = 609 participants with varying time intervals, using data with a time
interval of six months (Study 1), and repeated weekly and daily measurements (Study 2). We
discuss the theoretical and methodological implications of our results for entertainment
research.
Meaning-focused coping
The concept of coping describes different approaches that people take to deal with
stress by “constantly changing cognitive and behavioral efforts to manage specific external
and/or internal demands that are appraised as taxing or exceeding the resources of the person”
(Lazarus & Folkman, 1984, p. 141). That is, when a situation is perceived as stressful,
different strategies are applied to handle stress and stress reactions. These strategies are
differentiated by their orientation towards or away from the stressor—approach coping or
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 4
avoidance coping, respectively (Roth & Cohen, 1986); or by their focus on the emotional
response (emotion-focused coping) or the problem at hand (problem-focused coping)
(Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Another group of coping strategies, subsumed as meaning-
focused coping, permeates and extends these categories, as it is situated in a broader context
of meaning in life and meaning making (Folkman & Moskowitz, 2007; Park & Folkman,
1997).
Different yet related theoretical accounts of meaning share the idea that when
meaning is threatened or violated, e.g., through loss or other traumatic life-events, people
employ strategies not as an effort to regulate emotions or the violation itself but to restore the
subjective accounts of meaning (Heine et al., 2006; Heintzelman & King, 2014; Park, 2010).
A prominent theoretical approach to describing and explaining such processes of (re-
)establishing meaning in life is the meaning making model (Park, 2010), which differentiates
meaning into global meaning and situational meaning. Global meaning refers to a broad and
general belief system, values, goals, and subjective perceptions of meaning in life. Situational
meaning is context- or event-specific; it describes a set of processes and outcomes that occur
when global meaning is disrupted. A disruption of meaning could occur in the form of any
event or situation that misaligns with global meaning. For a person with a strong sense of
trust in their friendships, for example, a disloyalty by an esteemed friend would disturb the
global meaning system, as the experience of betrayal (i.e., situational meaning) and the
personal value system (i.e., global meaning) are incongruent. To then restore meaning,
meaning making comes into play. Either the situational meaning of the event is reappraised
(assimilation: the presumed friend was not a real friend after all), or global meaning is
reappraised (accommodation: some friends may be less trustworthy than others). We focus
here on the more common appraisal of the event or situation. Global meaning reappraisals
occur less frequently and are usually practiced only in more extreme cases of life events
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 5
where the discrepancy between situational and global meaning is too substantial to allow for
successful assimilation (Park, 2010).
Meaning-focused coping is one of the central meaning making processes when
situational meaning is incongruent to global meaning perceptions (Park & Folkman, 1997).
Importantly, meaning-focused coping is a deliberate process. It entails a number of strategies
that can aid realigning situational and global meaning, with the shared core element of
gaining a sense of positive meaning in reaction to a potentially threatening event or
experience. Accordingly, positive reappraisal is at the heart of meaning-focused coping
(Folkman, 1997; Folkman & Moskowitz, 2007; Park & Folkman, 1997). Closely connected
to this are strategies such as finding and reminding oneself of benefits. These may also be
found through downward comparison with people who are in worse situations (Park, 2010).
Through finding the good in stressful situations, e.g., by reframing adversity as a learning
opportunity, ideally, people experience a sense of personal growth in the aftermath of the
event (Folkman & Moskowitz, 2007; Park & Folkman, 1997). Perceived growth is
therefore—among others, such as acceptance—a desired outcome of meaning-focused coping
efforts (Park, 2010).
Positively (re-)appraising adverse circumstances can be a powerful tool—so much so
that Kalisch and colleagues (2015) consider it the key resilience factor. Indeed, applying
meaning-focused coping strategies is linked to resilient outcomes after adversity, i.e.,
maintained or regained mental health and well-being (Park, 2017). In that vein, meaning-
focused coping may also serve as a protective factor against stressful circumstances, not
merely as a response to them, as coping is usually conceptualized. Hence, in the present
study, we want to determine whether media entertainment can prospectively strengthen such
adaptive coping-tendencies.
Meaningful entertainment and coping
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 6
Entertainment was traditionally defined in hedonistic terms—motives and experiences
that are pleasurable and enjoyable (Vorderer et al., 2004). With the field evolving, however,
inconsistencies in this view came to light, led by the question why people would seek out,
and to some extent “enjoy” deeply tragic media entertainment (Oliver, 1993). Researchers
then shifted to two-factor models of entertainment, wherein entertainment experiences do not
always have to be fun and pleasurable and elicit enjoyment, but can also be more profound,
somber, and thought-provoking and elicit appreciation (Vorderer & Reinecke, 2015). These
entertainment experiences have been termed hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment,
respectively (Oliver & Raney, 2011). Hedonic entertainment is characterized by fun,
lightweight topics and narratives that mostly elicit positive affect; eudaimonic entertainment
is characterized by bittersweet or poignant topics and narratives that elicit mixed affect
(Oliver & Bartsch, 2010; Oliver & Raney, 2011), elaboration (Bartsch et al., 2014), and
cognitive and emotional challenges (Bartsch & Hartmann, 2017). Hedonic and eudaimonic
entertainment experiences frequently co-occur while consuming media entertainment (Oliver
& Raney, 2011).
Particularly hedonic entertainment has been researched early on in contexts of coping
as a functional (e.g., mood management, Zillmann, 1988) or dysfunctional (e.g., escapism,
Katz & Foulkes, 1962) form of emotion regulation. Since then, research has demonstrated
that people consistently and oftentimes efficiently use (entertaining) media to cope with
adverse circumstances (Wolfers & Schneider, 2021). The COVID-19 pandemic has
accelerated research interest in coping with media. Different studies reveal that during these
adverse and highly stressful circumstances, using both interactive (e.g., games, social media)
and non-interactive (e.g., TV) media was a successful coping and recovery strategy (e.g.,
Boursier et al., 2021; Eden et al., 2020; Pearce et al., 2022).
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 7
Following the coping perspective, research in this area focuses on media use as a
reaction to stress: media can be used as a tool for coping (Wolfers & Schneider, 2021),
thereby facilitating recovery (Rieger et al., 2014), regulating emotions and mood (Zillmann,
1988). A notable exception is the work on media prescriptions (Nabi et al., 2023; Prestin &
Nabi, 2020), which investigates how small “prescribed” doses of entertainment can
contribute to stress reduction by eliciting positive emotions. In the present paper, we extend
this work by following a salutogenetic perspective that addresses the long-term benefits of
media use for well-being. We ask how entertainment media consumption may act as a
facilitator for adaptive coping tendencies. In contrast to media prescriptions, we consider not
only the emotions evoked by entertainment, but also specific narratives surrounding
adversity. We further argue that media entertainment can prospectively build and strengthen
meaning-focused coping as a resilience factor that goes beyond situational stress reductions
and, over the course of their lives, may allow media user to accumulate coping resources that
help to protect them from mental health impairments in situations of more severe adversity.
Building on two-factor models of entertainment, we propose three pathways to explain the
relationship between entertainment use and meaning-focused coping.
Pathway 1: Entertainment as a vicarious learning opportunity for meaning-focused
coping
Entertainment narratives, particularly eudaimonic entertainment, frequently feature
adverse life circumstances, hardships, and traumatic situations (de Graaf & Das, 2022; Ott et
al., 2021; Slater et al., 2018). Such depictions of adversity, and subsequent coping with
adversity by media characters, may be beneficial to meaning-focused coping through
vicarious experiences of role models coping with adversity via meaning making and resulting
observational learning.
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 8
Several theoretical accounts argue that entertainment can provide a safe space to the
vicarious experience of life events and associated emotions via media (e.g., Slater et al.,
2019). A theoretical approaches which appears particularly fruitful in explaining the
connections between vicarious experiences through media and meaning making capacities is
the concept of mediated wisdom of experiences (Slater et al., 2019).
The basic notion of mediated wisdom of experiences suggests that eudaimonic
narratives elicit poignancy by portraying life events that are usually only experienced over
the span of a lifetime (Slater et al., 2019). The experience of such poignant emotions lets
people “mature” and grow beyond their years. As a result of vicariously experiencing these
life events via narratives, people become more accepting of grievances of life, such as
delayed rewards, severe (e.g., death) and less severe (e.g., disappointments) adversity (Slater
et al., 2018, 2019).
This mechanism may also apply to the development of meaning making capacities: If
life events were already experienced vicariously in eudaimonic narratives—potentially with
an adaptive, resilient outcome—and emotions connected to these events are already
experienced vicariously through the narrative, this would help to make sense of a life event in
the greater scheme of life, and find consolation in accepting the adverse circumstances one is
currently facing. Furthermore, the notion of vicarious experience in media entertainment
closely corresponds with the learning mechanisms proposed in social cognitive theory (SCT,
Bandura, 2001). SCT is based on the idea that humans learn a great deal of their behaviors,
values, and thoughts by observing “models”, and acknowledges that many of such models are
conveyed via mass media (Bandura, 2001). Entertainment narratives frequently feature
protagonists and characters that are confronted with major life events and oftentimes
adversities that they need make sense of, and successfully do (de Graaf & Das, 2022; Ott et
al., 2021). In uncertain life circumstances, people may be drawn to find inspiration in role
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 9
models who have undergone similar uncertainties (Lockwood et al., 2012). This view is
supported by a growing body of research demonstrating that media entertainment is a
persistent and reliable source of inspirational media portrayals (Raney et al., 2018) and that
viewers feel inspired by and actively seek inspirational media content (Janicke-Bowles et al.,
2021) Applied to meaning making, we hence argue that portrayals of character’s struggles
can serve as role models and inspire viewers to engage in meaning-focused coping efforts.
Taken together, we argue that entertainment provides ample opportunities to
vicariously experience, learn, and be inspired to engage in meaning-focused coping.
Entertainment can help to make meaning of adversity that is deeply ingrained in the human
experience and may therefore strengthen meaning-focused coping skills and tendencies over
time. Initial evidence further underlines the idea that making sense of adversity is a core
outcome of entertainment media use (de Leeuw et al., 2023; Ott et al., 2021).
Pathway 2: Entertainment as a source of positive affect and personal meaningfulness
The broaden and build theory of positive emotions suggests that positive emotions are
utterly important in facilitating adaptive approach behavior, i.e., engaging in activities and
with one’s environment (Fredrickson, 2001). Positive emotions, the theory argues, broaden
people’s thought-action repertoire—whereas negative emotions narrow it to function in life-
threatening situations. The though-action repertoire represents patterns of cognitions and
behaviors that typically arise in certain situations, but can be changed by (positive) emotions
(Fredrickson, 1998). By broadening the thought-action repertoire, positive emotions are
further thought to build personal resources—cognitively, socially, and psychologically—in
the long term. Put differently, positive emotions allow people to seek out new experiences,
contacts, and activities and in doing so, building skills, relationships, and other resources that
stick with them over time and create even more positive emotions, causing a virtuous cycle
(Fredrickson, 1998).
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 10
In light of the central role of positive affect and emotions in the context of media
entertainment (Vorderer et al., 2004), the theoretical connection between broaden and build
theory and entertainment research is easy to establish. In fact, much of the experimental
evidence provided by Fredrickson and others to support the basic assumption of broaden and
build theory used film clips to induce positive emotions before letting participants describe
their desired actions in the induced mood (for an overview: Fredrickson, 2001). Media
psychology, however, has only recently integrated this perspective (e.g., Bonus et al., 2018),
particularly under the notion of media prescriptions (Nabi et al., 2023; Prestin & Nabi, 2020).
Referring to broaden and build theory, Nabi and colleagues conceptualize small doses of
positive videos as media prescriptions, which are thought to mitigate stress by eliciting
positive emotions. Their research finds that such videos, eliciting different discrete positive
emotions, such as hope or amusement, reduced stress, in part mediated through coping
efficacy (Nabi et al., 2023). While media prescriptions originally focus on a more direct
effect of emotions elicited by media on subsequent stress, we focus on how positive emotions
can build resilience factors that equip users with tools for stressful and adverse life events
over longer periods of time.
In line with the work on media prescriptions, we argue that the positive emotional
experiences elicited by media entertainment can be a central resource that may fuel meaning-
focused coping tendencies in media users’ everyday life. Positive reappraisal as the key
mechanism of meaning-focused coping serves to find “the good” in difficult situations and is
closely intertwined with positive affect (Folkman & Moskowitz, 2007). Furthermore, positive
emotions are helpful in identifying meaningful situations (King et al., 2006). If positive
emotions are readily available, the broaden and build perspective suggests that new avenues
and pathways should become more salient and open people’s minds to positive aspects and
outcomes of adversity. Entertainment could therefore be a coping resource in providing
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 11
positive emotions that can be utilized to broaden one’s meaning making mindset and further
building long-lasting meaning-focused coping abilities.
Pathway 3: Entertainment as an escape
Pathways 1 and 2 provide theoretical arguments for potentially beneficial effects of
entertainment use on meaning-focused coping, but using media entertainment may also entail
risks for meaning making. A common response to experiencing stressors and life-events is
escapist media use (Anderson et al., 1996). Though the notion of escapism is long-standing in
entertainment research, there are conceptual and empirical gaps (Halfmann & Reinecke,
2021). Originally defined as media use that necessarily leads to negative or dysfunctional
outcomes (Katz & Foulkes, 1962), Knobloch-Westerwick et al. (2009) offered an
understanding of escapist media use as a form of emotion-focused avoidance coping. In this
perspective, escapist media use is a deliberate action to disengage from everyday stressors
(Halfmann & Reinecke, 2021; Meier et al., 2018). Unlike hedonic and eudaimonic
entertainment experiences, escapist media use reflects a media use motivation rather than an
experiential state deriving directly from entertainment use (Wulf et al., 2022): People turn to
media because they want to escape their problems. This does not preclude the possibility that
escapist media use may indeed be a functional coping behavior, especially in the short term,
but the actual effects of escapist media use are generally poorly understood (Halfmann &
Reinecke, 2021). We seek to contribute to the literature on escapism by studying its effect on
meaning making. We consider it most plausible that escapist media use is potentially
detrimental to establishing meaning-focused coping processes in the long term. Escapism,
even when functional, implies that there will be no engagement with but a distraction from
the problem or adversity at hand. Meaning-focused coping on the other hand needs a
deliberate cognitive effort that involves the stressor, situating it along the lines of an approach
coping behavior (Knobloch-Westerwick et al., 2009). Meaning-focused coping could
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 12
therefore be hindered if entertainment media are regularly used for distractive purposes and
as an avoidant coping behavior.
Meaning in Life
Ultimately, meaning-focused coping seeks to reaffirm global meaning (Park, 2010). One
central facet of global meaning is the subjective sense of meaning in one’s life (Park, 2010).
Even though a highly subjective experience, researchers have identified three common
themes in perceptions of meaning in life: (1) coherence (i.e., life “making sense”), (2) having
a sense of purpose, e.g. through meaningful goals, and (3) a perception of existential
mattering and significance, reflected in life’s value and impact (King & Hicks, 2021; Martela
& Steger, 2016). The subjective experience of meaning in life is vital for physical and mental
health (e.g., Hooker et al., 2018). It functions both as a protective resilience factor against
psychopathological outcomes (Park, 2017) and as a central component of mental health in
itself. Particularly, it is a signifying indicator of eudaimonic well-being (Huta, 2017).
Therefore, the presence of meaning in life is an important mental health outcome deriving
from meaning making efforts: For instance, Ward et al. (2023) found a close association
between the presence of meaning in life and meaning-focused coping in the form of positive
reappraisal in a series of studies.
A sense of meaningfulness also represents an important element of entertainment
experiences, particularly eudaimonic entertainment experiences (Oliver et al., 2018; Oliver &
Raney, 2011), but can also be associated with hedonic entertainment experiences (Bonus et
al., 2022). Though the link between entertainment and perceptions of meaning beyond the
media use episode has been proposed theoretically, there is no research to date testing this
association over time. Hence, our study addresses meaning in life as a mental health outcome
of media-induced meaning making processes, and as a direct outcome of entertainment
experiences. We therefore propose positive links between meaning-focused coping and
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 13
meaning in life, as well as between hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment and meaning in
life.
The present research
In the preceding sections, we presented three pathways outlining both positive and
negative potentials of media entertainment for meaning-focused coping tendencies, abilities,
and resources. Pathways 1 and 2 suggest that media entertainment may facilitate meaning-
focused coping prospectively through vicarious experiences and role modeling of meaning
making in a safe space (pathway 1) as well as the cultivation of positive affect as a central
coping resource that may fuel meaning making (pathway 2). At first glance, it may seem
intuitive to map these two pathways onto eudaimonic versus hedonic entertainment
experiences, respectively—eudaimonic entertainment may appear more powerful in
triggering vicarious meaning making whereas hedonic entertainment is likely a more reliable
source of positive affect. We, however, explicitly refrain from mapping these pathways
separately onto these entertainment experiences. We believe that outside the laboratory—
where hedonic versus eudaimonic media stimuli are often utilized as contrasting media
conditions (e.g., Rieger et al., 2014)—the boundaries between hedonic versus eudaimonic
entertainment “diets” may be more permeable. Of course, entertainment eliciting (mostly)
hedonic experiences can also feature adversity, just as entertainment eliciting (mostly)
eudaimonic experiences can feature funny, light-hearted moments and positive affect.
Entertainment experiences further alternate or even co-occur within a single episode of a
show or within a single movie (Oliver & Raney, 2011). Building on our arguments that
entertainment can strengthen meaning-focused coping both through vicariously experiencing
adversity and meaning making, as well as being a (re-)source for positive affect, we
hypothesize:
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 14
H1: Eudaimonic entertainment use is positively associated with meaning-focused coping.1
H2: Hedonic entertainment use is positively associated with meaning-focused coping.
As argued in pathway 3, when regularly used as a distraction and an escape,
entertainment may hinder building meaning-focused coping capabilities. Hence, we
hypothesize:
H3: Escapist media use is negatively associated with meaning-focused coping.
As a last set of hypotheses, we wanted to test the relationship between meaning-
focused coping and general perceptions of meaning in life. Based on research that proposes a
positive link of meaning-focused coping and perceptions of meaning in life (Ward et al.,
2023), we assume:
H4: Meaning-focused coping is positively related to meaning in life.
To further extend research on the longitudinal effects of entertainment use on
psychological well-being, we also want to test the direct effects of entertainment experiences
on meaning in life. Whereas ample evidence exists for short-term experience of
meaningfulness associated with entertainment use (Oliver & Bartsch, 2010; Oliver & Raney,
2011), prospective effects have rarely been studied (Neubaum et al., 2020). Furthermore,
previous research has primarily addressed eudaimonic entertainment as a source of meaning
(Oliver et al., 2018), but hedonic content can similarly elicit meaningfulness if personally
relevant (Bonus et al., 2022). We therefore assume:
H5: Using (a) eudaimonic entertainment, and (b) hedonic entertainment is positively related
to meaning in life.
Following our reasoning that escapist media use is an avoidant coping behavior that
1 All our hypotheses were preregistered prior to data analysis. We changed the wording slightly to
avoid confusion (i.e., entertainment use instead of exposure):
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 15
potentially hinders meaning making, and providing a first empirical test of the prospective
effects of escapist media use on meaning in life, we further assume that:
H6: Escapist media use is negatively related to meaning in life.
We tested our hypotheses in two studies. Study 1 provides an initial longitudinal
investigation in the general population in Germany over the course of one year. Study 2
provides a more fine-grained longitudinal perspective by investigating the relationships in
weekly and daily intervals in a student sample over the course of a full semester.
Study 1
Method
Design and Preregistration
We conducted a three-wave online panel study with six-month intervals between each
wave. Design, sampling plan, and all measures were preregistered before data collection:
analytical strategy were also preregistered prior to data analysis:
Sample and Procedure
A representative quota sample of the German population between 18 and 65 years,
stratified for gender, age, education, and region was recruited by market research company
Ipsos. The first wave of data collection was conducted in October 2021. Subsequent data
collection waves took place in April 2022 and October 2022. We asked the participants a
number of questions about their media use, mental health and well-being. As a part of a larger
research project, the current study reports on a subset of those variables. We started with a
sample size of N = 5,230 participants and retained about half of the sample in each wave
T1
(N = 2,604; N = 1,300). Participants who failed an attention check in any of the waves
T2 T3
were excluded from analyses, resulting in a final sample size of N = 1,263. The final sample
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 16
consisted of 45% women, 54% men, and 3 cases with diverse gender. The mean age was 51.7
waves.
Measures
All measures showed high internal consistencies. Reliabilities and intraclass
Hedonic and Eudaimonic Entertainment Use. We adapted the appreciation and fun
subscales by Oliver and Bartsch (2010) in their validated German translations (Schneider et
al., 2019) to assess the use of hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment. On a scale from 1
“never” to 7 “very frequently”, we measured eudaimonic entertainment use as the general
frequency of using media that was (1) “moving”, (2) “thought-provoking”, and (3)
“meaningful”. Hedonic entertainment use captured how often participants used media content
that was (1) “fun”, (2) “entertaining”, and (3) “lets me have a good time”.
Escapist Media Use. Four items adapted from Meier et al. (2018) measured escapist
media use on a scale from 1 “never” to 7 “very frequently” and asked participants how
frequently they used media in certain situations to escape their everyday reality (e.g., “I use
media in certain to forget my everyday life.”).
Meaning-focused Coping. Among a variety of meaning-focused coping strategies,
we focused on two central components of meaning-focused coping: positive reappraisal as a
central strategy and growth as a perceived outcome of meaning-focused coping. We
measured both constructs with a combined measurement of the positive reinterpretation &
growth subscale from the COPE (Carver et al., 1989) and the positive reappraisal subscale by
Wrosch et al. (2000). Five items measured positive reappraisal, e.g., “I look for something
good in what is happening,” and “I can find something positive, even in the worst situations”;
three items measured growth, e.g., “I try to grow as a person as a result of the experience,”
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 17
and “I find I usually learn something meaningful from a difficult situation.” Participants
indicated their agreement to each of the statements on a scale from 1 “fully disagree” to 7
“fully agree”. An EFA and CFA2 revealed that one of the positive reappraisal items cross-
loaded and decreased model fit. This item was omitted, leaving four items in the positive
reappraisal scale. Further, both factors were found to be distinct constructs2. Therefore, we
used growth and positive reappraisal separately in the following analyses.
Meaning in Life. We used the presence of meaning in life subscale of the Meaning in
Life Questionnaire (Steger et al., 2006) to assess perceptions of meaning in life. Participants
were asked to indicate their agreement to five items (e.g., “My life has a clear sense of
purpose”) on a scale from 1 “fully disagree” to 7 “fully agree”. The scale includes one
reverse-coded item, which showed poor factor loading in a confirmatory factor analysis and
was hence removed from analyses.
Sociodemographic Variables. We additionally measured age, gender (male, female,
diverse, other), educational level, income, and frequency of general media use (e.g., tv,
newspapers and magazines, radio and music, social media) as potential control variables.
Analytical Strategy
With three measurement incidents, our longitudinal data structure allowed us to test
our assumptions at the between-person and within-person level using random-intercept cross-
lagged panel models (RI-CLPMs, Hamaker et al., 2015). RI-CLPMs decompose longitudinal
relationships into stable between components—random intercepts—and time-varying within
components (Hamaker et al., 2015).
We modeled a separate RI-CLPM for each proposed relationship, seven models in
total. Each model consists of latent between- and within-components, and gender, age,
education, income, and general media use as between-person control variables. We used
Please see code and analysis documentation on the OSF.
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 18
mean score indices for each construct as observed variables to reduce model complexity.
Within-person relationships were modeled as autoregressive and cross-lagged effects;
between-person relationships were modeled as the covariance between constructs. Each
model was first estimated without imposing constraints (basic model). We then estimated the
same model with cross-lagged and autoregressive within-person relationships constrained to
be equal over time (constrained model). This procedure yielded a single estimate for each
relationship and made for more parsimonious models. We compared the basic and
constrained models with each other with comparative fit indices (AIC and BIC) and assessed
the model fit of each model using Chi Square tests, CFI, RMSEA, and SRMR (Kline, 2016).
Results
All analyses and code as well as detailed results are accessible via the OSF. Means,
H1 postulated a positive relationship between eudaimonic entertainment use and
meaning-focused coping. The RI-CLPMs revealed significant positive relationships on the
between-person level for both growth and positive reappraisal but no significant cross-lagged
effects on the within-person level.
We similarly found support for H2, which postulated a positive relationship between
hedonic entertainment use and meaning-focused coping, on the between- but not on the
within-level for growth and positive reappraisal. Notably, hedonic entertainment use and
positive reappraisal showed a significant negative cross-lagged within-person effect from
hedonic entertainment use at T2 to positive reappraisal at T3 in the basic model, but this
effect turned insignificant when constraining the cross-lagged effects to be equal over time.
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 19
As per our H3, escapist media use and growth showed a significant negative
correlation on the between-person level, but no cross-lagged effects on the within-person
level. Escapist media use and positive reappraisal, however, did not show any correlations on
the between-level, but a consistent negative cross-lagged within-person effect from escapist
media use to positive reappraisal over time.
To test the relationships between positive reappraisal, growth, and meaning in life
(H4), we estimated a RI-CLPM including all three variables. The model showed significant
positive between-person correlations between all three variables. On the within-person level,
there was no effect of growth on meaning in life over time, but we found reciprocal effects of
positive reappraisal and meaning in life, with both being positively and significantly related
to the other at T and T , lending support for H4.
x x+1
Lastly, H5a and H5b suggested a positive direct relationship of eudaimonic and
hedonic entertainment and meaning in life, whereas H6 suggested a negative relationship
between escapism and meaning in life. Again, the RI-CLPMs revealed only between-person
correlations in the expected direction, but no within-person effects over time; hence lending
partial support to H5a and b, and H6.
Study 1 Discussion
The results of Study 1 provide little evidence for any prospective, within-person
effects of entertainment use on meaning making but speak to more general interindividual
differences in entertainment preferences and coping styles on a trait level. We found partial
support for our hypotheses H1 and H2, with hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment being
positively related to meaning making between-person but not within-person over time. We
did find support for the negative relationship between escapist media use and meaning
making proposed in H3 on the within-person but not the between-person level. The patterns
of findings revealed in Study 1 could suggest that effects of media use on meaning making
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 20
may exist, yet unfold on a shorter cadence. The relatively long measurement intervals applied
in Study 1 may have prevented us from finding more transient within-person effects. This
notion is further supported by the high ICCs (> .64 for all dependent variables), indicating
that our measures were unable to detect sufficient within-person variance. Given a lack of
theorizing about the time frames in which effects of entertainment use should occur, Study 1
followed a six-month interval design that is frequently used in longitudinal media effects
research (e.g., Reinecke & Trepte, 2014). We then sought to complement this broad
longitudinal perspective by integrating a more fine-grained longitudinal approach. Hence, a
central aim of Study 2 was to replicate the tests of H1-H6 and to explore the interplay of
entertainment use and meaning making at a higher temporal resolution. In designing Study 2,
we thus followed previous work in entertainment research that has addressed the effects of
media entertainment based on daily (e.g., Reinecke et al., 2014) or weekly (e.g., Nabi et al.,
2023; Neubaum et al., 2020) measures. Study 1 and 2 combined thus provide a
comprehensive picture of the temporal dynamics of the effects of entertainment use on
meaning making.
A further major limitation of Study 1 refers to the fact that it only addressed the direct
effects proposed in H1-H6, yet leaves the mechanisms outlined in our three theoretical
pathways untested. A second major goal of Study 2 therefore was to provide a preliminary
test of the proposed mediators connecting the use of entertainment to meaning-focused
coping. In contrast to H1-H6, these analyses were not pre-registered and thus remain
exploratory. For the sake of transparency, we thus formulated research questions:
RQ1: Is the association of hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment use with meaning-
focused coping mediated by a) vicarious experiences and b) positive affect?
RQ2: Is the association of escapist media use with meaning-focused coping mediated
by distraction?
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 21
Study 2
Method
Design and Preregistration
We conducted weekly and daily surveys over the course of the winter term of 2022/23
among students of a German university. Specifically, we applied a measurement burst design
(Sliwinski, 2008). Students responded to weekly surveys over the course of 12 weeks and to
three bursts of five consecutive daily diary measures within three weeks at the beginning,
middle, and end of the semester. The design and sampling plan for Study 2 were
preregistered prior to data collection
and analytical strategy:
Sample and Procedure
The sample was recruited via a university-wide email invitation as well as flyers and
posters on campus. In a first step, interested students completed a two-part screening and
registration questionnaire in which they were informed about the study, provided basic
sociodemographic information, responded to additional baseline measures, and gave their
consent for their participation. As outlined in our preregistration, we invited only first,
second, and third semester bachelor students after the initial screening. From a total of 718
students that were invited to participate in the main study, 648 students completed at least one
survey other than the screening questionnaire. Per our preregistration, we removed
participants who failed more than a third of all attention checks in the weekly questionnaires.
This yielded a final sample of n = 600 daily and n = 609 weekly participants, providing a
d w
total of n = 6412 daily and n = 5089 weekly responses. Participants on average were
dq wq
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 22
20.76 years old (SD = 2.8). The sample consisted of 30% men and 68% women; 2% of
participants indicated diverse gender.
Data collection commenced in November of 2022 and ended in February 2023 with
daily diary measurement bursts in week 4, 8, and 12 of the winter term (i.e., mid-November,
mid-December, and end of January). The weekly surveys were designed as an end-of week
questionnaire that was sent out to participants Fridays around 4pm and could be completed
until Sunday, 9pm. All questions were asked with regard to the past (work) week. The daily
surveys similarly functioned as end-of-day measurements and were sent out around 6pm on
each working day of the three selected weeks. Participants were instructed to ideally
complete the questionnaire before going to bed, but were given until 11am the next day to
participate (then referring to the previous day instead of “today”).
Measures
We measured the media-related variables (i.e., eudaimonic and hedonic entertainment
experiences, escapist media use) with the same scales as in Study 1. Where necessary, the
items were adapted to fit the weekly/daily context. Notably, we shortened the meaning
making measurement in the daily survey to four items, using only the positive reappraisal and
growth items from the COPE (Carver et al., 1989). Daily meaning in life was measured using
two questions adapted from prior research on state meaning in life (Kashdan & Steger, 2007;
Ward et al., 2023). The questions asked respondents (1) how meaningful, and (2) purposeful
their life had felt that day. In the weekly surveys, we used the same scale for meaning in life
as in Study 1, excluding the previously omitted negatively-worded item. Descriptives,
correlations, and ICCs are displayed in Tables S5 and S6. In addition to the variables tested in
H1-H6, we also assessed three mediator variables to explore RQ1 and RQ2. Three items
adapted from the inspirational motives subscale (Ouwerkerk & Johnson, 2016), were used to
measure vicarious experiences (e.g., “Today [This week], I used media content showing role
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 23
models that I can aspire to”). Positive affect was measured using the SPANE (Diener et al.,
2010). Finally, the two items of the self-distraction subscale of the Brief COPE (Carver,
1997) were used to assess self-distraction (e.g., “Today [In the past week] I've been turning to
[work or] other activities to take my mind off things”). We provide a more detailed
description of all measures in our preregistration:
Analytical Strategy
Our Study 2 data are hierarchical, with daily and weekly observations (level 1) nested
within participants (level 2). This again allowed us to test our hypotheses on a within- and
between-person level. With the more intensive longitudinal data at hand, we tested our
assumptions with multilevel models in R version 4.3.1 (R Core Team, 2022) using the lme4
package version 1.1-34 (Bates et al., 2015). We tested all hypotheses with random effects
within between models (Bell et al., 2019). For all models, the independent variables were
centered around their person-mean (within) and person means were further centered around
the sample’s grand mean to account for between-person relationships. We first tested
maximal models (Barr et al., 2013) with varying intercept, fixed within- and between-person
effects, and varying within-person effects (slopes). When convergence issues emerged, we
reduced model complexity by fixing the varying slopes. We included age and gender as level
2 control variables. Age was grand-mean centered, gender was dichotomized with 0 = male
or diverse and 1 = female.
Results
All analyses and code as well as detailed results are accessible via the OSF. We ran
several multilevel regressions with either growth or positive reappraisal as the outcome
variable based on the weekly or daily data set (i.e., we ran models on four outcomes: daily
growth, weekly growth, daily positive reappraisal, weekly positive reappraisal). Tables S7
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 24
varying slopes are visualized in Figures S2-S4. All models revealed consistent effects of
entertainment use and escapist media use on the two indicators of meaning-focused coping in
both time intervals. We found support for H1, which postulated a positive relationship
between eudaimonic entertainment use and meaning-focused coping: Eudaimonic
entertainment use was positively linked to both positive reappraisal and growth weekly and
daily on the between- and within-person level. In other words, on days or weeks when
participants consumed more eudaimonic entertainment than usual for them, they also
indicated stronger meaning-focused coping tendencies (within-person). Additionally,
participants who consumed more eudaimonic entertainment than the sample average also
reported stronger meaning-focused coping tendencies (between-person). The between-person
relationship was considerably stronger than the within-person effect.
H2 postulated that hedonic entertainment use would similarly strengthen meaning-
focused coping tendencies. Within person, hedonic entertainment was weakly positively
related to both growth and positive reappraisal in both time intervals; indicating that
consuming more hedonic entertainment than usual for oneself on a specific day/week was
connected to reporting more meaning-focused coping on that day/week. Between-person, we
found only one significant relationship with daily growth. H2 was therefore partially
supported.
As predicted, escapism was negatively related to meaning-focused coping, lending
support to H3. This relationship was consistent on the within-person level over all models,
whereas on the between-person level, we only found a significant negative relationship
weekly, but not daily. Hence, participants who used media for escapism more than typically
for them on a given day/week, also reported lower meaning-focused coping tendencies.
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 25
Whether participants escaped more using media than the mean of the sample only led to
lowered meaning-focused coping tendencies within weeks but not on a daily basis.
H4-6 referred to connections between meaning-focused coping, entertainment use,
and escapism on meaning in life. Again, we estimated models for the weekly and daily
sample separately and included both growth and positive reappraisal, hedonic and
eudaimonic entertainment, and escapism as predictors of meaning in life.
As predicted in H4, both positive reappraisal and growth significantly and positively
influenced meaning in life on the between- and within-person level. On days/weeks with
higher meaning-focused coping tendencies, participants also sensed greater meaning in life
(within) and participants with higher than sample-average meaning-focused coping
tendencies also sensed more meaning in life (between). The between-person effects were
consistently stronger than the within-person effects. H4 was therefore supported.
H5 postulated a positive relationship between (a) eudaimonic and (b) hedonic
entertainment and perceptions of meaning in life. Our results reveal that both types of
entertainment use were positively linked to meaning in life within-person daily and weekly.
That is, consuming more hedonic and/or eudaimonic entertainment than typical on a given
day/week led to reporting higher perceptions of meaning in life on that day/week.
Interestingly, though both estimates indicate a small effect, hedonic entertainment use yielded
a slightly bigger within-person effect than eudaimonic entertainment use. Further, only for
hedonic entertainment, we also found a significant between-person effects on the weekly and
daily level. H5 was therefore mostly supported.
Lastly, we assumed that escapist media use would negatively relate to perceptions of
meaning in life (H6). Our results support this assumption: escapist media use was negatively
related to meaning in life perceptions on the within- and between-person level daily and
weekly. These effects were also considerably stronger than those of entertainment use.
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 26
Exploratory Mediation Analyses: Pathways 1-3
To explore RQ1 and RQ2, we conducted several mediation analyses at the within-
person level3 using the mediation package (Tingley et al., 2014) in R. Concerning our first
pathway, which argued that entertainment offers the opportunity to vicariously experience
adversity and meaning making, as well as finding role models in adaptive coping skills, we
found that vicarious experience partially mediated the positive relationship between hedonic
entertainment and meaning making, and also between eudaimonic entertainment and meaning
making. The indirect effect was stronger for eudaimonic entertainment, yet, also present for
hedonic entertainment, supporting our pathway 1. We thus found preliminary support for our
pathway 1: the effects of both hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment on meaning making
were partly mediated by vicarious experience.
In our second pathway we argued that positive emotions elicited by entertainment
would strengthen resources for adaptive coping, thus mediating the effects of entertainment
on meaning making. When including positive affect in the models that predicted meaning-
focused coping, the small positive effect of hedonic entertainment on meaning-focused
coping turned insignificant. Mediation analyses revealed an indirect effect of hedonic
entertainment on meaning-focused coping via positive affect, indicating a full mediation.
Positive affect also partially mediated the positive effect of eudaimonic entertainment on
meaning-focused coping, yielding a very small indirect effect. We therefore also found
support for our pathway 2.
Our third pathway proposed that meaning-focused coping tendencies may be hindered
if media were frequently used as an escape via distraction from problems. Remarkably and
unexpectedly, self-distraction was positively related to both growth and positive reappraisal.
3 Our pathways imply intraindividual mechanisms, hence we report the mediation analyses excluding
the between-person variables. We tested the mediation analyses including the between-person variables with no
effect on the reported results (see code on the OSF for details).
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 27
Further, escapism had a positive indirect effect on meaning-focused coping via self-
distraction. Hence, we found no support for our pathway 3, as distraction did not mediate the
negative direct relationship between escapism and meaning-focused coping but rather served
as a buffer for the negative effects of escapism. All estimates of the mediation analyses are
displayed in Tables S9 and S10.
Study 2 Discussion
The results of Study 2 lent further support to our hypotheses, with both hedonic and
eudaimonic entertainment showing positive, and escapism showing negative effects on
meaning-focused coping weekly and daily. Study 2 also extends our Study 1 findings by
lending support to our theoretical explanations in pathway 1 and 2. Indeed, the effects of both
hedonic and eudaimonic entertainment were (partially) mediated by vicarious experiences
and positive affect. This speaks to our understanding that both content categories may
similarly elicit inspiration and vicarious learning in that they feature role models for
overcoming adversity, and both can also entail positive and light-hearted moments that elicit
positive affect. The indirect effects were stronger for eudaimonic entertainment in pathway 1,
whereas the effect of hedonic entertainment was fully mediated by positive affect,
representing the mechanism proposed in pathway 2. Each pathway, however, was not
exclusively connected to hedonic or eudaimonic entertainment but rather mediated the effects
of both entertainment experiences. Contrarily, distraction did not negatively influence
meaning-focused coping but even counter-acted the negative influences of escapism,
suggesting that other mechanisms may underly the negative direct effects of escapism on
meaning making.
General Discussion
Guided by the question whether media entertainment can strengthen adaptive coping
skills, we conducted two studies that tested the relationships of entertainment use and
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 28
escapism with meaning-focused coping and meaning in life, thereby contributing to the fields
of entertainment and media effects research both theoretically and empirically.
Theoretically, our study advances entertainment research by applying a salutogenetic
perspective to entertainment effects (Reinecke & Kreling, 2022; Reinecke & Rieger, 2021).
Doing so allows researchers to grasp media entertainment not solely as a coping tool in
reaction to stress (Wolfers & Schneider, 2021) but also as a resource that prospectively
strengthens adaptive coping skills. Additionally, we sought to theoretically advance
entertainment and media effects research by delineating theoretical pathways linking
entertainment use to prospective effects on meaning making. We believe that these pathways
can serve to explain not only the effects of entertainment and narratives on meaning making,
but could also be fruitful in deconstructing the effects of media entertainment on other
resilience factors, such as hope (Prestin & Nabi, 2020), optimism, or gratitude, and other
outcomes that promote mental health.
Empirically, our study is among the first to investigate effects of entertainment
consumption on meaning making, coping and meaning in life longitudinally (see also
Janicke-Bowles et al., 2022; Neubaum et al., 2020), and, to our knowledge, the first study
doing so with systematically varying time intervals. This complements media entertainment
research with a unique perspective on both between-person relationships and within-person
effects outside of experimental settings, and further offers insights into the previously
uncovered temporal dynamics of media entertainment’s effects.
On the whole, we found support for our basic assumption that entertainment can
prospectively strengthen meaning-focused coping tendencies. Study 1 mostly revealed
relationships on the between-person level, whereas Study 2 provided more fine-grained
insights into intrapersonal- and interpersonal dynamics, revealing positive within-person
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 29
effects of eudaimonic and hedonic entertainment on two meaning-focused coping indicators
both on a daily and weekly level.
Across the two studies, there were some notable inconsistencies, particularly with
regard to intrapersonal differences and effects. In Study 1, we did not find within-person
effects over time. This might be an artifact based on the 6-month time lag—our measurement
of entertainment frequencies might have represented trait-like preferences more than actual
use over this time period. Such stable preferences might represent an accumulation of small
effects on the intrapersonal level that can only be measured as differences between
individuals in longer time intervals. Alternatively, this pattern of findings may suggest that
the effects of entertainment use on meaning making are relatively fleeting. Instead of leading
to the cultivation of a relatively stable meaning-focused coping style, media entertainment
may provide more short-lived impulses for meaning making. These effects may persist over
the specific usage episode and are detectable both on the day and week level, but may not
extend over several weeks or months. Interestingly, for eudaimonic entertainment, between-
person associations were considerably larger than within-person effects. The within-person
effects of eudaimonic and hedonic entertainment we found in Study 2, however, were
comparable in size. This finding suggests that though media users have relatively stable
entertainment diets and meaning-focused coping tendencies, situational media use and the
media content consumed on the day and week level nevertheless dynamically influence the
fluctuation of meaning making processes around the individual baseline level. It may also
indicate that—even though hedonic entertainment is normatively seen as a guilty pleasure
(e.g., Reinecke et al., 2014)—situationally, whether a person decides to consume meaningful
or fun and lightweight content, has similar effects on meaning-focused coping. Though
pointing in the same direction, these effects are mostly driven by different mechanisms: In
line with our theoretical pathways, both types of entertainment were mediated by positive
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 30
affect and vicarious experiences; yet the former was more important for hedonic and the latter
for eudaimonic entertainment.
We also found support for our assumption that escapist media use would be harmful
to meaning making: Escapism consistently showed negative within- and between-person
associations with meaning making in both studies; these associations being considerably
stronger than those of entertainment use with meaning making. The negative effect of
escapism was, however, not mediated by self-distraction, as distraction positively influenced
meaning making. Distraction may therefore be adaptive in that temporarily disengaging from
a stressor may open up mental capacities for meaning making down the line, or allow for
meaning making processes in the background during media consumption. In that sense, it
may be that the negative effect of escapism is attributable to it being normatively appraised as
problematic by people themselves. Hence, more than the actual act of (escapist)
entertainment use in stressful times, the appraisal of one’s media use as an escape in this
situation could be harmful to user’s perception of their own meaning making abilities.
Further, escapist media use does not preclude the possibility for (positive) effects of the
media content that was consumed in an episode of escapism (Halfmann & Reinecke, 2021).
The negative effect of escapism is counterbalanced by the positive effects of entertaining
media content, making it hard to capture which effect predominates.
Our results have to be interpreted in the light of several limitations. First, our
measures of entertainment use are very broad and based on self-reports. Consequently, they
only provide a relatively rough estimate of our respondents “media diets”, without granting
insight into the media, channels, and message types that were used. Future research would
thus benefit from a more comprehensive picture of entertainment use, e.g., based on log data
or data donations. Secondly, we assessed only positive reappraisal and growth as meaning
making strategies. Though both of these strategies are key to meaning making, the latter can
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 31
also occur through other strategies that could be elicited by entertainment, such as downward
comparison or acceptance (Park, 2010). Thirdly, we included presence of meaning in life, but
not the search for meaning in life in our studies, though research shows the latter to be closely
connected to the exposure to meaningful media (e.g., Oliver & Raney, 2011). In future
studies, investigating whether entertainment exposure aids not only situational meaning
making processes, but also a larger search for meaning in life, and under what circumstances
it may do so, would be an interesting path to follow. Lastly, we see room for improvement in
our measurement of vicarious experiences via inspiration: Though it captures the aspect of
learning from role models in entertainment, it leaves other aspects of vicarious experiences,
such as living through life events and their associated emotions via media, unexplored.
With these limitations in mind, we believe that our study provides insight into the
manifold potentials that lie in entertainment and acknowledges that entertainment can make
people stronger in, but also divert them from, handling everyday stressors and hassles. Taking
the first step in studying entertainment media use from a salutogenetic perspective, we find
that entertaining media are a resource that can help make sense of stressful life events. In
today’s highly stressful life circumstances, our study emphasizes the potential that lies in
entertainment and utilizing it, not only as a resource that serves to cope in the moment, but
also serves to benefit adaptive mental health outcomes beyond its immediate use.
Understanding further benefits of entertainment media as a resource—a resource that is,
perhaps most importantly, available to all—is a promising path forward for the field of
entertainment research and positive media psychology.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Anisha Arenz, Alicia Ernst and Caroline Hauf for their
support in conducting this research.
Conflict of Interest
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 32
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article
Funding
This work was supported by German Research Foundation (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG) [grant RE 2785/6-1 awarded to Dr. Leonard Reinecke].
Data availability
All data and materials are openly available at the Open Science Framework Repository:
MEANING MAKING & ENTERTAINMENT 33