How imitation moves:
Effects of movement congruency and temporal contingency
on affiliation, social influence, empathy and prosocial
behavior
Jasminka Majdandži a,b,c,d,e, Birgit Rauchbauer,a,c,f, Gernot Gergerh, Marina Maksimovaa,
Jakub Chromeci,j, Christoph Huber-Huberk,l, and Claus Lamma,c
a. Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Unit, Department of Cognition, Emotion, and Methods in
Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna, Austria
b. Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna, Austria
c. Vienna Cognitive Science Hub, University of Vienna, Austria
d. Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia
e. Department for Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University for Continuing Education Krems,
Krems, Austria
f. CNRS - Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France
g. Department for Psychology of Cognition, Emotion, and Methods, Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna,
Austria
h. Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Digital Health and Patient Safety
i. Behavioral and Social Neuroscience Research Group, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic
j. Department of Neurology, Masaryk University and Saint Anne's Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic
k. Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
l. Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento, Rovereto, Italy
Corresponding author:
Dr. Jasminka Majdandži
Department of Clinical and Health Psychology
Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna
Liebiggasse 5
1010 Vienna
Austria
E-mail: jasminka.majdandzic@univie.ac.at
Abstract
Being imitated has prof ound ef f ects on social aff ect and behavior, but it is still unclear how it
produces these ef f ects. According to one view the ef f ects are grounded in covert movement
simulations and theref ore require the movements of the individuals to be bodily congruent. Yet,
imitation could also have its positive ef f ects because of the rewarding experience of perceiving
temporal contingencies between one’s own and others’ movements, implying that these ef f ects
would also occur if the imitator’s movements are temporally contingent, but not bodily congruent.
In two experiments, we assessed whether bodily congruency is necessary for increasing
empathy and prosocial behavior, or whether temporal contingency alone can also produce such
ef f ects. Participants made spontaneous joystick movements while engaging in a f eigned webcam
interaction with two conf ederates, one of whom made imitative movements, while the other (the
control actor) made unrelated movements. In two experimental groups, we varied whether the
imitator made bodily congruent or temporally contingent movements.
Participants reported more af f iliation to the congruent actor compared to the control
actor, and conf ormed more to this actor’s judgments. Besides, participants showed a higher skin
conductance response (SCR) when perceiving the congruent actor in pain, and f avored this actor
in prosocial behavior, with increase in SCR predicting whether the imitator was f avored. Imitation
that was merely temporally contingent did not evoke such ef f ects. Together, these f indings
suggest that the social ef f ects of imitation seem grounded in motor and af f ective resonance
processes, and that they can be selectively targeted at specif ic interaction partners.
Keywords
Imitation; Mimicry; Chameleon Eff ect; Empathy; Prosocial behavior
Introduction
During social interactions people tend to spontaneously mimic each other’s movements and
gestures. Although these subtle f orms of imitation are typically not consciously noticed, research
has shown that people who are imitated by their interaction partner tend to experience the
interaction as smoother and more pleasant (Chartrand and Bargh, 1999). Moreover, being
imitated may inf luence one’s opinion about the interaction partner, who is seen as more likable
(e.g. Bailenson and Yee, 2005; Chartrand and Bargh, 1999; Dabbs Jr, 1969; Meltzof f , 2007;
Suzuki et al., 2003; Van Baaren et al., 2009). Besides af f ecting explicit af f iliation ratings, being
imitated may also shape actual behavior: f or instance, it may promote later prosocial behavior
towards the imitator (Müller et al., 2012; Van Baaren et al., 2004). This suggests that, despite
its implicit nature, imitation seems to strengthen our sense of social connection with others (Fawcett
and Liszkowski, 2012; Meltzof f , 2007; Van Baaren et al., 2009).
While evidence f or the ef f ects of imitation on social attitudes and behavior is extensive,
it is still not fully resolved how imitation produces these ef f ects. Based on a vast body of research,
it is generally assumed that individuals engage in automatic simulations of observed actions of
others by covertly activating the motor programs involved in the f irst-person execution of these
actions (Blakemore and Frith, 2005; Brass and Heyes, 2005; Georgief f and Jeannerod, 1998;
Knoblich and Sebanz, 2006). It has been proposed that such covert motor resonance may entail
a def ault, ef f ortless processing mode which gets disinhibited during smooth, pleasant
interactions, resulting in a f acilitation of actual imitative movements (Cross and Iacoboni, 2014;
Heyes, 2013). The af f iliative ef f ects of being mimicked by an interaction partner, then, might
arise f rom a congruency between one’s own current motor programs and the covertly simulated
movements of the other: the resulting self -other overlap in motor representations may denote a
neural and behavioral state of being “tuned in” to the other, which may enhance af f iliative and
prosocial tendencies and which may also f acilitate embodied simulations of the other’s emotional
state (de Waal, 2007). Thus, according to this view, the prosocial ef f ects of imitation are
ultimately grounded in embodied movement simulations, and theref ore require the movements
of the mimicker and the mimickee to be structurally congruent .
Yet, the af f iliative and prosocial eff ects of imitation could also be driven by other
mechanisms, which may either provide a more comprehensive explanation or work in parallel
with motor resonance-based processes. In particular, the mere detection of a reliable predictive
relationship or temporal contingency between one’s own actions and certain perceptual events
may be intrinsically rewarding, irrespective of whether it involves imitation or not (Catmur and
Heyes, 2013). Supporting this notion, it has been shown that inf ants enjoy watching temporal
contingencies between external events ( Bahrick, 1983) and, more specif ic to action-perception
contingencies, that the reliable occurrence of a perceptual event f ollowing one’s action induces
positive af f ect (Gunnar et al., 1984; Tarabulsy et al., 1996). This might be due to the f act that
noticing that one’s actions have predictable ef f ects evokes a sense of agency or causality
(Meltzof f , 1990), i.e., a “f eeling of causing something to happen” (Dewey and Knoblich, 2014),
which satisf ies ef f ectance motivation - the basic motivation to predict and attain control of one's
environment (Waytz et al., 2010; White, 1959). With respect to imitation, (subconsciously)
detecting that the interaction partner reliably re acts to one’s movements may thus f ulfill a basic
desire f or predictability and control, resulting in positive f eelings about this person. In addition,
the other’s responsiveness to one’s behavior might be understood as a social signal that he or
she is deliberately “tuning in” to oneself . This view of mimicry as an implicit expression of
af f iliative intent has been proposed bef ore (Lakin et al., 2003), but may not necessarily be
conf ined to anatomically congruent movements; indeed, it may as well apply to non-congruent
but temporally contingent movements. Altogether, this account would imply that temporal
contingency is a necessary condition f or the social ef f ects of imitation to occur, but strict
movement congruency is not.
A f ew studies have attempted to disentangle the roles of temporal contingency and
movement congruency in explaining the social ef fects of imitation. Two independent studies have
shown that inf ants pref er an actor who perf orms bodily congruent movements over an actor who
perf orms temporally contingent, but dif f erent movements (Agnetta and Rochat, 2004; Meltzof f ,
2007). Although this suggests that movement congruency drives at least part of the ef f ects, it
does not exclude the possibility that a contingently moving actor would still be pref erred over
an actor whose movements are not in any way related to the inf ant’s behavior. A more recent
study which independently varied the similarity and temporal contingency of f eet and hand
stimuli moving in response to participants’ self -initiated movements f ound that contingency (i.e.
how reliably the participant’s movement was f ollowed by a stimulus movement), not similarity
(i.e., whether the body part shown was the same or dif f erent), increased ratings of closeness
and task enjoyment as well as prosocial behavior ( Catmur and Heyes, 2013). Although this study
provided novel insights into the role of contingency, it also had some limitations. First, while in
the contingent conditions all trials showed a moving body part, in the non-contingent condition,
only half of the trials showed a movement of any kind, which implied that in this condition, part
of the similar and dissimilar trials did not contain a motion component, arguably a cr ucial aspect
of imitative movements. This may have had the additional ef f ect of making the non-contingent
condition less engaging overall, irrespective of the degree of action-perception contingency per
se, given the assumption that trials with movements are likely more engaging than still trials.
Second, due to the f act that this task f ully relies on animated stills of body parts, it remains to
be clarif ied how these f indings generalize to experimental settings involving a real-time
interaction with an intentionally moving agent, which in that respect bear more resemblance to
naturalistic interactions. Thus, the question to what extent temporal contingency accounts f or the
prosocial tendencies of imitation in interactional settings still needs to be resolved, using an
approach in which contingent movement is accurately contrasted with similarly f requent but non-
contingent motion.
A second open issue involving the prosocial ef f ects of imitation is the question whether
the ef f ects ref lect a general change in prosocial orientation, or can be tailored towards specif ic
interaction partners. Besides evidence f or ef f ects on prosocial behavior towards the individuals
that have imitated (Müller et al., 2012; Van Baaren et al., 2004) there is also evidence that
being imitated enhances prosocial behavior towards third parties (Ashton-James et al., 2007;
Carpenter et al., 2013; Fischer-Lokou et al., 2011; Van Baaren et al., 2004), possibly ref lecting
a shif t towards more interdependent self -construal (Brewer and Gardner, 1996). On the other
hand, in it has been shown that perspective taking, which is also believed to engage self -other
merging mechanisms, typically yields target-specif ic prosocial ef f ects (Galinsky et al., 2005).
Although in the domain of imitation it has been shown that sequentially inducing imitative and
non-imitative encounters can f lexibly enhance and diminish socio-aff ective responses in
individuals (De Coster et al., 2013), it has, to our knowledge, never been tested whether
simultaneously interacting with multiple individuals of whom one is imitating and one is not, can
evoke prosocial ef f ects restricted to the imitator. This is an important question as target-specif ic
ef f ects may indicate that, in addition to inducing an interdependent or prosocial mindset , mimicry
may also f oster social bonding processes between two specif ic agents.
A third open issue is the question to what extent the ef f ects of imitation on prosocial
behavior are mediated by changes in empathy , i.e. by sharing others’ af f ective states. Like
automatic imitation, empathy is also assumed to be mediated by embodied simulations
(Bernhardt and Singer, 2012; Decety and Jackson, 2006; Lamm et al., 2011; Lamm and
Majdandžić, 2015; Preston and de Waal, 2003; Rütgen et al., 2015a; Rütgen et al., 2015b),
and theref ore a state of being bodily tuned in to others in the motor domain may also f acilitate
such simulation in the af f ective domain. Furthermore, prosocial behavior can be driven by
increases in empathy, although it is not a necessary nor a suf f icient precondition (Batson et al.,
1997; Batson and Shaw, 1991; Cialdini et al., 1987). While several correlational studies have
shown a link between dispositional empathy and spontaneous imitation (Chartrand and Bargh,
1999; Müller et al., 2013), there has only been one experimental study demonstrating that
being imitated f acilitates subsequent empathic responses (De Coster et al., 2013). In this study,
participants perf ormed voluntary f inger lif ting movements which were, in block-wise f ashion,
either imitated or counter-imitated by an animated hand stimulus. Compared to non-imitation
blocks, imitation blocks evoked increased responses on several empathy measures during video
clips in which the hand was harmed. Yet, as the authors note themselves, due to the egocentric
presentation of the hand and the synchronous presentation of the imitative movements, the
manipulation seemed to primarily induce a sense of self-other conf usion between the
participant’s hand and the hand on the screen, equivalent to a rubber hand illusion (Botvinick
and Cohen, 1998), which suggests that the observed af f ective responses might have ref lected
self -related distress rather than empathic responses. Thus, it remains to be established whether
the reported ef f ects on empathy can be generalized to imitative settings in which such self -other
conf usion is unlikely.
In the present study we tested the ef f ects of being imitated on empathy and prosocial
behavior in two separate experiments. More specif ically, we aimed to assess whether strict
congruency between one’s own movements and those of the imitator is necessary to evoke such
ef f ects, or whether temporal contingency alone is suf ficient. In addition, we sought to determine
whether increases in empathy and prosocial behavior can be tailored to a specif ic individual in
situations where people are simultaneously interacting with multiple interaction partners of whom
one is imitating them and one is not.
To address our research questions, we designed a motor task in which we varied the extent
to which participants were imitated by two conf ederates, and used this task in both experiments.
In the task, participants made spontaneous decisions about whether or not to move a joystick
while engaging in an ostensible live webcam interaction with two co-players. In one experimental
group, one of the co-players tended to move the joystick in a manner that was both temporally
contingent and spatially congruent to the movements of the participant (congruent condition),
that is, equivalent to f ull imitation in naturalistic interactions; the other co-player made unrelated
movements (control condition). In a second experimental group, one co-player moved in a
manner that was only temporally contingent, but not spatially congruent, with the participants’
movements, while the other co-player moved in an unrelated way. Thus, in one group (congruent
versus control) the imitation condition was f ully congruent, both spatially and temporally, while
in the other group (contingent versus control) it was only temporally contingent. This design
allowed us to separately assess effects of movement congruent and temporally contingent
imitation relative to a control condition matched f or movement output, and hence, to examine
whether f ull movement congruency is necessary for eliciting socio-af f ective ef f ects, or whether
temporally contingent movement alone can also evoke such eff ects.
In both experiments, we assessed the ef f ects of this manipulation on empathy and prosocial
participants’ self -reported positive and negative vicarious af f ect in response to monetary gains
or losses by the co-players in a gambling task. Pref erence in prosocial behavior was assessed
by probing participants’ willingness to donate part of their earnings to their co-players, thereby
requiring them to f avor one co-player over the other. In this experiment we additionally
assessed whether imitation induced a tendency to conf orm to the imitator’s judgment in a number
estimation task. Subjective ly experienced self -other merging may increase social identif ication,
which may in turn trigger assimilation to behavioral standards set by a person (de Cremer,
2004). Although imitation has been shown to increase assimilation to opinions and group norms
(Leander et al., 2011; Parton and Prief ert, 1975), it is unclear whether these ef f ects require
motor congruency or can also be elicited by mere temporal matching, and whether they ref lect
a general change in social orientation or can be spe cif ically linked to one imitator.
In Experiment 2, we f ocused on ef fects of imitation on empathy f or pain, using a task in
which participants observed their co-players receive painf ul shocks (Hein et al., 2010; Rütgen
et al., 2015a; Singer et al., 2006). Empathic responses were quantif ied by complementing self-
reports with a set of psychophysiological measures, consisting of skin conductance measures and
f acial electromyography (EMG) measures of corrugator supercilii muscle activity and startle
blink ref lex. This was motivated by the f act that the underlying physiological responses have
been shown to be sensitive to noxious stimuli and negative af fect, not only when these are self-
related but also when observed in others. More specif ically, amplitude of the startle blink
response, a ref lex in the orbicularis oculi muscle in response to sudden, intense stimuli (Miller et
al., 2002), is specif ically increased by stimuli with a negative af f ective valence (Bradley, 2009;
Vrana et al., 1988), including pain in others, which also enhances corrugator activity, a measure
of “f rowning” (Caes et al., 2012). Skin conductance response (SCR), an index of autonomic
arousal, is sensitive to negative emotional stimuli (Bradley et al., 2001) ; notably, it also responds
to the observation of pain in others and is modulated by the social relation with the person
empathized with (Krebs, 1975; Lanzetta and Englis, 1989). More in general, assessing
physiological responses as an index of empathy f or pain f its with evidence that people who f eel
socially connected to each other tend to automatically synchronize a range of bodily processes
(Butler, 2011; Konvalinka et al., 2011) and that the extent of physiological synchrony with the
observed other is indicative of empathic accuracy (Levenson and Ruef , 1992). Af ter the empathy
f or pain task we assessed participants’ pref erence in prosocial behavior by probing
participants’ decision to take over or pass on a further series of painf ul shocks f rom their co-
players (Hein et al., 2010), thereby requiring them to f avor one co-player over the other.
We predicted that if potential ef f ects of imitation on empathy and prosocial behavior are
driven by embodied movement simulations and self -other overlap, these eff ects would only occur
in the experimental group in which the imitator was congruently moving. If , on the other hand,
the ef f ects of imitation are (partly) driven by the rewarding ef f ects of experiencing temporal
contingencies between one’s own and another person’s movements, we would also f ind ef f ects
in the group in which the imitator made dif f erent movements but moved in a temporally
contingent way.
Experiment 1
METHOD
Participants
64 healthy right-handed volunteers participated in Experiment 1 (34 f emale, 30 male, age 25.9
± 5.3 years, mean (M) ± standard deviation (SD)). Participants were pseudo-randomly assigned
to one of two experimental groups: the C group or the C group, resulting in
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
a sample of 31 participants (18 f emale, 13 male) in the C and 33 participants
ONGRUENT GROUP
(16 f emale, 17 male) in the C group. In the C data f rom two
ONTINGENT ONGRUENT GROUP
participants on the Prosocial Pref erence measure were not recorded, resulting in a f inal sample
of 29 participants (17 f emale, 12 male) f or this measure. All participants had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision, and gave written inf ormed consent. Participants were paid a
reimbursement of €9.00 f or their participation, which was increased with a variable f urther
amount between €3.00 and €7.00, depending on participants’ decisions in the prosocial
pref erence task. This resulted in a f inal f ee between €12.00 and €16.00. The experiments was
perf ormed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee
of the University of Vienna.
Experimental procedures and design
The experiment consisted of f our consecutive tasks: the Motor Task (I), the Social Inf luence
Measure (II), the Empathy Task (III), and the Prosocial Pref erence Task (IV). During all tasks,
participants were led to believe that they were part of a live webcam-based interaction with
two other participants, who were in f act conf ederates who had been f ilmed in advance.
two groups of participants were tested. In group 1 we tested for effects of fully congruent imitation (i.e.,
both bodily congruent and temporally contingent) with respect to a control condition; in group 2, we
tested for effects of imitation that was merely temporally contingent (not bodily congruent), with respect
to a control condition.
Experimental manipulation Dependent measures
Experiment 1
Motor task Social influence measure Empathy Task Prosocial Preference Task
(monetary version) (monetary version)
Group 1: congruent imitation versus control congruent vs. control congruent vs. control congruent vs. control
Group 2: contingent imitation versus control contingent vs. control contingent vs. control contingent vs. control
Experiment 2
Motor task Empathy Task Prosocial Preference Task Affiliative ratings
(pain version) (pain version)
Group 1: congruent imitation versus control congruent vs. control congruent vs. control congruent vs. control
Group 2: contingent imitation versus control contingent vs. control contingent vs. control contingent vs. control
Cover story and confederates
The experiment was preceded by an instruction session during which participants read and
signed an inf ormed consent f orm, and received written and oral instructions about the tasks. They
were inf ormed that throughout the experiment they would interact over a live network connection
with two other participants, who were said to be in a diff erent part of the research institute.
Participants were then given a yellow coat to wear over their normal clothing, ostensibly to make
them easily recognizable f or the other two participants, who in turn would wear a red or blue
coat f or the same reason. Participants were then seated behind a computer. Bef ore start of the
Motor Task, they were introduced to the other two participants with two short video clips,
seemingly to test the live webcam connection, af ter which participants were ostensibly recorded
in a similar way. The videos lasted 4 seconds each and showed two conf ederates, one of whom
was wearing a red coat (the “red participant”) and the other a blue coat (the “blue participant”).
Of both confederates, only the upper body was visible; this was done to prevent f actors related
to f acial appearance (e.g. f acial attractiveness, f acial expression) to interf ere with imitation-
related ef f ects on participants’ evaluations and behavior. Both conf ederates were f emales;
however, due to the wide coats this could not be discerned f rom the videos, as had been
conf irmed in an online survey that preceded the study, using a 5-point rating scale ranging f rom
“certainly male” to “certainly f emale” (N = 61, Mean rating conf ederate A = 3.13; B = 3.27).
Assignment of the two conf ederates and coat colors (red and blue) to the conditions
(C /C or C ) was counterbalanced across the 32 participants per
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
group.
Tasks
Motor Task
The Motor Task was designed as an implicit imitation manipulation in which participants were
imitated by one interaction partner and not by another. During the task participants had to
make spontaneous movement decisions while ostensibly interacting over a webcam connection
with the two co-participants who were seemingly perf orming the same task. In experimental
group 1 one of the f eigned co-participants tended to copy the participant’s movement decisions
in a manner that was both spatially congruent and te mporally contingent (the C actor,
ONGRUENT
see below f or details) while the other actor made movement decisions unrelated to those of the
participant (the C actor). In experimental group 2 one actor made movement decisions
ONTROL
which were temporally contingent but not spatially congruent to the participant’s movement
decisions (the C actor) while the other actor again made unrelated movement decisions
ONTINGENT
(the C actor).
ONTROL
Participants were seated behind a joystick and a computer screen and were told to keep
both hands on the joystick throughout the task (see Fig. 1). They were instructed that in each trial,
they could either move the joystick to the lef t or right, or remain still. They were asked to decide
this spontaneously, but to move or keep still the joystick about equally of ten across all trials.
They were told that the other two participants would perf orm the task simultaneously, that in
each trial they would be connected over the webcam with one of them, and that the movement
decision of this participant would be shown immediately af ter the participants’ decision. Af ter a
training block in which the joystick movements were practiced, the experiment began. A trial
started with a video of one of the two actors, who was, like the participant, ostensibly waiting
f or a movement cue. Af ter a variable time interval of 2 to 5 s, a “GO?” text cue was projected
onto a still of the last video f rame, af ter which participants had to carry out their movement
decision as quickly as possible. This was f ollowed by a video of the ostensible movement decision
of the other actor, which was selected based on the participant’s joystick manipulation. In
C trials (i.e., the experimental condition of group 1) the actor perf ormed mostly the
ONGRUENT
same movement decision: if the participant moved the joystick, in 80% of cases the actor moved
it too, and in that case, with a 80% probability moved it in a spatially congruent direction, that
is, the movement mirrored that of the participant, in line with evidence that automatic imitation
in f ace-to-f ace orientations tends to be mirrored rather than rotational (Avikainen et al., 2003;
Bavelas et al., 1988; Brass et al., 2000; Koski et al., 2002). Similarly, in non-movement trials,
the actor mostly (80%) kept the joystick still, too. We did not use a 100% imitation rate to
prevent participants f rom noticing the manipulation, consistent with the implicit character of
mimicry in naturalistic settings. The C actor (representing the experimental condition
ONTINGENT
of group 2) also mostly (80%) moved the joystick when the participant moved it, but moved it
in a spatially congruent way in only half of these cases. Thus, the movements of this actor were
only temporally, not spatially, corresponding to those of the participant. In C trials (the
ONTROL
control condition f or both groups) the actor moved the joystick in 50% of the cases in which the
participant moved it, and
Fig. 1. Motor Task. (A) Experimental set-up. The participant (in yellow) was instructed to keep both
hands on a joystick (right panel) and in each trial, to make a spontaneous decision to either keep the
joystick still or to move it to the left or right. Participants were told that they were part of a live webcam
interaction with two other participants. On each trial, a video of one of two presumed other participants
was shown, who seemingly performed the same movement task. (B) Example trials for the C
ONGRUENT
condition. Both participant’s decisions whether to move the joystick or not and the movement direction
(left or right) tended to be imitated by the video actor. (C) Example trials for the C condition.
ONTINGENT
Participant’s decisions whether to move the joystick or not tended to be copied by the video actor, but
movement direction (left or right) was not copied. (D) Example trials for the C condition, which
ONTROL
was used as a baseline condition in both experimental group 1 (C versus C ) and group
ONGRUENT ONTROL
2 (C versus C ). The movements of this actor were unrelated to those of the participant,
ONTINGENT ONTROL
both in terms of the decision whether to move the joystick, and in which direction to move it.
if so, moved it in a congruent direction with only 50% probability; conversely, non-movement
decisions were f ollowed by a movement in 50% of the cases. For each actor, a set of ten videos
per movement decision had been recorded, f rom which the video to be shown was randomly
selected. Trials were separated by a screen with f ixation cross shown for 1 s. Order of the
conditions (i.e., the two actors) was pseudo-randomized across trials, omitting repetition of a
condition more than twice. Each condition comprised 60 trials, amounting to 120 trials f or the
whole task. Duration of the Motor Task was approximately 20 minutes.
Social influence measure
To test whether participants showed a tendency to assimilate their estimations more to those of
the imitator than to those of the control actor we presented them with a number estimation task.
Participants were shown a screen with “A“ characters, of which they had to estimate the number
(between 100 and 300). They were told that the player whose guess was closest to the correct
number would play f irst in the subsequent gambling task. The participant then saw the ostensible
estimations of the other two participants, which appeared successively on the screen under a
screenshot of each actor, af ter which the participant had to enter his/her own estimation. The
f eigned estimations of the two actors were f ixed (152 and 245); order and number estimated
by each actor (imitator or control) were counterbalanced across participants and conditions.
Absolute distance between the participant’s estimation and the one of each actor was used to
assess social inf luence: a smaller distance to one actor’s estimation, as compared to the other
actor’s estimation, was taken as an indication of social inf luence by this actor.
Empathy Task (monetary version)
To assess participants’ empathic responses to pleasant and unpleasant af f ect experienced by
their presumed co-players, they were presented with a f eigned gambling task. In this task, the
three players engaged in a series of gambling trials that either resulted in monetary gain or
loss. A trial started with a snapshot indicating which participant was on turn, af ter which two
colored geometrical f igures were presented. If it was their turn, participants had to select one
of the f igures and were then shown f eedback on whether they had won or lost money in this
trial. In other trials, participants saw the decisions and outcomes of their presumed co-
participants.
Af ter each trial a visual analogue scale was shown, on which participants had to indicate
their af f ect on a continuous scale that ranged f rom “not at all” to “very much”. For each of the
two presumed co-players, they had to indicate, in case of a loss trial 1) How unpleasant they
f elt the outcome was f or the other player (O A ) and 2) How unpleasant it f elt f or them
THER FFECT
to witness the other players’ result (S A ); in case of win trials, the ratings concerned
ELF FFECT
pleasant af f ect. They also had to rate how pleasant or unpleasant their own gambling outcomes
f elt f or them. The rating scale stayed on screen until a response was given.
The task consisted of 30 trials, corresponding to 10 trials f or each presumed player.
Trials were presented in a f ixed order, in which Target Persons were alternated (e.g. 1 -2-3-1-
3-2-1-2-3) and win and loss trials were pseudorandomized, which was balanced across
participants. Win and loss trials were pre-def ined and did not depend on the shape or color of
the f igures, which were randomly selected f rom a set of nine. The participant won in 6 trials and
lost in 4 trials, while the other players each won in 4 and lost in 6 trials. The amount of money
won or lost per trial varied between €3.00 and €3.85.
Prosocial Preference Task (monetary version)
In the Prosocial Pref erence Task we assessed which actor was f avored by the participants in a
one-shot prosocial decision measure. Directly af ter the gambling task, participants were
presented with a screen showing their own result , i.e. a total gain of €6.00, as well as the
ostensible results of the two other participants (a gain of €1.00 each). On the next screen,
participants were inf ormed that they had the option to either take the €1.00 euro gain away
f rom one of the others participants, or to donate a part of their own gain to the others. They
were then asked to indicate the total amount they would like to take away or donate by
selecting one of f our options: 1) take €1.00 2) donate €0.75; 3) donate €1.50; or 4) donate
€3.00. Af ter this, participants were required to indicate how their decision would af f ect each of
the two participants. They had to choose f rom two options, both of which implied an unequal
distribution: in one option the imitating (i.e., congruent or contingent) actor was f avored (i.e.
could either keep his/her gain or would receive a donation twice as high as the other actor)
while in the other option the non-imitating control actor was f avored.
Data analysis
Data were analyzed using PASW 18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). For each experimental
group, the ratings obtained during the Monetary Empathy Task were entered into a 2 x 2 x 2
repeated measures ANOVA with f actors Target Person (C /C , C ),
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
Outcome (W , L ), and Rating Scale (S A , O A ). In addition, planned paired
IN OSS ELF FFECT THER FFECT
t tests were applied to assess pairwise comparisons between the two Target Person conditions,
separately f or W and L trials and S A and O A ratings.
IN OSS ELF FFECT THER FFECT
For the Prosocial Task we assessed for each participant which actor
(C /C or C ) was assigned the smaller amount of money (either because
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
more money was donated to this player or because more money was taken of f f rom the other
player). For each group, we entered these values into a chi-square goodness-of -fit test to
determine whether there was a pref erence f or one actor over the other across participants. We
then applied a f urther chi-square test to f ormally test whether the observed proportions dif f ered
between the two experimental groups.
The extent of social influence was quantif ied by calculating the absolute distance between
participants’ estimations and the ostensible estimations of both actors (C /C
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
or C ), and by entering these values into a paired t-test. To assess the signif icance of
ONTROL
observed dif f erential ef f ects between experimental groups, the dif f erence scores
(C /C > C ) of the participants in each group were entered into a one -
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
sided two-sample t-test.
Alpha level was set to .05 f or all analyses of behavioral data. Greenhouse-Geisser
corrections were applied to ANOVA p- values if the assumption of homogeneity of covariances
was violated (as determined by Mauchly tests of sphericity). If multiple tests were used to test
the same hypothesis in the same data, p-values were Bonf erroni-corrected to correct f or multiple
comparisons.
RESULTS
Social influence
The extent of social inf luence in the number estimation task was quantif ied by calculating the
absolute distance between participants’ estimations and the ostensible estimations of both actors
(C /C or C ), and by entering these values into a paired t-test. For
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
experimental group 1 (C , C ) we observed a signif icantly smaller distance to
ONGRUENT ONTROL
estimations of the C actor (mean distance (M) = 50.7) than to those of the C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
actor (M = 77.3; t(30) = 2.13; p = .042; d = 0.38; see Fig. 2). We did not observe any ef f ect
in experimental group 2 (C , C ; t(32) = 0.73; p = .47). Testing whether the ef f ect
ONTINGENT ONTROL
of imitation on social inf luence dif f ered between experimental groups, by conducting a two-
sample t-test on the diff erence scores (C / C > C ) of the participants
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
in each group, conf irmed a signif icant groups dif ference (t(64) = 2.03; p (one-sided) = .023; d
= 0.51).
Fig. 2. Conformity in number estimation task (experiment 1). Difference between participants’
estimations and those of the two actors in the number estimation task. A smaller difference indicates
more similar estimations. (A) In group 1 participants’ estimations were closer to those of the C
ONGRUENT
actor than to those of the C actor. (B) In group 2, there was no difference in how close participants’
ONTROL
estimations were to those of the C and the C actor. Experimental groups significantly
ONTINGENT ONTROL
differed as to whether participants conformed more to the imitating actor than to the control actor.
Empathy ratings
VAS ratings obtained during the Monetary Empathy Task were recoded (with 1 representing
the lower extreme and 5 representing the upper extreme) and f or each experimental group
entered into a 2 x 2 x 2 repeated -measures ANOVA with factors Target Person
(C /C , C ), Outcome (W , L ), and Rating Scale (S A , O
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL IN OSS ELF FFECT THER
A ). For experimental group 1 (C versus C ) this revealed main ef f ects of
FFECT ONGRUENT ONTROL
Rating Scale (M =3.03; M = 3.96; F(1,30) = 27.7; p < .001; η ² = .48) and Outcome
S O p
ELF THER
(M = 3.78; M = 3.20; F(1,30) = 27.3; p < .001; η ² = .48), but no main ef f ect of Target
W L p
IN OSS
Person (F(1,30) = 0.21; p = .65). We f urthermore f ound a Target Person x Rating Scale
interaction (F(2,30) = 4.84; p = .036; η ² = .14); this eff ect was driven by a smaller discrepancy
between self -related and other-related af f ect ratings involving the congruent person
(M = 3.08, M = 3.93) compared to the control person (M =
S ,C O ,C S ,C
ELF ONGRUENT THER ONGRUENT ELF ONTROL
2.98, M = 3.98). Planned pairwise comparisons between C and C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
O ,C
THER ONTROL
f or each specif ic combination of Rating Scale and Outcome separately did not reveal any
signif icant eff ects (all p ≥. 16).
For experimental group 2 (C versus C ) we also f ound main ef f ects of
ONTINGENT ONTROL
Rating Scale (M =2.95; M = 3.93; F(1,32) = 25.8; p < .001; η ² = .45) and Outcome
S O p
ELF THER
(M 3.77=; M = 3.11; F(1,32) = 23.0; p < .001; η ² = .42), but no main ef f ect of Target
W L p
IN OSS
Person (p = .46), nor any signif icant interactions (all p ≥ .13). Pairwise comparisons between
C and C f or each specif ic combination of A and O did not yield
ONTINGENT ONTROL FFECT UTCOME
any signif icant ef f ects (all p ≥ .094).
Preference in prosocial behavior
In experimental group 1 (C versus C ) the C actor was f avored in the
ONGRUENT ONTROL ONGRUENT
prosocial decision measure by signif icantly more participants (69 %) than the C actor
ONTROL
(χ²(1,N=29) = 4.17; p = .041; φ = .38); see Fig. 3 A. To examine this result in more detail, we
splitted our sample according to whether participants decided prosocially (i.e., donated money,
55% of participants) or egoistically (i.e., took away money f rom one of the other participants).
Applying chi-square tests to these sub samples revealed that the tendency to f avor the
C actor was only present in the prosocial sub sample (i.e. by 81% of this sample;
ONGRUENT
χ²(1,N=16) = 6.25; p = .012; φ = .63) and not in the egoistic sub sample (i.e. by 54%;
χ²(1,N=13) = 0.08; p = .78). However, the dif f erence in preference between these sub samples
did not reach significance (χ²(1,N=29) = 2.52; p = .11).
In contrast to experimental group 1, group 2 (C versus C ) did not show
ONTINGENT ONTROL
a pref erence f or one of the actors over the other (52% pref erence f or the C actor;
ONTINGENT
χ²(1,N=33) = 0.03; p = .86); see Fig. 3 B. Although experimental group 1 showed a clear
pref erence for the C actor whereas experimental group 2 did not show a pref erence
ONGRUENT
f or the C actor, post-hoc f ormal testing of the disparity in pref erence between
ONTINGENT
experimental groups did not yield a signif icant group dif f erence (χ²(1,N=62) = 1.95; p = .16).
Fig. 3. Preference in prosocial behavior for the imitating or control actor. (A) Percentage of participants
favoring the C versus the C actor in distributing monetary gains in experiment 1. The
ONGRUENT ONTROL
C actor is favored significantly more often over the C actor than vice versa. (B)
ONGRUENT ONTROL
Participants do not favor the C actor over the C actor in distributing monetary gains.
ONTINGENT ONTROL
(C) In decision about how to distribute a series of painful shocks (experiment 2), participants favor the
C actor significantly more often over the C actor than vice versa. (D) Participants do not
ONGRUENT ONTROL
favor the C actor over the C actor in distributing painful shocks.
ONTINGENT ONTROL
Across the two experiments (data pooled), participants favored the C actor significantly more
ONGRUENT
often than the C actor.
ONTINGENT
DISCUSSION
In Experiment 1 we showed that participants who have been imitated by an actor who copied
their movements in a bodily congruent manner respond dif f erently to this person in subsequent
social behavior. First, participants adapted their responses in a number estimation task more to
standards set by this person than to those set by a non-imitating control person, indicating that
they were more prone to social inf luence by the congruent imitator. We did not f ind such a
conf ormity ef f ect f or the actor who copied the movements of participants in a merely temporally
contingent way, suggesting that bodily congruent, but not temporally contingent, imitation
increases participants’ social identif ication with the imitator.
In addition, participants f avored the bodily congruent imitator over the control actor in
a subsequent monetary donation decision, while the contingent actor did not evoke such a
pref erence. This suggests that movement similarity is necessary f or the prosocial ef f ects of
imitation to occur, while a predictive temporal relationship between one’s own and the imitator’s
movements is in itself not suff icient f or such eff ects. However, the dif ference in pref erence
between experimental groups did not reach significance when we f ormally tested it, which might
be due to the use of a dichotomous measure along with the small size of our sample. This
prevented us f rom drawing strong conclusions f rom this finding and prompted us to replicate the
ef f ect in a further experiment.
We did not f ind any ef fects of movement congruency or temporal contingency on the
intensity of self -reported empathy in response to gains and losses experienced by the actors in
a gambling game. Although we did f ind that self - and other-related af f ect tended to be more
similar in response to congruent imitators than control actors, which might suggest that imitation
causes representations of one’s own and the other’s aff ective state to become merged or
conf used to a greater extent, overall our data suggest that empathic responses to imitators were
not experienced as more intense than to non-imitators. Yet, it is possible that such responses
require a more salient aversive af fective state than is induced by winning or losing a small
monetary amount. In addition, explicit self -reports may lack the sensitivity to pick up on subtle
or implicit changes in empathic responses. To overcome these limitations, we decided to carry
out a second experiment. In this experiment, we used the same imitation paradigm, but assessed
participants’ empathic responses with an empathy f or pain paradigm. In addition to collecting
self -reports of empathy, we also acquired several psychophysiological measures as
physiological indices of empathic responding.
Experiment 2
METHOD
Participants
We analyzed data f rom 64 healthy right-handed volunteers (36 f emale, 28 male, age 25.1 ±
4.6 years, mean ± standard deviation). Data f rom 9 f urther participants (age 28.2 ± 3.8) had
to be discarded due to technical problems during data collection. P articipants were pseudo-
randomly assigned to one of two experimental groups: the C group or the C
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
group. This resulted in a f inal sample of 32 participants (18 f emale, 14 male) per experimental
group. During analysis of the psychophysiological measures, data f rom a number of f urther
participants had to be excluded due to missing data or poor raw data quality. This resulted in
a sample of 57 skin conductance datasets (29 in the C and 28 in the C
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
group), 57 startle datasets (30 in the C and 27 in the C group), and 52
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
corrugator datasets (27 in the C and 25 in the C group).
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and gave written inf ormed
consent bef ore participating. Participants were paid €15,00 f or their participation. The study
was perf ormed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the experiment, including the
procedure for pain administration, was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of
Vienna.
Experimental procedures and design
Experiment 2 consisted of f our consecutive tasks. As in Experiment 1, the procedure started with
the Motor Task (I), which was carried out according to the same procedures and cover story as
described f or Experiment 1. The Motor Task was f ollowed by the Empathy f or Pain Task (II) and
the Prosocial Pref erence Task (III), af ter which a short Af f iliation rating scale was administered
(IV). As in Experiment 1, participants were led to believe that they took part in a live webcam -
based interaction with two other participants throughout the experiment.
Tasks
Empathy for Pain Task
In the Empathy f or Pain Task, both the participants and their presumed co-participants received
a number of painf ul and non-painful electrodermal stimulation trains applied via electrodes to
the hand. Behavioral ratings and psychophysiological recordings were acquired as indices of
empathy f or the alleged co-participants’ pain.
Bef ore start of the task, we assessed participants’ individual detection and pain thresholds in
a calibration procedure. Stimulation was delivered using a Digitimer DS5 Isolated Bipolar
Constant Current Stimulator (Digitimer Clinical and Biomedical Research Instruments) via a
concentric surf ace electrode with 7 mm diameter and a platinum pin (WASP electrode, Specialty
Developments) attached to the back of the lef t hand using adhesive plaster. This set-up was
motivated by previous empathy studies using a similar paradigm (Hein et al., 2010; Majdandžić
et al., 2016; Rütgen et al., 2015a; Singer et al., 2004), with one stimulation train lasting 1500
ms. During the calibration procedure the stimulation intensity was gradually increased to a level
that participants reliably indicated as either “clearly detectable but not unpleasant” (threshold
f or non-painf ul stimulations) or “very painf ul but tolerable over multiple trials” (threshold f or
painf ul stimulations).
The paradigm was structured as a 3 x 2 f actorial design with f actors Target Person (S ,
ELF
C or C , C ) and Stimulation Type (P , N -P ). In 50% of the
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL AINFUL ON AINFUL
trials, a startle stimulus was presented; these trials were included in the analysis of startle blink
response, while the remaining 50% of trials was included in analysis of skin conductance
response and corrugator supercilii activity. The task was divided into f our blocks: two blocks with
painf ul stimulation and two blocks with non-painful stimulation. Painful and non-painful blocks
were alternated, their order being counterbalanced across participants. Each block consisted of
6 stimulation trials per Target Person, resulting in 18 stimulation trials per block, and a total
number of 72 trials. Order of the conditions within a block was pseudo-randomized, omitting
repetition of a target person in consecutive trials.
The task was preceded by detailed on-screen instructions and presentation of two probe
trials without stimulation to f amiliarize participants with the paradigm. Participants were also
presented f ive times with the startle stimulus, an acoustic 104 dB 50 ms white noise burst,
delivered via headphones. This was done to prevent habituation ef f ects from occurring during
the task. At the start of each block it was indicated whether the block would consist of painf ul or
non-painful stimulation trials. A trial started with the presentation of a video clip of the person
who would receive stimulation (see Fig. 4). As in the motor task, only the upper body and the
hands were shown. In case of a S trial a schematic depiction of a yellow player was shown.
ELF
Af ter a variable duration of 2000 – 3000 ms a lightning symbol was projected onto a still of
the last video f rame or picture, to indicate that the stimulation would start in 1 s (the anticipation
cue). The color of this symbol depended on the condition, and was blue f or non-painf ul and
orange f or painf ul stimulation trials. Af ter 1000 ms the color of the lightning symbol changed to
green (f or non-painf ul stimulation) or red (f or painf ul stimulation), to indicate that stimulation was
applied. The symbol stayed on screen f or 1500 ms, corresponding to stimulation duration. In
case of a startle trial, the startle stimulus was presented af ter 750 ms. Af ter stimulation the
lightning symbol and picture disappeared and a grey screen with f ixation cross was shown f or
a variable duration of 5 – 9 s (in case the preceding trial did not contain a startle stimulus) or
16 – 24 s (in case the preceding trial contained a startle stimulus, to allow SCR to return to
baseline). After each block a visual analogue scale was shown, on which participants had to
indicate their af f ect during the preceding block on a continuous scale that ranged f rom “not at
all” to “very much”. For each of the two presumed co-players, they had to indicate 1) How
unpleasant they f elt the stimulation had been f or the other person; 2) How unpleasant it had
been f or them to witness the other’s stimulation trials 3) How disturbed they had felt during
watching the stimulation (as a measure of personal distress, Batson et al., 1981), and 4) How
compassionate they had f elt during watching the stimulation (as a measure of empathic concern).
They also had to rate how unpleasant their own stimulation trials had been f or them. The rating
scale stayed on screen until a response was given. Duration of the whole task was approximately
32 minutes, depending on individual rating durations.
Fig. 4. Empathy for Pain Task (experiment 2). Timecourse of a trial with painful stimulation involving
one of the video actors. After a video showing the actor waiting for stimulation (first panel), an
anticipation cue was projected onto the video for 1000 ms, followed by a stimulation cue for 1500 ms
(third panel) to indicate that stimulation was being applied. Trials were separated by a screen with
fixation cross.
Prosocial Preference Task (pain version)
In the Prosocial Task we assessed participants’ pref erence in prosocial behavior f or one of the
two actors using a one-shot decision measure. The task was preceded by a f eigned gambling
task. Participants were told that all three participants would receive a f urther series of
maximally 12 painf ul stimulations, but that each participant could reduce this number with his or
her perf ormance on the gambling task. A trial started with a snapshot indicating which
participant was on turn, af ter which two colored geometrical f igures were presented. If it was
their turn, participants had to select one of the f igures and were then shown feedback on whether
they had won or lost this trial. In other trials, participants saw the decisions and f eedback of
their presumed co-participants. The task consisted of 36 trials, corresponding to 12 trials f or
each presumed player. Trial order was pseudo-randomized and balanced across participants.
Win and loss trials were pre-def ined and did not depend on the shape or color of the f igures,
which were randomly selected f rom a set of nine.
Directly af ter the task, participants were presented with a screen showing their own result
(6 win trials, resulting in 6 f urther painf ul stimulations) as well as the ostensible results of the two
other participants (2 win trials each, resulting in 10 f urther painf ul stimulations). On the next
screen, participants were inf ormed that they could inf luence the number of painf ul stimulations
that they and the other participants would receive, either by taking over some painf ul
stimulations from the other participants, or by passing on some of their own stimulations to the
other participants. They were asked to indicate the total number of shocks they would like to
take over or pass on by selecting one of f ive options: 1) pass on 3 shocks; 2) pass on 1 shock;
3) take over 1 shock; 4) take over 3 shocks; and 5) take over 6 shocks. Af ter their choice,
participants were required to choose how to distribute this change in number of shocks over the
two other participants. They had to choose f rom two options, both of which implied an unequal
distribution: in one option the congruent or contingent actor was f avored (i.e. this actor would
receive a lower number of painf ul stimulations than the other actor) while in the other option the
control actor was f avored.
Af ter participants’ decision, the ensuing number of painf ul stimulations was applied to
the three participants according to the same procedure as in the Empathy f or Pain Task,
distributed over two blocks. We did not record behavioral or psychophysiological data during
this task.
Affiliative ratings
At the end of the experiment, we presented participants with a brief rating task, in order to
examine the ef f ects of our manipulation on explicit measures of af f iliation and interpersonal
closeness (Majdandžić et al., 2016). Participants were presented with a photo of each co-
participant, showing this person’s upper body, as in the Motor Task. Using a on a continuous
scale that ranged f rom “not at all” to “very much”, they had to rate them on the f ollowing
attributes: (1) "How likable do you f ind this person?"; (2) "How connected do you f eel to this
person?"; (3) "How similar do you f ind this person to yourself?"; (4) “How cooperative do you
f ind this person?”; and (5) “How f amiliar does this person seem to you?”. Order of the to-be-
rated person and of the items was randomized across participants. Af ter the rating task
participants were debrief ed and thanked f or their participation.
Analysis of behavioral data
For each experimental group, the ratings obtained during the Empathy Task were entered into
a 2 x 2 x 4 repeated measures ANOVA with f actors Target Person (C or C ,
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
C ), Stimulation Type (P , N -P ), and Rating Scale (U O ,
ONTROL AINFUL ON AINFUL NPLEASANTNESS THER
U S , E C , P D ). If applicable, post-hoc paired t tests
NPLEASANTNESS ELF MPATHIC ONCERN ERSONAL ISTRESS
were applied to assess specif ic ef f ects in more detail. The explicit af f iliation and interpersonal
closeness ratings of the Target Persons were entered into a 2 x 5 repeated measures ANOVA
with f actors Target Person (C or C , C ) and Scale (L ,
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL IKABILITY
C , S , C , F ); specif ic eff ects were assessed with
ONNECTEDNESS IMILARITY OOPERATIVENESS AMILIARITY
paired t tests. To assess the signif icance of any observed dif f erential ef f ects between
experimental groups, dif ference scores ( C /C > C ) of the participants
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
in each group were entered into one-sided two-sample t-tests. Furthermore, we calculated
dif f erence scores f or the empathy and af f iliative ratings, by subtracting the values f or the
C Target Person from those of the C or C Target Person. The size of
ONTROL ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
these dif f erence scores was used as a measure of the extent to which the imitating person was
f avored over the control person, which we used in correlation analyses. Correlation analyses
were perf ormed using Spearman's rank correlation coef f icient (r ) due to the ordinal scaling of
the data.
For the Prosocial Task we obtained f or each participant the actor
(C /C or C ) that was assigned the lowest number of painf ul shocks. For
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
each group, we entered these values into a chi-square goodness-of-f it test to determine whether
there was a pref erence f or one actor over the other across participants. We then applied a
f urther chi-square test to f ormally test whether the observed proportions dif f ered between the
two experimental groups.
Alpha level was set to .05 f or all analyses of behavioral data. Greenhouse-Geisser
corrections were applied to ANOVA p- values if the assumption of homogeneity of covariances
was violated (as determined by Mauchly tests of sphericity). If multiple tests were used to test
the same hypothesis in the same data, p-values were Bonf erroni-corrected to correct f or multiple
comparisons.
Psychophysiological recording and analysis
Skin conductance response (SCR)
For recording of SCR during the Empathy Task, two Ag/AgCl Easy Cap skin conductance
electrodes were applied to the middle phalanx of the index and ring f inger of participants’
non-dominant hand. Bef ore application participants cleansed their hands with water and soap.
Data were sampled with 2048 Hz and stored on hard drive.
Data were analyzed using Ledalab (Benedek and Kaernbach, 2010). The raw data
were downsampled to 128 Hz bef ore Continuous Decomposition Analysis (CDA) was applied.
CDA allows decomposition of SC data into continuous signals of phasic and tonic activity by
modeling signal characteristics of the sudomotor response. While the tonic component represents
the basic SC level, the phasic component represent event-related SC responses, with higher levels
corresponding to higher sympathetic arousal. Data in a time window of 2-5 s af ter onset of the
anticipation cue were used f or CDA. This resulted in a series of SCR values based on the integral
of the phasic driver over the response window. Given the log-normal distribution of the data,
date were log10 transf ormed to correct f or skewed data distribution; zero values were
accounted f or by adding a small constant (a random value between 1 and 10% of the smallest
non-zero value) to all zero data points.
For each experimental group, the resulting values were entered into a 3 x 2 repeated-
measures ANOVA with f actors Target Person (S , C /C , C ) and
ELF ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
Stimulation Type (P , N -P ). Post-hoc paired t tests were applied to assess single
AINFUL ON AINFUL
ef f ects in more detail. More precisely, since we were specif ically interested in the ef f ects of
congruency and contingency on empathy f or pain, we compared, f or each experimental group,
responses to painf ul stimulation of the C or C actor and the C actor.
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
To assess the significance of any observed diff erential eff ects between experimental groups,
dif f erence scores (C /C > C ) of the participants in each group were
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
entered into a one-sided two-sample t-test.
Corrugator supercilii muscle activity
For f acial EMG recordings two Ag/AgCl electrodes (4mm surf ace) were applied over the M.
corrugator supercilii region of the lef t side of the f ace in a bipolar f ashion (Fridlund and
Cacioppo, 1986). An electrode on the right mastoid served as ground. Bef ore application skin
was rubbed with abrasive gel (Nu-Prep) and cleansed with alcohol to reduce impedances below
5 kOhm. EMG data were sampled with 2048 Hz and saved to hard disk.
Bef ore analysis EMG data were f iltered with a 20 Hz low pass f ilter to reduce blink
artef acts (van Boxtel, 2001), a 500 Hz high pass f ilter, and a 50- Hz notch f ilter to reduce
powerline artif acts. Visual inspection of the data showed that the pain stimulation caused
technical artif acts in the f acial EMG data. Thus, trials in which the participants received pain
stimulation themselves were omitted f rom the analyses. The remaining data were f ull wave
rectif ied, smoothed with a 125 ms moving average f ilter, and transf ormed into z-scores within
participants (Bush et al., 1993; Winkielman and Cacioppo, 2001). Changes of EMG activations
were calculated separately f or each trial, by using a 50-ms baseline before the critical time
interval, and then averaging the data over seven consecutive 500- ms time bins (f rom trial onset,
i.e. onset of the stimulation anticipation cue, to 500 ms af ter stimulation of f set). All processing
steps were carried out with Matlab 8.1 (MathWorks, Inc, USA) and EEGLab Toolbox (Delorme
and Makeig, 2004).
For each participant, EMG data per condition were averaged across trials to obtain a
single value f or each condition. These values were then subjected to a 2 × 2 × 7 repeated
measures ANOVA with within-subjects f actors Target Person (C or C ,
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT
C ), Stimulation Type (P , N -P ) and time interval (1-7). If applicable, post-
ONTROL AINFUL ON AINFUL
hoc paired t tests were applied to assess specific ef f ects in more detail. In case of observed
dif f erential ef f ects between experimental groups, signif icance was tested by entering the
dif f erence scores (C /C > C ) of the participants in each group into a
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
one-sided two-sample t-test.
Startle blink magnitude
Electrodes for the startle response (two Ag/AgCl electrodes, 4 mm surf ace) were attached over
the lower orbital portion of the M. orbicularis oculi (Blumenthal et al., 2005). Startle responses
were sampled with 2048 Hz and f iltered of f line with a 20Hz high pass f ilter.
Trial-by-trial peak amplitudes were extracted f rom a 200-ms time window (121-320
ms af ter startle tone onset). A ref erence window of 20 ms (0-20 ms f rom startle tone onset) was
used as a baseline. Peaks were def ined as values with amplitudes exceeding three standard
deviations f rom mean baseline value and occurring no later than 95 ms af ter onset. Mean
baseline value was then extracted f rom the peak amplitude to obtain baseline-corrected peak
values. Trials without a startle response were omitted f rom analysis. Non-responders, def ined
as participants with less than three startle responses per condition, were excluded f rom the
sample. For each participant, the trial-by-trial values were outlier-corrected by winsorizing, i.e.
by replacing values larger than the upper quartile plus 1.5 times the interquartile range, or
smaller than the lower quartile minus 1.5 times the interquartile range, by the largest or smallest
remaining values. Values were then T-transf ormed to each participant’s mean to account f or the
notoriously large individual dif f erences in absolute blink magnitude and variance (Blumenthal et
al., 2005).
For each participant the mean response amplitude per condition was calculated. The
resulting values were then, separately f or each experimental group, entered into a 2 x 2
repeated measures ANOVA with f actors Target Person (C /C , C ) and
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
Stimulation Type (P , N -P ). If applicable, post-hoc paired t tests were applied to
AINFUL ON AINFUL
assess specif ic ef f ects in more detail. In case of observed dif f erential ef f ects between
experimental groups, signif icance was tested by entering the dif f erence scores
(C /C > C ) of the participants in each group into a one-sided two-
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
sample t-test.
RESULTS
Empathy Task
Empathy ratings
To test f or ef f ects of our imitation manipulation on empathy ratings, empathy ratings f or both
groups were entered into a 2 x 2 x 4 repeated measures ANOVA with f actors Target Person
(C /C , C ), Stimulation Type (P , N -P ), and Rating Scale
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL AINFUL ON AINFUL
(U O , U S , E C , P D ). For
NPLEASANTNESS THER NPLEASANTNESS ELF MPATHIC ONCERN ERSONAL ISTRESS
experimental group 1 (C versus C ) we f ound, as can be expected, a main ef f ect
ONGRUENT ONTROL
of Stimulation Type (F(1,31) = 48.1; p <.001; η ² = .61), with higher ratings on painf ul than
non-painful trials (M = 2.42; M = 1.56) and a main ef f ect of Rating Scale (F(1,31)
P N -P
AINFUL ON AINFUL
= 6.41; p =.001; η ² = .17), but no main ef f ect of Target Person (p = .17). We f urthermore
f ound a Stimulation Type x Rating Scale interaction (F(1,13) = 23.6; p < .001; η ² = .51) but
no other signif icant interactions (all p ≥ .26). Since f or each target person the ratings f or painf ul
trials on the dif f erent scales were highly correlated (all r between .70 and .95; all p < .001),
we subsequently combined the ratings f or painf ul trials into one pain measure. From this we
calculated, f or each participant, a dif f erence value (C > C ) in empathy f or pain
ONGRUENT ONTROL
ratings and used this f or post-hoc correlation analyses.
For experimental group 2 (C versus C ) we observed a main ef f ect of
ONTINGENT ONTROL
Stimulation Type (F(1,31) = 78.6; p < .001; η ² = .72) and Rating Scale (F(1,31) = 6.55; p <
.001; η ² = .17), but no main ef f ect of Target Person (p = .99); we f urthermore observed a
Stimulation Type x Rating Scale interaction (F(2,31) = 26.4; p < .001; η ² = .46) but no other
signif icant interactions (all p ≥ .20).
Psychophysiological measures
Skin conductance response
For each experimental group skin conductance data were entered into a 3 x 2 repeated-
measures ANOVA with f actors Target Person (S , C /C , C ) and
ELF ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
Stimulation Type (P , N -P ). For experimental group 1 (C versus C )
AINFUL ON AINFUL ONGRUENT ONTROL
we f ound a main ef f ect of Stimulation Type (F(1,28) = 6.00; p = .021; η ² = .018), with higher
SCR values for painf ul (M = 4.73) than non-painf ul (M = 4.46) trials. This conf irmed that skin
conductance response was sensitive to the aversiveness of the stimulation, with painf ul trials
eliciting a stronger response. We also f ound a main ef f ect of Target Person (F(2,28) = 40.4; p
< .001; η ² = .59) and a trend Stimulation Type x Target Person interaction (F(2,31) = 2.73; p
= .074; η ² = .09). Post-hoc testing showed that overall, SCR was highest to S ELF stimulation trials
(M = 5.29), which significantly dif f ered f rom SCR during stimulation of the C (M =
ONGRUENT
4.39; F(1,28) = 61.8; p < .001; η ² = .69) and the C ONTROL person (M = 4.11; F(1,28) =
61.9; p < .001; η ² = .69); this is in line with the presumption that self -related stimulation evokes
the strongest autonomic arousal. Finally, a planned pairwise comparison between painf ul trials
involving the C and C person showed that SCR to painf ul stimulation was higher
ONGRUENT ONTROL
f or the C (M = 4.52) than the C (M = 4.11) target person (t(28) = 2.33; p =
ONGRUENT ONTROL
.028; d = 0.43). Results are shown in Fig. 5 A.
Fig. 5. Skin conductance response (SCR) during painful and non-painful electrodermal stimulation
(experiment 2). Log-transformed average phasic activity in μS in a time window of 2-5 seconds after
onset of the anticipation cue. SCR in trials in which participant received stimulation themselves are shown
on the left for reference. (A) Group 1: SCR in response to painful stimulation of the C actor
ONGRUENT
was significantly higher than during painful stimulation of the C actor. (B) Group 2: SCR in
ONTROL
response to painful stimulation of the C actor did not differ from response during painful
ONTINGENT
stimulation of the C actor.
ONTROL
For experimental group 2 (C versus C ) we also f ound main ef f ects of
ONTINGENT ONTROL
Stimulation Type (F(1,27) = 15.0; p = .001; η ² = .36) and of Target Person (F(2,27) = 22.1;
p < .001; η ² = .45), but no interaction ef f ect (p = .191). In this group too, painf ul stimulation
trials evoked a stronger SCR (M = 4.96; M = 4.67), and overall, S trials elicited
ELF
P N -P
AINFUL ON AINFUL
a stronger SCR (M = 5.12) than C ONTINGENT (M = 4.65; F(1,27) = 42.2; p < .001; η ² = .61)
or C ONTROL trials (M = 4.67; F(1,27) = 19.5; p < .001; η ² = .42), conf irming that our
manipulation was ef f ective. A planned paired t test to test f or dif f erences in SCR during painf ul
trials involving the C versus C person, did not yield an ef f ect (p = .41) – see
ONTINGENT ONTROL
Fig. 5B.. Thus, painf ul trials involving the C person did not evoke stronger SCR than
ONTINGENT
those involving the C person.
ONTROL
We then f ormally tested whether the ef f ect in experimental group 1 was indeed stronger
than in experimental group 2, by entering the dif f erence values per participant (C >
ONGRUENT
C and C > C ) between the groups into a one -sided two-sample t test.
ONTROL ONTINGENT ONTROL
This conf irmed that painf ul stimulation of the C actor evoked a stronger SCR than
ONGRUENT
painf ul stimulation of the C actor, with respect to a non-imitating actor (t(55)
ONTINGENT CONTROL
= 1.92; p (one-sided) = .030; d = 0.51).
Corrugator supercilii muscle activity
For both groups, individual EMG corrugator supercilii muscle activity values were entered into a
2 × 2 × 7 repeated measures ANOVA with within-subjects f actors Target Person
(C /C , C ), Stimulation Type (P , N -P ) and Time Interval
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL AINFUL ON AINFUL
(1-7). For experimental group 1 (C versus C ) we f ound a main ef f ect of Time
ONGRUENT ONTROL
Interval (F(6,26) = 2.87; p = .049; η ² = .40), but no main ef f ects of Stimulation Type or Target
Person (all p ≥ .128), nor any interaction ef f ects between these f actors (all p ≥ .32). For
experimental group 2 (C versus C ) we also f ound a main ef f ect of Time Interval
ONTINGENT ONTROL
(F(6,24) = 3.24; p = .022; η ² = .61), but no main ef f ects of Stimulation Type or Target Person
(all p ≥ .22). We also did not f ind any interaction ef f ects in this group (all p > .21). Thus, f or
both groups, our imitation manipulation did not have an ef f ect on corrugator activity during trials
in which the two actors received electrodermal stimulation.
Startle blink magnitude
Startle blink magnitude values were entered, f or each group, into a 2 x 2 repeated measures
ANOVA with f actors Target Person (C /C , C ) and Stimulation Type
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL
(P , N -P ). For group 1 (C versus C ) we did not f ind any main
AINFUL ON AINFUL ONGRUENT ONTROL
ef f ects or interaction ef fects (all p ≥ .794). Applying the same analysis to group 2 (C
ONTINGENT
versus C ) did not yield any main ef f ects or interaction eff ects either (all p ≥ .102). Taken
ONTROL
together, we did not f ind any ef f ects of our imitation manipulation on startle blink magnitude
during electrodermal stimulation of the two actors.
Preference in prosocial behavior
In experimental group 1 (C versus C ) the C actor was f avored in the
ONGRUENT ONTROL ONGRUENT
prosocial decision measure by signif icantly more participants (72%) than the C actor
ONTROL
(χ²(1,N=32) = 6.13; p = .013; φ = .44; see Fig. 3C). We did not f ind such a dif f erence group
2 (C versus C ), where 53% of participants f avored the C actor over
ONTINGENT ONTROL ONTINGENT
the C
ONTROL
actor (χ²(1,N=32) = 0.13; p = .73; see Fig. 3D). Although we thus f ound an ef f ect
in group 1 and no ef f ect in group 2, f ormal testing did not reveal a signif icant dif f erence in
pref erence between experimental groups (χ²(1,N=64) = 2.40; p = .12). However, when we
combined the samples f rom both studies we did f ind a signif icant group dif f erence in pref erence,
with the experimental groups in the C versus C manipulation showing a stronger
ONGRUENT ONTROL
pref erence for the imitating actor than the C versus C groups, although the
ONTINGENT ONTROL
ef f ect size was modest ( χ²(1,N=126) = 4.38; p = .036; φ = .18).
As in Study 1, we then explored whether this pref erence f or the C actor in
ONGRUENT
group 1 was conf ined to participants who decided prosocially, rather than egoistically. Like in
study 1, sample splitting revealed that prosocially deciding participants f avored the C
ONGRUENT
actor more of ten (75%) than the C
ONTROL
actor (χ²(1,N=20) = 5.00; p = .025; φ = .50), but
that egoistic deciders did not f avor the C actor more of ten (67%) than the C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
actor (χ²(1,N=12) = 1.33; p = .25), suggesting that a pref erence f or the C
ONGRUENT
actor
manif ests itself only in truly prosocial behavior, not in egoistic decisions. Yet, when directly tested,
the dif f erence in pref erence between prosocially versus egoistically deciding participants was
not signif icant (χ²(1,N=32) = 0.26; p = .61), also not when data f rom group 1 f rom both
experiments were pooled ( χ²(1,N=61) = 2.24; p = .13).
Affiliation ratings
We tested for effects of our imitation manipulation on affiliation ratings using a 2 x 5 repeated measures
ANOVA with factors Target Person (C or C , C ) and Rating Scale (L ,
ONGRUENT ONTINGENT ONTROL IKABILITY
C , S , C , F ). For experimental group 1 (C versus
ONNECTEDNESS IMILARITY OOPERATIVENESS AMILIARITY ONGRUENT
C ONTROL ) this revealed main effects of Rating Scale (F(1,31) = 14.6; p < .001; η ² = .32 ) and Target
Person (F(1,31) = 5.43; p = .026; η ² = .15) with the congruently moving target person receiving higher
ratings (M = 2.70; SD = 0.89) than the control person (M = 2.41; SD = 0.72). We also observed a trend
Target Person x Rating Scale interaction, but with a small effect size (F(2,31) = 2.26; p = .081; η ² =
.07). Post-hoc paired t Tests comparing ratings for the C versus C target person on
ONGRUENT ONTROL
individual scales showed that participants felt more connected with the C than with the C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
person (M = 2.63; M = 2.03; t(31) = 2.70; p = .011; d = 0.48); see Fig. 6A. Although the
C C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
C target person was also rated as marginally more likable (M = 3.26; M
ONGRUENT
C C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
= 2.92; t(31) = 2.14; p = .040; d = 0.38) and more f amiliar (M = 2.26; M =
C C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
1.94; t(31) = 2.19; p = .036; d = 0.39) than the C person, the p-values of these
ONTROL
Fig. 6. Affiliation ratings for the congruent and control actor in experiment 2. Ratings of how likable,
cooperative, familiar and similar participants found each actor, and how connected they felt to him/her. (A)
Experimental group 1: participants felt more connected with the C actor than with the C
ONGRUENT ONTROL
actor. Ratings of likability and familiarity showed a marginal difference that did not reach Bonferroni-
corrected significance level. (B) Experimental group 2: there were no differences between ratings of the
C and the C actor.
ONTINGENT ONTROL
comparison did not withstand Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, and hence are not interpreted.
We did not find differential effects on ratings of S and C (all p ≥ .401).
IMILARITY OOPERATIVENESS
In experimental group 2 (C versus C ) we f ound a main ef f ect of Rating
ONTINGENT ONTROL
Scale (F(1,31) = 13.0; p < .001; η ² = .65) but no main ef f ect of Target Person (F(1,31) = 0.19;
p = .66) nor an interaction between these f actors (p =.79), see Fig. 6B. Formal testing f or a
dif f erential ef f ect between experimental groups in C ratings of the target persons,
ONNECTEDNESS
by entering the dif f erence value (C vs. C and C vs. C ,
ONGRUENT ONTROL ONTINGENT ONTROL
respectively) on this measure into a post-hoc one-sided two-sample t test, conf irmed a signif icant
group dif f erence f or this measure (t(62) = 1.88; p (one-sided) = 0.032; d = 0.47.
Correlations and predictive analyses
To more closely examine potential links between the imitation manipulation in experimental
group 1 (C versus C ) and the observed behavioral and physiological responses
ONGRUENT ONTROL
during the Empathy and Prosocial Pref erence tasks, we perf ormed several post-hoc analyses.
First, although ratings during the Empathy Task did not show a signif icant ef f ect of imitation
across participants, we explored whether within participants, the extent of dif ferentiating
between the target persons in ratings of likability, f amiliarity and connectedness predicted
dif f erentiating in empathy ratings. Theref ore , we calculated dif f erence scores (i.e., C
ONGRUENT
> C ) f or each participant, and perf ormed a number of correlation analyses. This revealed
ONTROL
that dif f erentiating in empathy between the C and C target person (all ratings
ONGRUENT ONTROL
f or painf ul stimulation trials collapsed) correlated positively with dif f erentiating in f amiliarity (r
= .36 p = .042), likability (r = .38; p = .030) and connectedness (r =.43; p = .014) ratings,
s s
suggesting that ef f ects of C on af f iliative ratings predicted the extent of
ONGRUENCY
dif f erentiation in self -reported empathy. We also assessed whether dif f erentiating between the
C and C target person in af f iliative ratings correlated with the extent of SCR
ONGRUENT ONTROL
modulation during painf ul stimulation trials of these target persons. We f ound that
dif f erentiating in f amiliarity ratings (C > C ) correlated with dif f erentiating
ONGRUENT ONTROL
(C > C ) between these persons in SCR during the Empathy Task (r = .41; p =
ONGRUENT ONTROL
.029), but dif f erentiating in likability and connectedness ratings did not (all p ≥ .17). Thus, both
dif f erentiating in subjectively experienced empathy and in autonomic arousal (SCR) were
correlated with dif f erences in self -reported af f iliation.
We also assessed whether participants’ pref erence in prosocial behavior was predicted by
dif f erential values on empathy and af f iliative measures. More specif ically, we perf ormed a
binary logistic regression to assess the ef f ects of dif f erential (i.e., C > C )
ONGRUENT ONTROL
responses in SCR, empathy f or pain ratings, and likability , f amiliarity and connectedness ratings
on the likelihood that participants f avored the C person in prosocial behavior. The
ONGRUENT
model explained 41.6% (Nagelkerke R2) of the variance in choosing the congruent person and
correctly classified 82.8% of cases. A higher dif ference in SCR to the C as compared
ONGRUENT
with the C actor in pain was associated with an increased likelihood of f avoring the
ONTROL
C person in prosocial behavior (odds ratio 9.43 , p = .021, Wald Chi square = 5.33).
ONGRUENT
The other f actors were not predictive of this pref erence (all p ≥ .101). Thus, the size of the
dif f erence in skin conductance response when watching the C versus the C actor
ONGRUENT ONTROL
in pain predicted which target person was pref erred in prosocial behavior later on.
DISCUSSION
In Experiment 2 we assessed the ef f ect of bodily congruent versus temporally contingent
imitation on behavioral and physiological responses during subsequent empathy f or pain, on
pref erence in prosocial behavior involving the distribution of painf ul shocks between the
participant and the imitating and non-imitating co-actors self -af filiation measures, and on
ratings of af f iliation. We tested two groups of participants: in group 1, a bodily congruent
imitating and a non-imitating control actor were contrasted, while in group 2 an actor who made
temporally contingent (but not spatially congruent) movements was contrasted with a non-
imitating control actor.
Bodily congruent imitation, as assessed in group 1, did not enhance self -reported
empathy with the imitator, but did increase skin conductance response during observation of
painf ul stimulation involving this person, indicating that it did af f ect vicariously induced
autonomic arousal. Corrugator muscle activity and startle blink magnitude recorded during the
empathy task were not af f ected by our manipulation, though. Furthermore, consistent with the
f indings from experiment 1, the congruently imitating target person was f avored over the control
person in later decisions involving the distribution of f urther painf ul shocks. This pref erence f or
the congruent actor seemed to be restricted to participants making prosocial decisions (i.e.,
taking over shocks from others), and was not observe d in participants deciding egoistically (i.e.,
passing on their own shocks to others), but f ormal testing of this ef f ect did not conf irm a signif icant
dif f erence in pref erence between egoistically and prosocially deciding participants. Bodily
congruent imitation was f urthermore associated with an increase in ratings of connectedness with
this actor, with respect to the non-imitating control actor.
Although we did not f ind a signif icant ef f ect of congruent movement on explicit empathy
ratings across participants, more f ine-grained correlation analyses showed that the extent to
which participants f rom group 1 dif f erentiated between the actors in af f iliation (likability,
f amiliarity and f eelings of connectedness) predicted the extent to which they dif f erentiated in
empathy ratings. Thus, the stronger a pref erence in af f iliation participants showed f or the
congruent actor, the higher was their self -reported empathy f or pain f or this person, with respect
to the control person. Furthermore, how f amiliar the congruent person seemed to them, as
compared to the control actor, was correlated with the size of their SCR increase during painf ul
stimulation of the congruent person, with respect to the control person. This SCR increase in
response to the congruent actor’s, versus the control actor’s, pain also predicted whether this
actor would later on be f avored in the decision how to distribute the painf ul shocks. Thus,
elaborating on the main ef f ects of the congruency condition, additional positive associations
between tasks suggest ed that ef f ects of congruency on explicitly reported af f iliation were
mirrored in self -reported and physiological indices of empathy, and that this physiological
measure of dif f erential vicarious arousal was predictive of participants’ bias f or the congruent
actor in helping behavior.
We did not f ind any ef f ects of imitation on af f iliation, empathy or pref erence in
prosocial behavior if the imitating actor perf ormed merely temporally contingent movements, as
assessed in experimental group 2. Post-hoc directional comparisons conf irmed that the ef f ects
of imitation on empathy-related SCR and connectedness in the congruent group were
signif icantly higher than the equivalent ef f ects in the contingent group. Despite the presence of
a prosocial pref erence for the imitating actor in the congruent group, and an absence of such a
pref erence in the contingent group, we could not conf irm a group dif f erence in pref erence f or
study 2; yet, pooling together results f rom study 1 and 2 did result in such a dif f erential ef f ect,
suggesting that across our studies, there seems to be a reliable ef f ect of congruency, not
contingency, on prosocial pref erence.
Thus, the f indings of experiment 2 indicate that bodily congruency, not mere temporal
contingency, seems to drive the ef f ects of imitation on af f iliation, empathy f or pain and, to some
extent, prosocial behavior. They f urthermore show that these ef f ects can be targeted to one
specif ic interaction partner, rather than ref lecting purely generalized ef f ects on socio-af f iliative
attitudes and behavior. The broader theoretical implications of these f indings and the f indings
of experiment 1 will be discussed in more detail in the general discussion.
General discussion
In the present study we perf ormed two experiments to test the ef f ects of bodily congruent versus
temporally contingent imitation on empathy and bias in prosocial behavior. In both studies, we
manipulated imitation using a joystick task in which participants were instructed to make
spontaneous decisions about whether and how to move a joystick, while they presumably
interacted over a webcam connection with two other participants perf orming the same task. We
included two participant groups in each experiment: in one group (C versus C ),
ONGRUENT ONTROL
one of the actors copied the participant’s movements in a “f ully” imitative manner that was not
only temporally contingent, but also bodily congruent, in contrast to a control actor who made
random movement decisions; in the other group (C versus C ), the movements of
ONTINGENT ONTROL
the imitating actor were temporally contingent, but not spatially congruent, with those of the
participant.
In experiment 1, empathic responses were assessed with a gambling task in which
participants reported their vicarious af f ect for the other participants’ gains and losses.
Pref erence in prosocial behavior was assessed by probing which of the target persons was
f avored in a decision about redistributing the earnings obtained. We also included a social
inf luence paradigm in this experiment. In experiment 2, we used an empathy f or pain paradigm
to assess behavioral and psychophysiological indices of empathic responding. We assessed bias
in prosocial behavior by probing how participants chose to distribute a series of painful shocks
between themselves and the target persons. Participants’ af filiation f or the two target persons
was assessed using self-reports.
Effects of congruent and contingent imitation on affiliation and social influence
Participants in experiment 2 indicated that they f elt more connected to the person who had
imitated them in a bodily congruent way more, as compared to the non-imitating control person.
This is in line with previous evidence on the ef f ects of being imitated on af f iliation and f eelings
of social connection (see Van Baaren et al., 2009) and indicates that our imitation manipulation
was ef f ective in evoking the expected positive socio-aff ective ef f ects. Participants whose
movements had been copied in a merely temporally contingent manner did not report increased
f eelings of af f iliation towards their imitator, as compared to the control actor. Thus, bodily
congruency seemed to be required over and above temporal contingency to increase aff iliation.
In addition, participants in experiment 1 who had been imitated in a bodily congruent
way adapted their responses in a number estimation task to a standard set by the imitator ,
indicating that they were sensitive to social inf luence by this actor. The contingent actor did not
elicit such a conf ormity eff ect. This suggests that bodily congruent, but not temporally contingent,
imitation increased participants’ social identif ication with the imitator to the extent that it induced
a motivation to align themselves also to cognitive judgments by this specif ic actor (de Cremer,
2004).
Effects of congruent and contingent imitation on preference in prosocial behavior
Participants who had been imitated by the congruent actor showed a clear bias in their prosocial
decisions, f avoring the congruent over the control actor. Participants who had been imitated in
a merely temporally contingent way did not show a bias towards the imitating actor. We f ound
this ef f ect in both experiments, and although prosocial preference did not signif icantly dif f er
between the groups in the single studies, we could conf irm a signif icant group dif f erence in
pref erence when data f rom experiments were combined, suggesting a genuine ef fect. Thus,
being imitated by one specif ic interaction partner seems to induce a behavioral bias in which
the imitator is treated more f avorably than other interaction partners.
Explorative analyses f urthermore revealed that in both experiments the ef f ect seemed to be
restricted to participants who decided prosocially (i.e. sharing their earnings with others or taking
over painf ul shocks f rom them) rather than egoistically (i.e. taking away earning from others or
passing on shocks to them). This suggests that being imitated might only induce f avoring of the
imitator in participants with an inclination towards prosocial behavior, that is, who are already
tuned to others’ wellbeing to a higher extent. This interpretation is speculative though, and the
dif f erence in pref erence between individuals deciding prosocially versus egoistically was not
signif icant when f ormally tested. Theref ore, future studies with larger samples sizes and a more
sensitive measure of prosocial bias should conf irm this observation.
Effects of congruent and contingent imitation on empathy
In both experiments, we did not f ind any ef f ects of bodily congruency or temporal contingency
on empathy ratings. Thus, participants did not show any increases in self -reported empathy
towards the imitating actor. However, correlation analyses showed that in experiment 2,
individual af f iliation bias towards the congruent person (i.e., the size of the dif f erence in
connectedness, likability and f amiliarity ratings of the congruent versus the control actor)
predicted dif f erential scores in empathy ratings, suggesting some sensitivity of the empathy
ratings to the congruency manipulation.
Being imitated in a bodily congruent way did af f ect skin conductance response (SCR), as
shown in experiment 2: SCR in response to the congruent imitator’s pain was higher than in
response to a control actor’s pain. This eff ect was not observed f or the contingent imitator.
Manipulation checks showed that SCR was higher f or painf ul stimulation in all actors and was
highest f or self -related stimulation, conf irming that this measure was sensitive to the arousing
characteristics of pain processing in self and others. We did not observe any ef f ects of our
imitation manipulation on startle blink magnitude or corrugator supercilii muscle activity, though.
Our f indings thus show that bodily congruent imitation af f ects physiological indices of empathic
arousal (SCR) but has no ef f ect on valence measures (startle blink, corrugator activity), nor on
consciously accessible empathic responses.
Our study is in line with f indings by De Coster et al. ( 2013), who showed that
physiological indices of empathy f or pain can be modulated by imitation . Yet, our f indings
extend these results in several crucial ways. First, we show that imitation also has these ef f ects
in settings where they cannot be explained by “rubber hand illusion” ef f ects in which the
perceived body part in pain might be conf used with one’s own. Second, we demonstrate that
these eff ects can also be evoked in a more naturalistic, interactive imitation setting involving
agents displaying voluntary behavior, rather than computer-animated body parts. And third,
our results suggest that these eff ects can also be evoked in top -down rather than bottom-up
instances of empathy, in which the empathic response is not evoked by emotion contagion (e.g.
f acial expressions) or visual displays of physical harm, but rather is triggered by abstract cues
(the lightning symbol) and theref ore presumably arises predominantly f rom internally generated
representations of the other’s aff ective state.
Although we observed clear ef f ects of our manipulation on physiological measures of
empathic response, we did not f ind ef f ects on ratings of subjectively experienced empathy in
the same experiment. This might be due to the f act that explicit ratings are prone to inequity
aversion tendencies: participants might have been reluctant to overtly indicate that they
experienced more empathy f or one presumed other participant than f or another. Alternatively,
participants’ higher vicarious arousal when the congruent actor rather than the control actor was
in pain might not have been consciously accessible to them. Yet, despite not being f ound as a
main ef f ect, empathy ratings did show sensitivity to the imitation manipulation, as was revealed
by more f ine-grained analyses showing positive correlations between empathy and af f iliation
ratings within individual participants.
The f act that we did not observe any ef f ects on psychophysiological valence measures
(corrugator EMG activity and startle blink magnitude) is somewhat inconsistent with f indings by
others. For instance, De Coster et al. (2013) f ound ef f ects of imitation on startle blink amplitude
during pain perception, and in a study by Caes et al. ( 2012) anticipating pain in others
augmented both corrugator activity and startle blink response. This discrepancy might be due
to dif f erences in the paradigms used. That is, in De Coster et al.’s paradigm , participants were
presented with highly aversive video clips f rom a hand in egocentric position being injured, which
likely evoked self -related aversive responses in a bottom-up f ashion. Caes et al. used a
paradigm in which the f ace of the person in pain was visible, suggesting that also here empathic
responses were mainly rooted in bottom-up emotional contagion processes. This is dif f erent f rom
the abstract cues used to indicate pain in our empathy task. Thus, psychophysiological valence
measures might be relatively insensitive to variations in top-down-generated empathic
responses, as elicited in our experiment.
Predictive links between affiliation, empathic arousal and prosocial behavior
Several additional analyses revealed that physiological and socio-af f ective ef f ects evoked by
bodily congruent imitation were interrelated. First, the stronger individual participants’ SCR to
painf ul stimulation of the congruent, as compared to the control person, was, the more f amiliar
the congruent person f elt to them, with respect to the control person. Thus, ef f ects on vicarious
arousal were mirrored in subjectively experienced af f iliative ef f ects. Second, the increase in
SCR during painf ul stimulation of the congruent person, with respect to the control person,
predicted whether the congruent rather than the control person was f avored in later prosocial
behavior. This is an important f inding, as it suggests that the prosocial ef f ects of imitation might
indeed be rooted in a process of bodily tuning in with the interaction partner, which manif ests
itself also on a basic physiological level. Thus, our data f it with the notion that imitation-induced
modulations of the tendency to prevent a person f rom being harmed are shaped by stronger
vicarious responses to this person’s pain earlier on – in other words, that ef f ects of imitation on
prosocial behavior are at least partly driven by increases in empathy rather than by, f or
instance, positive af f ect (Hein et al., 2010). This interpretation is tentative though, and needs to
be conf irmed more comprehensively in f uture studies.
Implications of our findings for current views on the links between mimicry and socio-
affective processing
The f indings f rom this study provide several new insights into the mechanisms underlying the
positive socio-af f ective ef f ects of imitative behaviors. First, they seem to suggest that imitation
does not only enhance general prosocial orientation, as has been shown by previous f indings,
but can also evoke prosocial behavior directed to one specif ic interaction partner (the imitator),
rather than another. This prosocial bias is mirrored in similarly selective enhancements in
empathic arousal f or the imitator, and in a tendency to conf orm to behavioral standards set by
the imitator. These results suggest that imitation, besides causing a shif t towards a more
interdependent self -construal (Ashton-James et al., 2007; Brewer and Gardner, 1996), may
also selectively shape one’s social attitude towards a specific interaction partner, possibly by
way of increasing one’s sense of overlap with this person. As such, our f indings add to the
literature on the f unction of behavioral mimicry as “social glue” (Lakin et al., 2003) by indicating
that it may also trigger or reinf orce tendencies towards selective conf ormity, parochial empathy
and f avoritism in prosocial behavior.
Crucially, our study also indicates that spatial congruency of individuals’ movements is
necessary f or the socio-af f ective eff ects of imitation, and that mere temporal contingency is not
suff icient. This provides support f or the view that the ef f ects are rooted in basic motor resonance
processes, rather than in the rewarding properties of experiencing ef f ectance by causing
predictable outcomes (Dewey and Knoblich, 2014; Meltzof f , 1990; Waytz et al., 2010; White,
1959). In this respect, our results seem at odds with f indings by Catmur et al. (2013) which
showed that temporal contingency (stimuli of non-congruent body parts reliably moving with
participants’ movements) has positive socio-af f ective ef f ects, but bodily congruency (similar
body parts which move only occasionally) has not. This inconsistency might be due to the highly
dif f erent set-ups of the studies. For instance, the non-contingent conditions in the study by Catmur
et al. contained many trials with no movement at all, which might have made this condition less
engaging overall. In our design, the overall amount of movement was kept roughly constant
across imitative and control conditions, which we think is crucial f or overcoming such conf ounds.
Furthermore, our paradigm used video clips of agents who seemed to deliberately plan their
movements in real time, rather than animated body part stimuli. Our paradigm theref ore likely
tapped more strongly into the socio-active processes occurring in natural interactions. However,
more research is needed to clarif y these inconsistent f indings. Our results are more consistent
with studies which showed that children pref er a congruently moving agent over one who merely
moves in a temporally contingent way (Agnetta and Rochat, 2004; Meltzof f , 2007), and thus,
that congruency has stronger ef f ects than mere contingency. Our results also signif icantly extend
these f indings though, by showing that only congruency, and not temporal contingency, has
measurable ef f ects over and above a control condition with an unrelated movement pattern.
Overall, our f indings indicate that bodily congruency seems to be a crucial f actor in shaping the
positive eff ects of mimicry, and thus provide some support f or self -other overlap accounts of
mimicry (Ashton-James et al., 2007; Georgief f and Jeannerod, 1998).
Interpretational issues and limitations
Although our f indings point to a crucial role of movement congruency in driving the ef f ects of
imitation, there are some considerations with respect to the validity of our imitation induction
paradigm and the interpretation of its ef f ects that should be addressed. First, it should be noted
that our imitation induction paradigm was not designed to independently manipulate spatial
congruency and temporal contingency. Rather, we used an additive design in which we assessed
whether temporally contingent behavior alone can evoke prosocial ef f ects, or whether imitative
behavior additionally has to be spatially congruent to evoke such ef f ects – compared with a
control condition where both bodily congruency and temporal contingency are at chance level.
This approach dif f ers from previous approaches, f or instance, studies comparing mimicry with
anti-mimicry conditions (e.g. De Coster et al., 2013; Hogeveen et al., 2014), and allowed us to
assess not just whether f ull imitation may have stronger prosocial ef f ects than temporally
contingent movements, but also to examine to what extent temporal contingent behavior in itself
may also have such eff ects. It should be noted, however, that our f indings do not allow strong
conclusions about the potential role of spatial congruency in the absence of close temporal
contingency. Future research may tackle the question of how strictly temporally contingent
spatially congruent movements should be, in order to af f ect social behavior.
Second, we addressed our research questions not by varying the extent of congruency or
contingency between the participant’s and the imitator’s movement decisions on a trial-by-trial
basis (f or instance, by varying the degree of movement similarity or the size of the temporal
interval), but rather by manipulating the congruency or contingency between the participant’s
and the actors’ behavior across all trials. Although this design does not allow us to quantify
precisely how congruent or contingent this mapping needs to be in order to be ef f ective, we
think that our operationalization meaningf ully captures a central question regarding real-lif e
interactions – namely, whether it is 1) the f act that our interaction partners tend to react to our
movements and mannerisms or 2) the f act that, in doing this, they also copy our specif ic
movements – that is responsible f or enhancing our prosocial f eelings towards them.
Third, the f inding that congruent movement is required f or the socio-af fective ef f ects of
imitation does not necessarily imply that these ef fects are driven by self-other overlap. It could
be argued that overall, the predictability of the congruent condition is higher than that of the
contingent condition. This is because in the congruent condition, both the timing and the direction
of the imitator’s movements are predictable, whereas in the contingent condition only their timing
is predictable. According to recent suggestions, kinematically similar movements might be
intrinsically rewarding because they are easier to predict, and lead to a lower prediction error
signal (Hale and Hamilton, 2016). This might cause imitative encounters to be experienced as
smoother and more pleasant, which may f oster af f iliative and prosocial tendencies. Yet, it is less
clear how such reward processing could explain the finding that congruency also enhances
autonomic arousal when the imitator is in pain. This latter f inding seems more in line with a self -
other overlap account, in which increased motor resonance with the imitator f acilitates embodied
simulations in the af f ective domain. Which of these mechanisms drives the socio-aff ective ef f ects
of congruent imitation cannot be fully discerned based on our f indings. The f act that temporal
contingency does not have any dif f erential ef fects over a completely unpredictable control
condition, though, seems to suggest that degree of predictability cannot f ully account f or them.
Future studies should attempt to f urther disentangle inf luences of bodily congruency, temporal
contingency, and predictability, f or instance , by using overlearned complementary actions to
tap into the latter mechanism (Hale and Hamilton, 2016).
Fourth, it could be argued that our congruency condition denotes a more similar condition
also on a more general, conceptual level, without necessarily involving motor simulations. Indeed,
the f act that the congruent actor seems to deliberately make the same movement decisions as
the participant could also be seen as a signal that she is taking ef f orts to align her behavior and
decisions, motoric or not, to that of the participant. Since similarity per se is a strong predictor
of liking (Byrne, 1997; Montoya and Horton, 2013), the ef f ects of bodily congruency in our
study could also be explained by the perception of such domain-general similarities. This is,
however, an issue that more generally applies to mimicry research. In f act, according to
inf luential accounts, both motoric and non-motoric interpersonal similarity may ultimately rely on
equivalent embodied self -other overlap mechanisms, resulting in basic “like me” experiences
(Ashton-James et al., 2007; de Waal, 2007; Meltzof f , 2007). The extent to which bodily
congruent imitation af f ects empathy and prosocial behavior over and above non-bodily f orms
of perceived similarity is an issue f or f uture research.
Fif th, the type of interaction induced by our imitation paradigm was inevitably somewhat
artif icial compared to mimicry occurring in real social interactions. This is since we aimed to
address our research questions in an interactive setting involving realistic agents, rather than
relying on body part stimuli, but also wanted to eliminate contributions f rom f actors such as
f acial appearance, eye contact, pain expression, and bottom-up vicarious responses to visual
pain stimuli in our tasks. In this way, we aimed to put the ef fects of imitation on empathy and
prosocial behavior to a most stringent test. Future research should address whether our f indings
can be extended to more naturalistic settings – or, more plausibly, whether more naturalistic
settings evoke even stronger ef f ects.
Related to the previous point, it should be noted that it was not f ully evident whether
participants assumed that the movements of their co-players were planned independently f rom
theirs – and hence, that any imitation occurred by chance, or whether they believed that the co-
players could see the participant’s movements when planning theirs, and thus were able to
deliberately copy them. Notably, the movements of the co-players were always shown with a
short delay of about 1 sec af ter movement completion, which in timescale is more or less
equivalent to naturalistic f orms of mimicry. Although participants thus saw the movements of the
co-players only af ter perf orming their own movement decisions, we did not explicitly tell
participants that their movements were invisible f or the other two players as well, when these
were making their movement decisions. Theref ore, it is not implausible that participants assum ed
that the other players could in f act adapt their movements to theirs, and thus, were deliberately
imitating them. Nevertheless, it cannot be excluded that many participants assumed that that all
movement decisions were taken independently, and thus that any movement similarity was
coincidental. A f urther relevant point to this issue is the possibility that not all participants f ully
believed the cover story: when explicitly asked af ter the experiment, about half of the
participants indicated that they had at some point during the tasks experienced “some doubt”
about the authenticity of interaction, although it should be noted that participants may have
been reluctant to admit that they believed in the authenticity given that the question was
suggestive of a f eigned set-up. The fact that, in spite of the suggestion that imitation occurred
by chance, and in spite of any doubts about the authenticity of the interaction, our imitation
manipulation still had quite clear-cut ef f ects, suggests that apparently, even if we know that
others are not deliberately copying us, their imitative behavior can still be ef f ective in inf luencing
our social pref erences and behavior. On a more speculative note, this seems to suggest that such
ef f ects arise f rom relatively implicit processes that are f airly robust to conscious ref lection. Yet,
as said, we cannot univocally discern to what extent participants assumed that the imitation was
deliberate or not, and thus, the question how deliberate versus coincidental similarity in self -
initiated movements shapes imitation ef f ects needs to be addressed in f uture studies.
Lastly, and importantly, although our f indings show that spatially congruent imitation has
positive ef f ects on several measures of social behavior, it should be kept in mind that these
ef f ects were obtained in a relatively small sample, and that most ef f ect sizes were modest.
Furthermore, inf erences about the specif icity of these ef f ects are, in both studies, based on
statistical comparisons between the experimental group where the ef f ect were present, and the
group where they were absent. These comparisons yielded in some cases a small but signif icant
dif f erence (e.g. in the ef f ects on social inf luence, sense of connectedness, skin conductance
response), but in other cases the dif ference was less convincing (e.g., a dif f erential ef f ect of
congruency on prosocial pref erence, with respect to contingency, could only be shown when
samples f rom both studies were combined). Overall, the aggregated ef f ect size of dif f erential
ef f ects between experimental groups was small to medium ( 0.32), suggesting that caution is
needed in drawing conclusions about the specif icity of the ef f ects f or spatially congruent
imitation. Indeed, due to the small sample size of the groups it cannot be excluded that
contingent imitation might, to some extent, also be capable of af f ecting social behavior, but that
we f ailed to detect such ef f ects. Thus, we would like to emphasize that the main conclusions f rom
our studies remain to be conf irmed by f uture research.
Conclusion
We have shown in two experiments that bodily congruent implicit imitation moderately enhances
af f iliation, conf ormity, autonomic arousal measures of empathy, and prosocial behavior.
Imitation that was merely temporally contingent did not have such ef f ects. This provides support
f or the view that the social ef f ects of imitation are driven by motor resonance and ensuing self -
other overlap mechanisms, rather than by the rewarding ef f ects of experiencing that one’s
actions have predictable ef f ects. Our study also demonstrates that these ef f ects can be targeted
at a specif ic interaction partner (the imitator) when individuals are interacting with multiple
others simultaneously. This extends evidence that imitation has global ef f ects on prosocial
attitudes, and suggests that imitation may also increase one’s sense of overlap with a specif ic
person, thereby motivating biased social af f ect and behavior. Lastly, our findings show that the
tendency to f avor the imitator over others in prosocial behavior is predicted by increased
automatic arousal in response to the imitator’s pain earlier on. This suggests that the prosocial
ef f ects of imitation are driven by increased af f ective resonance with the imitator, rather than
by positive af f ect. Taken together, our study provides several valuable new insights into the
potential mechanisms underlying the ef f ects of imitation on social af f ect and behavior .
Author contributions
Jasminka Majdandži : Conceptualization, Methodology, Sof tware, Formal analysis, Resources,
Writing - Original Draf t, Funding acquisition. Birgit Rauchbauer: Investigation, Resources,
Writing - Review & Editing. Gernot Gerger: Sof tware, Formal analysis, Writing - Review &
Editing. Marina Maksimova: Investigation, Formal analysis. Jakub Chromec: Sof tware, Formal
analysis. Christoph Huber-Huber: Sof tware, Writing - Review & Editing. Claus Lamm:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding
acquisition.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF, CS11-005) and
by the SASPRO Mobility Programme (Project No. 0101/01/02; co-f inanced by the European
Union and the Slovak Academy of Sciences). The authors would like to thank Manuela
Baumgartner, Lorenz Pfau, and Martin Tik f or their assistance in creating the stimuli, and
Gabriela Jank, Andreas Martin, Corinna Lorenz, Michael Palkovics, and Michael Grosz f or
invaluable support in data collection.