How does embracing self-compassion in stressful moments influence our
coping abilities in the face of neuroticism?
1 2 1
Elisa Noack , Peter Boldizsar , Christina Ewert
1 2
University of Potsdam, Psychologische Hochschule Berlin
Author Note:
Elisa Noack, Department of Psychology, Differential Psychology and Psychological
Assessment, University of Potsdam; Peter Boldizsar, Psychologische Hochschule Berlin;
Christina Ewert, Department of Psychology, Differential Psychology and Psychological
Assessment, University of Potsdam
Correspondence regarding this manuscript should be addressed to Elisa Noack,
Department of Psychology, Differential Psychology and Psychological Assessment,
University of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Straße 24-25, 14469 Potsdam. E-mail:
elisa.noack.inbox@gmail.com
Abstract
Objectives Self-Compassion has already been well studied for mental health and well-being
on an inter-individual level. On the intra-individual level, however, little research has been
done on self-compassion and its possible correlations with other variables. This study aims to
examine the moderating effect of neuroticism on the relation between momentary self-
compassion and momentary coping and examines this interaction more specifically by
dividing self-compassion in its 2 subscales compassionate and uncompassionate self-
responding.
Methods A total of 210 participants completed measures of momentary self-compassion,
momentary coping and trait neuroticism among other measures via their smartphones. The
ambulatory assessment design consisted of 3 measurements per day (morning, afternoon,
evening) for 7 days.
Results The association between more momentary self-compassion and momentary emotional
approach coping was strengthened by lower levels of neuroticism, whereas no moderation
effect could be found for the other 2 subscales (problem-focused and emotional avoidance
coping). Considering the self-compassion subscales, the association between compassionate
self-responding and more emotional approach coping is strengthened by lower levels of
neuroticism as well as the association between compassionate self-responding and more
emotional avoidance coping is strengthened by higher levels of neuroticism.
Conclusions The results were able to provide insights into the moderating effect the
personality trait neuroticism has on the relation of self-compassion and coping on state-level,
which has not yet been studied. Implications for future research are discussed.
In the fast-paced modern world, stress has become an almost ubiquitous companion in
the lives of individuals across the globe. It permeates our daily experiences, seeping into our
personal and professional space, affecting our physical health, mental well-being and overall
quality of life. To ensure thriving in the face of stressful everyday life, a possible solution is
the choice of effective coping strategies. Amidst the myriad of coping mechanisms, the role of
self-compassion (SC) emerges as a pivotal factor in navigating the complexities of stressful
everyday life. While struggling with our daily demands, fostering a compassionate attitude
towards oneself becomes a beacon of resilience. SC, rooted in Buddhist teachings, was
introduced in psychological research by Kristin Neff (2003a). This construct includes
recognizing that mistakes are essential to being human and that all people are united in their
fallibility. Through SC, a person gains the emotional security to see oneself clearly and not to
judge oneself. As a result, maladaptive patterns of thinking and behavior can be better
recognized and corrected (Neff, 2003a). Self-compassionate individuals have more resources
to re-evaluate and deal caringly with themselves and cope actively with stressors (Ewert et al.,
2021).
Lazarus and Folkman (1984, p.233) defined coping as “the cognitive and behavioral
effort made to master, tolerate, or reduce external and internal demands and conflicts among
them.” There are many different kinds of coping mechanisms that are more or less successful.
Some of them aim to shift the perspective on the stressful situation itself, others enhance the
perceived ability to navigate potentially challenging experiences. Folkman and Lazarus
(1980) divide coping in problem-focused and emotion-focused coping. Problem-focused
coping (PC) attempts to address the cause of the stress, whereas emotion-focused coping aims
to reduce the negative emotions by using different strategies (Carver et al., 1989). With regard
to the efficacy of both coping strategies, problem-focused coping is found to predict long-
term mental health. Emotion-focused coping, on the other hand, is considered to be effective
in the short term and is associated with poorer prognosis in the long term than problem-
focused coping (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Emotion-focused coping can be further divided
into emotional approach coping (EAppC) and emotional avoidance coping (EAvC) (e.g., Roth
& Cohen, 1986). Emotional approach coping consists of strategies like self-regulation and
controlled expression of emotion and is especially effective when the stressors are
uncontrollable or in the past (Austenfeld & Stanton, 2004; Carver & Connor-Smith, 2010).
Emotional avoidance coping, on the other hand, is a defensive form of coping that consists of
ignoring, distorting, and fleeing from the stressors and is therefore not effective in the long
run.
Avoidant coping mechanisms are presumably less likely to occur as a result of self-
compassionate behavior. Instead, SC is thought to be more strongly related to adaptive
coping, such as problem-focused and emotional approach coping because a self-
compassionate behavior is also an attentive and accepting handling with one's own feelings
and thus also with one's own situation (Neff, 2003a).
Previous research already found results for those correlations. In their longitudinally
designed population-based study, Ewert et al. (2024) selected scales comparable to those
chosen in our study and found positive associations between SC and emotional approach
coping 2 months later, as well as negative associations between SC and emotional avoidance
coping 2 months later. Chishima et al. (2018) found that self-compassionate students rated
stressful situations as less threatening and more controllable and were significantly more
likely to use positive reinterpretation, an emotional approach coping strategy. Regarding
emotional avoidance coping, Neff (2003b) found a significant negative association of SC with
thought suppression and rumination and Neff et al. (2005) found a significant negative
correlation of SC with denial and mental distraction in a student sample. In a study with
individuals who recently received a cancer diagnosis, Gillanders et al. (2015) found that self-
compassionate patients were less likely to use emotional avoidance coping, even when the
situation was primarily appraised as threatening. A meta-analysis by Ewert et al. (2021) found
a significant positive association between SC and problem-focused and emotional approach
coping and a significant negative correlation between SC and emotional avoidance coping at
the trait-level. In exploratory analyses, Ewert et al. (2021) could also reply these findings on
state-level. They found a significant positive relation between momentary self-compassion
and momentary problem-focused and emotional approach coping and a significant negative
correlation regarding momentary emotional avoidance coping. However, the underlying
mechanisms on state-level remain largely unexplored to date. Investigating these mechanisms
casts light on how individuals respond to stressors in the moment. Moreover, understanding
how personality influences coping strategies at the state level could provide valuable insights
into the interplay between individual differences and situational factors in stress management.
A personality trait that might play an influential role as it appears to be most strongly related
to stress experience and psychopathology is neuroticism (Ormel et al., 2013). Gunthert et al.
(1999) define neuroticism as the predisposition to experience negative affect. Thus, neurotic
individuals experience more anxiety, depression, hostility, and self-doubt. They found that
participants with high neuroticism scores used the coping strategies of catharsis, self-blame,
wishful thinking and hostility more often than participants with low neuroticism scores. These
coping strategies are categorized as emotional avoidance coping as they are not used to solve
the problem but to escape from it (Gunthert et al., 1999). In a meta-analysis, Connor-Smith &
Flachsbart (2007) also found positive associations of neuroticism with emotional avoidance
coping strategies, for example with wishful thinking and behavioral withdrawal. Stanton et al.
(2000) found a negative correlation between neuroticism and emotional approach coping.
This is attributed to their more adaptive thought processes, which reduce susceptibility to
acute stress in daily life. Regarding SC, Neff et al. (2007) found that neuroticism appears to
be negatively related to SC. In a study examining undergraduate students during the COVID-
19 pandemic, Chen et al. (2023) found that self-compassionate students reported lower
perceived stress whereas neurotic individuals reported higher perceived stress. Thus, one can
assume that neuroticism influences the relation between SC and coping in many ways, leading
us to integrate it as the moderating variable in our study.
Based on the described individual correlations found in previous research, the
following hypotheses will be posited: (a) The association between more momentary SC and
more problem-focused coping is strengthened by lower neuroticism. (b) The association
between more momentary SC and more emotional approach coping is strengthened by lower
neuroticism. (c) The association between momentary SC and more emotional avoidance
coping is strengthened by higher neuroticism.
In addition, there has been a stream of research more recently proposing that the
subscale of uncompassionate self-responding (UCS), including the negative self-compassion
components of self-judgement, isolation, and over-identification should be excluded from the
total Self-Compassion Scale (SCS) score (Neff, 2003b) as these would weaken the validity of
the scale because they represent psychopathology rather than really measuring self-
compassion (e.g., Muris & Otgaar, 2020; Muris & Otgaar, 2022; Muris & Petrocchi, 2017;
Pfattheicher et al., 2017). They recommend only using the subscale of compassionate self-
responding (CS), including the positive components of self-kindness, common humanity and
mindfulness. In addition a recent study found a bifactorial structure for self-compassion also
on the state-level (Büchner et al., 2024). Due to the aforementioned findings and the ongoing
debate, we also tested our moderation hypotheses exploratory for the relation of CS and
coping as well as UCS and coping separately.
To test our hypotheses, we used an ambulatory assessment approach. To overcome
retrospective influences that one-time daily diary studies have, we collected state measures of
SC, problem-focused and emotion-focused coping 3 times a day. To assess trait neuroticism,
we incorporated a trait questionnaire that participants completed both before and after the
1-week ambulatory assessment period.
Method
Participants
A sample of N = 222 adults were recruited to participate in an ambulatory assessment
study via a student’s pool of cognitive sciences at 2 urban universities in Germany and via
course announcements. Moreover, flyers were positioned at the university campus, urban
meditation centers, yoga and fitness studios as well as at local supermarkets. At the study’s
start, each participant answered a trait questionnaire followed by a 7-days ambulatory
assessment answering questions about their levels of momentary SC and coping with stressful
situations 3 times a day resulting in N = 21 data points for each participant. However, 12
participants were excluded from the final sample as they either did not participate at all in the
ambulatory assessment (n = 8) or they had less than 3 data points in the entire data set (n = 4).
Thus, the final sample consisted of 210 participants with a mean age of 23.33 years (SD =
5.59, range = 16 to 59 years). Overall, 4109 reports were completed, which resulted in an
average of 19.57 per person and a response rate of 92%. Around 86% (n = 182) of the
participants defined themselves as female. Most of the participants were students (n = 200);
around 60% of them majored in psychology.
Procedure
The study was promoted as a 7-days ambulatory assessment study using the
participants’ smartphones to explore the relations between personality and stress regulation.
After expressing interest, participants were invited to the laboratory via e-mail, where a
maximum of 6 people could simultaneously answer questionnaires assessing demographic
and psychological trait variables such as neuroticism. Data were collected using SoSci Survey
further instructions were given to the participants about the ambulatory assessment design of
the study. For data collection of the state variables, the smartphone app movisensXS
tablet). 1 day later, the state measures (e.g. the experience sampling) started. For 7 days, data
was collected at 3 time points per day. Participants were pseudo-randomly prompted (via
audible signal) to answer questions in the morning (10 a.m. to 1 p.m. , afternoon (1 p.m. to 6
p.m.), evening (6 p.m. to 10 p.m. with an interval of minimum 1 hour between prompts. In
case of participants not immediately responding, further reminders were given at 10-minute
intervals. The response window was closed after 20 minutes, resulting in no data recorded if
the participants had not answered. Finally, a last survey consisting of trait measures was
conducted by invitation via email (using SoSci Survey) but these data were not analyzed in
this study. Participants either gained course credits for their psychology studies or were paid
around 20 USD depending on their response rate.
Measures
Momentary Self-compassion
Momentary SC was measured with a modified and shortened version of the SCS-D
(Self-Compassion Scale German version) (Hupfeld & Ruffieux, 2011; Neff, 2003b). The
SCS-D consists of 26 items and was shown to have a 6-factor structure, with satisfactory
reliability and validity (Hupfeld & Ruffieux, 2011).
The shortened Daily Self-Compassion Scale used for the measurement of momentary
SC contained 12 of the 26 items, 2 for each of the 6 facets of SC: self-kindness (e.g., “…I try
to be understanding and patient towards those aspects of my personality I don’t like”), self-
judgment, (e.g., “…I am disapproving and judgmental about my flaws and inadequacies”),
common humanity (e.g., “…I try to see my failings as part of the human condition”), isolation
(e.g., “…I think that other people are happier than I am.”), mindfulness (e.g., “…I try to take a
balanced view of the situation”), and over-identification (e.g., “…I get carried away with my
feelings”). The adaptation to measure state rather than trait SC was aided by the prompt:
(“When I experienced challenging moments since the last prompt…”). The wording of some
items was modified to make them more appropriate to the current moment rather than to the
typical stance towards oneself in difficult times. The scale ranged from 1 (”not at all”) to 5
(”strongly”).
For a total score of SC, a mean of the items were calculated. Items of the subscales of
self-criticism, isolation and over-identification were reversed before averaging for the total
score. The indices CS and UCS were calculated as the average of the items of the positive
(self-kindness, common humanity, mindfulness) and negative (self-criticism, isolation and
over-identification) subscales respectively (Neff, 2020).
Coping
Participants were asked to answer relevant subscales of the German version of the
Brief COPE (Carver, 1997; Knoll et al., 2005) to measure coping strategies 3 times a day.
They completed how they had coped with threatening or challenging moments since the last
beep or since waking up (for the first prompt of the day). According to the classical coping
literature, the subscales of Brief COPE can be divided into the 3 aggregated scales problem-
focused coping, emotional approach coping and emotional avoidance coping. The selected
coping subscales included coping strategies from all 3 approaches which have been
demonstrated to be strongly linked to SC (cf. Ewert et al., 2021). To shorten the scale length
to a minimum, we only integrated 5 subscales in our ambulatory assessment. Active coping
was equated to problem-focused coping (e.g., “I’ve been concentrating my efforts on doing
something about the situation I’m in”); positive reinterpretation (e.g., “I’ve been looking for
something good in what is happening”), and acceptance (e.g., “I’ve been learning to live with
it”) aggregated to emotional approach coping; and denial (e.g., “I’ve been refusing to believe
that it has happened”) and behavioral disengagement (e.g., “I've been giving up the attempt to
cope.”) aggregated to emotional avoidance coping. The rating of the items ranged from 1
(“not at all”) to 4 (“very much”). To form problem focused coping, the 2 items of the active
coping subscale were averaged. Composite scores for emotional approach and emotional
avoidance coping were created by averaging the means of the corresponding subscales.
Neuroticism
The short version of the Big Five Inventory (BFI-K; Rammstedt & John; 2005) was
used to measure trait neuroticism. The BFI-K is a standardized and economical questionnaire
to measure the 5 personality traits. The BFI-K consists of a total of 21 items on a 5-point
Likert scale (1 = “does not apply at all” to 5 = “applies completely”). For measuring
neuroticism, 4 items were included (e.g., "I worry a lot."). To assess the level of neuroticism
in an individual, 1 negatively coded item had to be inverted and afterwards the mean value of
the 4 items were calculated.
Data analyses
The data had a nested structure with repeated measures at level 1 nested within
persons at level 2. Hence, multilevel analysis using the software Mplus 8 (Muthén & Muthén,
1998-2017) was conducted. The used predictor variable was state SC. The criterion variables
were the 3 different coping responses.
The moderation effect of trait neuroticism was additionally analyzed. Missing data
were estimated with the full information maximum likelihood method (FIML; Enders, 2010)
using maximum likelihood estimation with robust standard errors (MLR). For the purpose of
a meaningful interpretation predictor variables were centered (Geiser, 2010). The level 1
predictor SC was centered at group mean and the level 2 predictor neuroticism was centered
at grand mean (Enders & Tofighi, 2007; Hofmann & Gavin, 1998). To ensure that a
multilevel model was the adequate method, intraclass-correlations (ICC) of the variables were
calculated. According to Geiser (2010) even low values of ICC can result in biased results,
such as inflated alpha error.
For the investigation of the relation of momentary SC and momentary coping only
repeated measure (level 1) variables were used - SC was entered in the model as predictor,
problem-focused and emotional approach as well as emotional avoidance coping as criterion
variables. The model regarding the moderation effect of neuroticism included both level 1 and
2 variables: SC as a level 1 predictor, neuroticism as a level 2 predictor. The decision for the
model fit was based on the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). The model with the lower
BIC is considered to have a better fit for the data, in that a difference over 10 points is
considered a very strong indication for a better model fit (Lorah & Womack, 2019).
The moderation effect of neuroticism as a level 2 predictor was only tested if the
model with random intercept and random slope results in a better fit for the model used to test
the relation of momentary SC and momentary coping. Firstly, with the help of a means-as-
outcomes model it was analyzed whether neuroticism itself has a predicting power for the 3
different coping responses regardless of momentary SC. Secondly, it was analyzed whether
neuroticism as level 2 predictor can explain the slope variability at level 1 (regression of
coping on SC). The study used p < .10 as a threshold for significance, as we formulated
directed hypotheses.
Results
Descriptive statistics and preliminary analysis
Minima, maxima, means, standard deviation and reliability coefficients regarding
scales, the more robust McDonald’s omega was used instead of Cronbach’s alpha (Hayes &
Coutts, 2020). There is no fixed cut-off value for acceptable reliability levels for multilevel
analyses. In order to classify the results, the current study follows the guideline proposed for
trait measures by Shrout (1998) including the following ranges: 0.00-0.10 – virtually no
reliability; 0.11-0.40 – slight; 0.41-0.60 – fair; 0.61-0.80 moderate; 0.81-1.0 – substantial.
As well as the within-persons emotional approach coping. The between-persons reliability
coefficients were substantial for neuroticism, emotional approach and emotional avoidance
coping. Regarding between-persons problem-focused coping a fair level was approached.
Slight levels of reliability could be found for problem-focused and emotional avoidance
coping within-persons.
The descriptive measures show satisfactory variability for all constructs. The full
range of scores from low to high was covered for all coping scales and SC, as indicated by the
minimum and maximum scores. Regarding the neuroticism scale, almost the full range was
covered.
Momentary SC showed an intra-class correlation (ICC) of 0.496, for problem-focused
coping an ICC of 0.430, for emotional approach coping an ICC of 0.498 and for emotional
avoidance coping an ICC of 0.410. These values imply that the variance in SC and coping is a
result of intra-individual differences and therefore multilevel modelling fits the data set the
best (Geiser, 2010).
Multilevel Analyses
The model fit check using the BIC showed that a random slope random intercept
model is the best fit for the data (PC : BIC = 9182.4; PC : BIC = 9142.6; EAppC : BIC =
F R F
7606.3; EAppC : BIC = 7539.2; EAvC : BIC = 4391.5; EAvC : BIC = 4339.9).
R F R
To test the moderation effect of neuroticism, we started by using a means as outcomes
model to check whether neuroticism can predict the individual coping subscales
independently of the level 1 predictor SC. The results were significant for all 3 regression
coefficients (B = -0.094, p < .05, 90%-CI = [-0.165; -0.022]; B = - 0.155, p < .01,
PC EAppC
90%-CI = [-0.231; -0.078]; B = 0.061, p < .05, 90%-CI = [0.017; 0.105]).
EAvC
We then considered the cross-level interaction. We found a statistically significant
cross-level interaction between neuroticism and SC for emotional approach coping but not for
calculation was performed only for the criterion variable emotional approach coping (see
between SC and emotional approach coping could be found (slope = 0.587, z = 14.449, p <
.001). Likewise for subjects with mean (slope = 0.51, z = 21.734, p < .001) and higher
neuroticism scores (slope = 0.433, z = 13.511, p < .001). To conclude, we found that the
relation of more momentary SC and momentary emotional approach coping is strengthened
by lower neuroticism.
Regarding the exploratory analyses, we considered momentary CS and UCS. To test
the moderation effect of neuroticism, we started by using a means as outcomes model to
check whether neuroticism can predict the individual coping subscales independently of the
level 1 predictors CS and UCS. The results were significant for all 3 regression coefficients
(B = -0.094, p < .05, 90%-CI = [-0.165; -0.022]; B = - 0.155, p < .01, 90%-CI = [-
PC EAppC
0.231; -0.078]; B = 0.165, p < .05, 90%-CI = [0.017; 0.105]).
EAvC
We found a moderating effect of neuroticism regarding the relation of momentary CS
and both emotion-focused coping subscales (B = -0.040, p = 0.079, 90%-CI = [-0.078; -
EAppC
0.003]; B = 0.051, p = .051, 90%-CI = [-0.060; -0.005]).
EAvC
General Discussion
The purpose of this study was to examine whether neuroticism has a moderating effect
on the relation of momentary SC and momentary coping using a multilevel regression
analysis.
Looking at the results, we only found a moderating effect of neuroticism for the
relation of SC and emotional approach coping, but not for problem-focused and emotional
avoidance coping. Thus, according to the data, individuals with high or low neuroticism differ
significantly in their momentary usage of SC and emotional approach coping. A possible
reason that we were able to find a cross-level interaction with emotional approach coping but
not with problem-focused and emotional avoidance coping could be that the correlation
between momentary self-compassion and momentary emotional approach coping is
descriptively the strongest of all the 3 subscales so that we were able to find a moderating
effect of neuroticism only for this subscale. Another reason could lay in the measurement of
the coping subscales. Emotional approach coping was measured through the coping
mechanisms positive reinterpretation and acceptance. Neurotic individuals experience more
anxiety, depression, hostility, and self-doubt (Gunthert et al., 1999). Hence, even in self-
compassionate moments it could be harder for them to look for something good in a negative
situation or to learn to live with the situation compared to less neurotic individuals. Problem-
focused coping was solely measured through the coping mechanism active coping. It is
possible that we could not find a moderation effect of trait neuroticism because it is generally
easier for people to identify the situation as a stressor and hence to want to actively change
something about it, independently of how neurotic the person is. Further research could take a
look into the relation with instrumental support as a problem-focused coping strategy, as self-
compassionate individuals are likely to seek social support more quickly and are also more
likely to acknowledge when they need it. Moreover, a possible reason why we could not find
a moderation effect of neuroticism regarding emotional avoidance coping is that this coping
subscale might be effective in the short term (e.g. Ewert et al., 2021; Suls & Fletcher, 1985).
Hence, independently of how neurotic a person is, using emotional avoidance coping
strategies like denial or behavioral disengagement is a quick fix to deal with stressors, even
though it is not effective in the long run.
Considering the findings on the 2 subscales of SC, trait neuroticism turned out to be an
influential factor for the relation of momentary CS and momentary emotional approach and
emotional avoidance coping. A possible reason could be that on the one hand, emotional
approach coping is strongly associated with self-compassion (Ewert et al., 2021). On the other
hand, neuroticism is related with an impaired ability to cope with stress (Mohiyeddini et al.,
2015). Similarly, in emotional avoidance coping, the stressor is not approached but avoided
(e.g., Schnider et al., 2007). Consequently, it is reasonable that we found neuroticism as a
moderator is that in neurotic individuals, ineffective coping with stress is already anchored in
their personality and therefore leads to more momentary stress coping behaviour in different
specific occasions. A potential reason for a lack of influential effect of trait neuroticism on the
association between momentary CS and momentary problem-focused coping could be based
on temperament and emotional regulation tendencies. While emotion-focused coping
strategies may provide immediate relief for individuals high in neuroticism, active coping
strategies might require more cognitive effort and problem-solving skills that individuals high
in neuroticism may find challenging to engage in consistently. The findings from the means as
outcomes model indicate that neuroticism can predict the choice of coping strategy regardless
of CS and UCS. Previous critiques concerning UCS suggest that it might essentially reflect
neuroticism itself (e.g., Muris & Otgaar, 2020; Muris & Otgaar, 2022; Muris & Petrocchi,
2017; Pfattheicher et al., 2017). In line with that, we did not observe a moderating effect as
UCS might already reflect neuroticism and therefore independently predicts how individuals
cope with stress in the moment. This redundancy suggests that including neuroticism as a
moderating variable may not provide additional explanatory power beyond what is already
accounted for by UCS. Future research should consider this and investigate the effect of both
SC subscales separately.
Limitations and Future Research
The several strengths of this study are mainly related to the ambulatory assessment
design. Due to the fact that the state variables were recorded 3 times a day, the data could be
collected directly in the subjects' everyday situations. This ensured ecological validity, as the
state variables were actually recorded at the moment and were thus subject to less
retrospective bias. The choice of a multilevel regression analysis also ensured that the
multilevel structure of the data was taken into account and that the results were not biased.
However, some limitations need to be mentioned.
Firstly, it must be noted that the present sample was almost exclusively a student
sample (94.8%), as the subjects interviewed came from 2 German universities. Accordingly,
the sample was very homogeneous in terms of educational level and age. Furthermore, there
was an unbalanced gender distribution, as the participants were predominantly female
(86.3%). Therefore, it should be avoided to relate the results to the general population or other
populations. Comparisons are only possible with the findings of similar studies with a student
sample. However, since studies often use students as subjects, it is quite possible to find
comparable material (cf., Henrich et al., 2010).
Secondly, due to our correlative design, it is imperative to approach the interpretation
of our results with caution regarding causality. Future research could examine causal relations
at the state-level through experience-sampling ambulatory assessment designs incorporating
experimental components. An example could be to conduct a design with experimental and
control group with randomly selected subjects. The experimental group would then receive
training on the momentary application of SC, while the control group would not.
Third, we will consider the reasons why, contrary to expectations, only the cross-level
interaction with emotional approach coping became significant as a criterion variable. One
possible reason could be the weak internal consistencies of the other 2 subscales. Especially
for problem-focused coping, the reliability coefficients both between and within individuals
are not in a satisfactory range. A possible reason could be that the German version of the
Brief COPE by Knoll et al. (2005) was shortened for economic reasons. Shorter
questionnaires have the advantage that the participation rates of the subjects are higher, but
they are sometimes accompanied by the disadvantage that reliability and validity are
impaired, especially when already existing scales are shortened (Smith et al., 2000; Stanton et
al., 2002). The problem-focused, emotional approach and emotional avoidance coping
strategies that had shown robust associations with SC in past studies were included in this
abbreviated coping scale. However, this selection criterion weakened the internal
consistencies, because the problem-focused coping subscale was limited to the active coping
strategy with 2 items. The other 2 subscales consisted of 2 coping strategies with 2 items
each. In this case, adding 2 items to the problem-focused coping subscale would probably
have been advisable, as this usually increases internal consistency, provided the added items
do not reduce the mean inter-item correlation (Carmines & Zeller, 1979, as cited in Niemi et
al., 1986). One strategy that would be appropriate here is instrumental support, as, for
example, Ewert et al. (2021) found a strongly significant correlation with SC. By extending
the total number of items from 10 to 12, an economic measurement should still be possible,
and by improving internal consistency, data quality should also increase. To avoid this
problem in the future, subsequent research could work on an even shorter version of the Brief
COPE (Carver, 1997; Knoll et al., 2005) that is economical enough for ambulatory
assessments, but in which the reliabilities and validities are at the same time as high as
possible to ensure sufficient quality of the data. On the other hand, it is also possible that this
scale is generally not suitable for capturing momentary coping. Thus, future research could
work on a coping scale specifically for intra-individual data collection.
Fourth, future studies should focus more on the differentiation between both subscales
while measuring SC (e.g., Muris & Otgaar, 2020; Muris & Otgaar, 2022; Muris & Petrocchi,
2017; Pfattheicher et al., 2017).
To derive practical implications, the findings of this paper underscore the potential
benefits of self-compassion trainings for individuals with high levels of neuroticism,
particularly in bolstering emotional approach coping on a specific occasion. Cultivating self-
compassion on a regular basis and practicing it in stressful moments might enable individuals
with higher neuroticism scores to approach momentary stressors with greater resilience.
Especially momentary coping might benefit from brief self-compassion exercises that focus
particularly on the positive aspects of self-compassion (CS). Future research should continue
to explore the moderating effect of personality traits on state-level coping mechanisms.
Ultimately, integrating self-compassion practices into therapeutic interventions for individuals
with high neuroticism scores may offer a promising avenue for promoting momentary stress
coping and hence, overall resilience.
Results of the effect of trait neuroticism on the variance of slopes in the
regression of momentary coping on momentary self-compassion.
Effect
Estimate SE 90%-CI 90%-CI
Spalte1 size
LL UL
Problem-focused coping
Neuroticism x self-
1.9%
-0.042 0.043 -0.113 0.029
compassion
Emotional approach coping
Neuroticism x self-
-0.086** 0.033 -0.141 -0.031 5.8%
compassion
Emotional avoidance coping
Neuroticism x self-
-0.035 0.024 -0.075 0.004 2.8%
compassion
Notes. SE = standard error. CI = confidence interval; LL = lower limit; UL = upper limit. The
effect size corresponds to the proportional reduction in variance between individuals
regarding the criterion variable, compared to a model without the predictor.
**p < .01.
Notes. N = neuroticism; SD = standard deviation.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Cosma Hoffmann, Anabel Buechner
and Rosanna Wendel for their help in collecting the data. Additionally, we want to thank Jan
Krause for his help preparing the data for final analyses.
Author Contribution EN: did the literature search, provided the data analyses and wrote the
paper; PB: assisted with the literature search and data analyses; CE: designed the study and
did the data collection, collaborated in writing of the manuscript. All authors approved the
final version of the manuscript for submission.
Funding This study was funded by a scholarship from the Potsdam Graduate School to the
third author.
Declarations
Conflict of Interest The authors declare no competing interests.
Ethical Approval All procedures performed in the current study involving human
participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the University of Potsdam. The
procedures used in this study also adhere to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Informed Consent Informed consent was obtained from all participants prior data collection
of the study.