Self-Development Through Competition: Coopetitive Mindset Intervention
Enhances Academic Performance among At-Risk Students
Gábor Orosz1+*, Lilla Török1,2+, Ákos Király3, Arthur Beaudrier1; János Salamon1,4,
Benedek Paskuj5, Miriam, Jánvári6, Zsolt P. Szabó7,8, Orsolya Pachner9, Noémi
Mészáros10,11, Orsolya Vincze11, Márta Fülöp12,13
1Unité de Recherche Pluridisciplinaire Sport Santé Société, Université d’Artois, Arras,
France
2Department of Psychology and Sport Psychology, University of Physical Education,
Budapest, Hungary
3University of Sorbonne Paris Nord, Department of Psychology, Paris, France
4Department of Ergonomics and Psychology, Budapest University of Technology and
Economics, Budapest, Hungary
5Department of Psychology, University College London, London, UK
6University of Nyíregyháza, Institution of Applied Human Sciences, Nyíregyháza, Hungary
7Institute of Management, Corvinus University of Budapest, Budapest, Hungary
8Institute of Psychology, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary
9Institute of Education and Psychology at Szombathely, Eötvös Loránd University,
Szombathely, Hungary
10Institute of Psychology, Pázmány Péter Catholic University, Budapest, Hungary
11University of Pécs, Department of Psychology, Pécs, Hungary
12HUN-REN Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, Research Centre of
Natural Sciences, Budapest, Hungary
13Károli Gáspár University of the Reformed Church in Hungary, Budapest, Hungary
+ Contributed equally to this work; shared first authorship.
*Corresponding author:
Gábor Orosz,
Université d’Artois
Arras, FRANCE
Phone: +33 7 82 65 26 37
E-mail: gaborosz@gmail.com
Self-Development Through Competition: ‘Coopetitive’ Mindset Intervention Enhances
Academic Performance among At-Risk Students
Abstract
Competition is traditionally viewed negatively within social sciences and is often considered
antithetical to cooperation. This perspective may explain the limited focus on strategies that
promote adaptive competitive behaviors, which is crucial in educational contexts. Our
research introduces a novel theoretical approach and an intervention aimed at reshaping
students’ thinking about competition. In a series of studies, we first identified a dominant
learning-oriented competitive orientation in a sample that follows the national quota of the
Hungarian population (Study 1: N=1,400). Building on this, we implemented a brief, 15-
minute online intervention in a randomized-controlled trial (Study 2: N=592), highlighting
the importance of self-developmental and collaborative aspects of competitive situations. The
intervention successfully fostered both a competition-is-facilitating mindset and a self-
developmental orientation among university students. This intervention promoted mastery-
oriented behaviors, improved grades in an academically at-risk student sample, and
maintained a balance with other-oriented goals. Subsequently, testing on a broader, non-
student population (Study 3: N=1,364) confirmed the intervention’s efficacy in enhancing
competitive mindsets conducive to learning and cooperation while reducing
hypercompetitiveness. Our findings challenge the traditional dichotomy of competition
versus cooperation in education, suggesting that adaptive competitive drives can be cultivated
to support both personal growth and cooperative learning.
Statement of Limitations
This research was conducted within a single cultural context. Additionally, our performance-
related findings are limited to academic grades one semester post-intervention; however, the
longer-term outcomes are unexplored. Importantly, we did not find a mediating psychological
process that leads to academic performance benefits among students with lower pre-
intervention grades.
Keywords: competition; competition-is-debilitating mindset; self-developmental orientation;
wise intervention
Self-Development Through Competition: ‘Coopetitive’ Mindset Intervention Enhances
Academic Performance among At-Risk Students
Like Morton Deutsch’s (1949a) basketball players, students frequently face
competitive scenarios. Deutsch, a pioneer in social science, illustrated that a basketball
player, when making a jump shot, engages in both competition and cooperation across
several levels: (1) they collaborate with teammates, (2) contest against opposing players, (3)
strive to excel within their own team, and (4) adhere to the game’s rules, showing broader
cooperation at the same time. Scoring a point, though a singular action, embodies both
competitive drive—outplaying the opponent and shining as a star—and cooperative spirit by
advancing the team’s goals and respecting the game’s regulations. Deutsch’s (1949a)
separation of competition and cooperation was methodological, meant only for experimental
scrutiny, as he acknowledged that such a distinction is often artificial and not practical for
real-world applications, where the lines frequently blur. Depending on the observer’s focus,
the scoring might be perceived as a bistable visual illusion, viewed as a competitive triumph
or a cooperative endeavor. Over time, what one perceives as prominent might shift, like an
seminal study, the challenge remains not to separate competition from cooperation but to
foster a mindset that emphasizes cooperation even within competitive environments. One
may well suppose that embracing this ‘coopetitive’ mindset helps navigate the complex
dynamics of competitive situations that can not only foster performance and advancement but
also that can foster significant learning and growth, providing benefits for everyone involved
regardless of the “winner” in the given match/challenge.
Competing with others inevitably contributes to learning. However, there was a dark
age of competition research when it was contrasted with cooperation (since Deutsch, 1949b,
1949a through Johnson et al., 1981 and Qin et al., 1995). Competition has been painted
negatively as a phenomenon that reduces performance and causes psychological harm. Fülöp
(2008) named this phenomenon the “Beauty and the Beast” paradigm, with competition being
the “beast” and cooperation being the “beauty.” However, since the advent of competition
research, it has been documented that interpersonal competition can be a source of
stimulation and motivation. In Triplett's (1898, p. 533) words, “…regarding the laboratory
races, we infer that the bodily presence of another contestant participating simultaneously in
the race serves to liberate latent energy not ordinarily available…”.
In the past 126 years of social psychology, several other studies showed that
competition can have a bright side, and certain competitive orientations can be beneficial
(e.g., Hulleman et al., 2010; Orosz et al., 2018; Ryckman et al., 1996). We assume that the
tacit belief about competition (see Fülöp, 1995)—similar to how people perceive stress as
facilitating vs. debilitating (Crum et al., 2023)—can have a significant impact on its harms
and benefits (Yeager et al., 2022). From this perspective, several questions arise. Is it possible
to change these beliefs? How can one develop adaptive beliefs about competition? What
meaning can one build around competitive situations to benefit the most from them? And
what can the benefits be of various competitive orientations? By using the methodology of
wise social psychological interventions (Walton, 2014; Walton & Crum, 2021; Walton &
Wilson, 2018; Yeager & Walton, 2011), the present work seeks to answer these questions in
the educational context and beyond to understand how it is possible to adaptively capitalize
on competitive orientations instead of suppressing them.
People can be competitive in many ways. Horney (1937) pioneered research on
individual differences in competitiveness. According to her psychoanalytic theory,
hypercompetitive and competition-avoidant personality features can be distinguished. Based
on her theory, in the 1990s, Richard M. Ryckman developed a system in which
hypercompetitive, competitive avoidant and self-developmental competitive temporally
stable attitudes were distinguished (Ryckman et al., 1990, 1996, 2009). Ryckman et al.’s
research inspired competition researchers to identify individual differences in competition
(Burckle et al., 1999; Collier et al., 2010; Hibbard & Buhrmester, 2010; Mudrack et al., 2012;
Orosz et al., 2018; Thornton et al., 2009, 2013); however–to our understanding–they aimed to
emphasize the stability of their competition-related constructs (attitudes, orientations or traits)
by demonstrating test-retest correlations over a few weeks, and they did not necessarily focus
on the underlying beliefs about competition. Before we move into the details of the beliefs on
competition, we briefly discuss the most essential features of competitive orientations based
on a recent classification (Orosz et al., 2018).
Hypercompetitive orientation represents a solid need to compete and win at any cost.
According to the classic studies, it is correlated with several maladaptive outcomes such as
low levels of self-esteem, self-actualization, and optimal psychological health, as well as high
levels of aggression, dominance, mistrust, Machiavellianism, and dogmatism (Ryckman et al.
across various years, 1990, 1994, 1996, 2009). More recently, it was found that
hypercompetitive orientations are positively related to negative aspects of perfectionism but
also high perfectionist standards and work-related achievement motivation, therefore, a
strong result orientation in competitive situations (Orosz et al., 2018). Anxiety-driven
competition avoidance features general anxiety deriving from competition, triggering
avoidance of competitive situations. This orientation is related to lower resilience, higher
standards of perfectionism, a higher discrepancy between perfectionist ideals and actual state,
and negative consequences of perfectionism (Orosz et al., 2018). These correlates are
compatible with less recent findings demonstrating that competition-avoidant people are
stressed, as they think failure in competitive situations can lead others to dislike or reject
them. They feel humiliated by competitive failures (see Ryckman et al., 2009). The lack of
interest in competitive situations describes the disinterest in competition and the lack of any
approach or avoidance motivations toward competition. This dimension was weakly related
to resilience and moderately and negatively associated with work-related achievement
motivation (Orosz et al., 2018). Self-developmental competitive orientation represents a
strong need for self and ability improvement in competitive contexts. According to the classic
studies, it is positively related to high self-esteem, task enjoyment, self-development, self-
discovery, achievement, affiliation, and various indicators of psychological health, and it is
negatively related to derogating others, aggression and dominance (Burckle et al., 1999;
Collier et al., 2010; Hibbard & Buhrmester, 2010; Mudrack et al., 2012; Thornton et al.,
2009, 2013). Most recently, it was found that the self-developmental competitive orientation
is related to resilience, positivity, positive aspects of perfectionism, and various achievement
motivations (Orosz et al., 2018). Among these orientations, the dominance of the self-
developmental one appears to be the most adaptive in many respects.
Beliefs about competition are an understudied field. Since the early days of
experimental social psychology (Triplett, 1898), we have seen that competition can lead to
performance and well-being benefits (Carnevale & Probst, 1998; Charlesworth, 1996; Erev et
al., 1993; Tjosvold et al., 2003, 2006). Still, we know very little about how adaptive beliefs
about competition or orientations can contribute to these benefits. We supposed that students
have heterogeneous beliefs about how competition can impact their behaviors, and we also
supposed that these beliefs are malleable, similar to other performance-related beliefs, such as
willpower (Job et al., 2010), intelligence (Dweck & Yeager, 2019) or stress (Yeager et al.,
2022). Therefore, we expected that targeted social psychological interventions in an
educational context (Walton, 2014; Walton & Wilson, 2018; Yeager & Walton, 2011) could
boost self-developmental competitive orientations by making students aware of the
potentially enhancing aspects of competitive situations. For these reasons, we found it helpful
to design a self-reported measure based on Crum et al.’s (2013) Stress Mindset Measure to
assess students’ beliefs about competition’s facilitating and debilitating effects.
Our main goal was to demonstrate how competition can promote learning if its focus
is self-developmental and facilitating and why a robust cooperative basis between rivals can
provide ground for long-term learning and progress. Solid cooperation among competitors
might sound paradoxical, but it is not necessarily the case. In his seminal work, even Deutsch
(1949a) demonstrated that competition and cooperation often go hand in hand. Borrowing the
term from business, coopetition (Brandenburger & Nalebuff, 1998) might reflect more
precisely the interpretation that people can form when competition and cooperation are
strongly intertwined. We translated this business concept to the audience of our intervention,
describing competition as a construct that can provide room for mutual learning and mastery
and can also yield respectful, cooperative relationships with rivals if it is perceived as a long-
term process and not a one-shot event (Fülöp & Takács, 2013).
Therefore, through descriptive norms (e.g., Yeager et al., 2014), expert opinions
(Yeager et al., 2016), testimonials (e.g., Walton et al., 2023), and self-persuasive saying-is-
believing exercises (see Aronson, 1999), we aimed to demonstrate that two rivals can treat
each other as ladders, allowing both to climb higher (see the analogy of Fülöp, 2004). The
interdependence between the rivals can lead to significant mutual learning and self-
development. However, besides the intense competition, there is a strong cooperative bond
between the competitors in this tandem climbing. These principles appeared in the central
analogy in our intervention work and emphasized that self-development could occur through
a cooperative, friendly, and considerate relationship between the rivals.
The present research had two main goals. First, it aimed to explore dominant
competitive orientations on a comprehensive sample to identify dominant competitive
orientations. Then, we aimed to develop a domain-general intervention promoting self-
developmental competitive values and making participants focus on what they can learn from
competitive situations. We aimed to design an intervention that can be applied in sports,
academics, and business contexts. This intervention does not motivate participants to seek
extra competitive situations but promotes self-developmental and competition-is-facilitating
mindsets if they find themselves in a competitive situation. Thus, we assumed that despite
being heavily exposed to competitive situations during the intervention, it would leave the
other-oriented (performance) achievement goals intact but would increase self-oriented goals.
We supposed the intervention would contribute to a belief that competition can facilitate
performance, learning, and growth. We also supposed that the intervention can contribute to
academic performance benefits compared to the control group. As a result of the intervention,
we presumed participants would develop a stronger self-developmental competitive
orientation. We supposed that, for example, students who did not have excellent prior
academic performance might not use competitive situations in the academic context to
perform better. They might experience more setbacks in these situations, and they do not
necessarily see these competitions through the lenses of self-development and collaborative
growth. For this reason, these students can potentially achieve better academic performance
by reframing their representation of competitive academic situations.
Study 1: Self-Developmental Competition as The Most Dominant Orientation
Social psychologists and educational researchers seem to have a relatively negative
perception of competition (Fülöp, 2008), and our question was whether the same is true in the
general population. In this study, we aimed to explore the most prevalent competitive
orientations within a sample representative of the Hungarian population based on self-
reported data. This study could contribute to the preparation of the intervention by providing
data on the prevalence of the most relevant competitive orientations that are present in
various cultures (Fülöp et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2024). For this purpose, we used a recent
assessment framework that integrates four competitive orientations—self-development,
hypercompetition, lack of interest towards competition, and anxiety-driven competition
avoidance—with in-depth theoretical and methodological roots regarding individual
differences in competition. We expected that adaptive competitive orientations focusing on
learning would be strongly represented and more salient than maladaptive competitive
orientations.
Method
Transparency and Openness
These studies were not preregistered. The data for all studies are publicly available in
codes are at the same link.
Participants
In July 2013, this study used a stratified probability sample of 1,400 internet-active
Hungarians aged 14 to 93, selected from an 88,000-member panel managed by Ringier
Publisher Hungary. The sample, which was representative in terms of gender, age, education,
and residence type, involved members who accessed the Internet weekly. Individuals
providing rapid or inattentive responses or having invalid email addresses were excluded to
maintain panel quality. Data collection was conducted using the freQuest cawi system. The
final sample demographics included 41.3% male and 58.7% female participants, with an
average age of 40.7 years (SD=13.2). Among respondents, 32.9% had a higher education
degree, and while 22.4% resided in the capital city, 77.6% lived in rural areas.
Measures
Competitive Orientations. We utilized the Multidimensional Competitive
Orientation Inventory to assess individual differences in competition (MCOI, Orosz et al.,
2018). The scale comprises 12 items and is rated on a 6-point Likert scale (1-not at all true
for me, 6-completely true for me) measuring four competitive orientations: self-
developmental (“Competitive situations allow me to bring the best out of myself”), anxiety-
driven competition avoidance (“Even the smallest competition makes me feel anxious”),
hypercompetitive (“I am willing to do whatever it takes to win”), and lack of interest in
competition (“I don’t care about competitions”). Prior research suggests a positive correlation
between approach factors (hypercompetitive and self-developmental) and between the
avoidance factors (anxiety-driven and lack of interest) aspects of competitive orientations;
however, the approach and avoidance factors are negatively correlated (see Orosz et al., 2018
Study 2). Self-developmental orientation focuses on self-improvement, while anxiety-driven
avoidance centers on general competition-related anxiety. Hypercompetitive orientation
emphasizes a strong desire to win, and lack of interest reflects disengagement from
competitive situations. The scale showed excellent reliability (Cronbach α =0.88,
self-development
Cronbach α =0.92, Cronbach α =0.83, Cronbach α =0.81).
anxiety-driven hypercompetitive uninterested
Analytic Strategy
We used R, Version 4.1.0 (R Core Team, 2021) to examine the proportion of
respondents who think that self-developmental attitudes are “rather true to them,” “true to
them,” and “completely true to them.” This study, similarly to the subsequent ones, was not
preregistered.
Results and Discussion
Two-thirds (65.5%) of the respondents characterize themselves with self-
developmental attitudes. Therefore, it appears that most people see themselves as competitors
who enjoy testing themselves in competitive situations, who enjoy competing as it allows
them to discover their abilities, and who see competitive situations that allow them to bring
the best out of themselves. (Please find the descriptives of the other orientations in the
Supplemental Materials).
Study 2: A Coopetition Intervention and Its Effects on Students in Higher Education
People may not realize the strong presence of self-developmental competitive
attitudes demonstrated in Study 1. Unlike hyper-competitive or anxiety-driven avoidance
behaviors, this orientation is less socially visible. By positioning self-developmental
competition as the default and suggesting it as a normative approach, we could reduce
various forms of resistance against being competitive. Additionally, to avoid
misinterpretation of our main message (e.g., one potential misinterpretation is that the
material encourages people to be more competitive), we emphasized that genuine competition
is unlikely to thrive without a strong cooperative foundation. Thus, in Study 2, we designed
an intervention that encourages self-developmental competitive orientation alongside
cooperative aspects of competition that can allow a friendly and learning-oriented approach
toward the rivals. For this purpose, we employed strategies from the toolkit of wise social
psychological interventions (e.g., Walton & Wilson, 2018).
Method
Participants
In the intervention, we expected a small-to-moderate effect on the self-reported
measures (competition-is-facilitating/debilitating mindset, competitive orientation). However,
our primary behavioral outcome was related to the competitive PERC task (see below for a
detailed description), where we expected the smallest effects to define the a priori sample size
calculations. Our goal was to recruit at least 787 participants (with d=0.2, alpha error
prob=0.05, power=0.8, and number of predictors=1) to be able to identify a small effect on
the PERC task and its subdimensions (effort, persistence, and resilience). Students from six
Hungarian public universities with various majors participated in the study. Participation was
voluntary, and students were enrolled in a credit pool. Among them, 566 reached the
randomized intervention or control materials (M =22.06; SD =4.27; 74.6% female; 96.8%
age age
Caucasian, 35.7% first-generation students).
Procedure
This study was conducted with the ethical approval of the Hungarian University’s
institutional review board, following the Declaration of Helsinki, and with the informed
consent of the participants. After consenting, participants completed surveys on their
sociodemographic and academic data (prior grades, major), pre-intervention competition-is-
facilitating mindset, and competitive orientations. Then, they were randomly assigned to the
intervention and the control condition related to healthy eating and academic performance.
The structure of the two conditions was designed to be identical. After a general introduction,
similar to prior educational wise interventions (Yeager et al., 2014), students learned
descriptive norms about competition (e.g., “based on representative studies, 69% of people
have a self-developmental competitive orientation”) vs. healthy eating (e.g., “78.8% of people
have breakfast”). Then, similarly to prior intervention studies (Yeager et al., 2016, 2019),
they could read expert opinions that were supposed to provide convincing scientific
background to the self-developmental competitive features (see below). In the control
condition, they could read quotes from nutritional experts promoting eating vegetables.
“... the longer-term and more profound function of competition is self-
development. As a result of competition, an individual can develop many
characteristics or abilities that would otherwise evolve more slowly or not at
all. Every victory/defeat can fit into this lifelong development and promote
it...”
According to the expert, if someone can view competition in this way…
“…even unfavorable comparisons can be seen as a starting point and
inspiration for learning. In such cases, the competition and the competitor
accelerate and facilitate the lifelong process of self-development.” (Professor
Márta Fülöp, 2001)
Subsequently, we explained how cooperative relationships with rivals can be
can highlight the positive, cooperative interdependence between competitors that can fuel
performance. We moved beyond their relationship within the competitive situation and
demonstrated that preserving a good relationship and sharing experiences can be essential to
their mutual growth in the long run. We did not want to demonstrate too directly the role of
cooperation behind competition, but we came back to this theme in every subsequent
testimonial in a tacit way.
Similarly to prior work (Walton et al., 2023; Walton & Cohen, 2011), students could
read peer testimonials, helping them better understand how to see competition from a self-
developmental perspective. Two testimonials came from sports backgrounds (ice skating as
2). In the control condition, students provided testimonials about eating healthy and
avoiding junk food during the exam period.
These testimonials and expert opinions could provide a general framework for the last
self-persuasive saying-is-believing exercise (Aronson, 1999). In this exercise, like other prior
interventions (Yeager et al., 2014), students were requested to write a letter to someone who
could benefit from these messages. In this exercise, they were supposed to tailor the main
messages of the intervention to themselves and phrase how they could use what they learned
about self-developmental competition. Similarly to Crum et al.’s (2013) stress-is-enhancing
mindset intervention, we emphasized that they do not need to seek competitive situations.
Still, if they find themselves in these circumstances, they can perceive them as opportunities
for self-development. These self-persuasive strategies were supposed to help students
introduce the intervention materials and convince themselves about the malleability of
eating enhances their cognitive capacities in the control condition.
Measures
Competition-is-Facilitating Mindset. We designed a new measure to assess beliefs
about competition. Participants indicated their agreement with six items on a 6-point Likert
scale (1-Completely disagree, 2-Disagree, 3-Rather disagree, 4-Rather agree, 5-Agree, 6-
Completely Agree). Items were compatible with the general Stress Mindset Measure (SMM,
Crum et al., 2013) except for the health and vitality dimension, which we left out, focusing on
learning and performance aspects. Three items were framed positively (competition-is-
facilitating: “The effects of competition are positive and should be utilized,” “Experiencing
competition facilitates my learning and growth,” “Experiencing competition enhances my
performance and productivity”), and three were framed negatively (competition-is-
debilitating: “The effects of competition are negative and should be avoided,” “Experiencing
competition inhibits my learning and growth,” “Experiencing competition debilitates my
performance and productivity”). We assessed two items before (to keep the content short)
and all six items after the intervention. Both the pre- (Cronbach α =0.78) and the post-
pre
intervention (Cronbach α =0.87, Cronbach α =0.89) measures
post enhancing post debilitating
demonstrated good reliability. The sample was randomly split in two for exploratory and
confirmatory factor analyses (N =297, N =269). The scree plot of the exploratory factor
EFA CFA
analysis with varimax rotation suggested two methodological factors (positively vs.
negatively worded items), and based on the criteria of Hu and Bentler (1999), the
confirmatory factor analysis suggested an excellent model fit for the two correlated factor-
model, using the MLM method (CFI=0.983, TLI=0.969, SRMR=0.038, RMSEA=0.067).
Competitive Orientations. The same Multidimensional Competitive Orientation
Inventory was used as in Study 1. We assessed four items pre-intervention (to keep the
content short), and all 12 items were evaluated post-intervention. The scale showed excellent
reliability (Cronbach α =0.88, Cronbach α =0.87, Cronbach
self-development anxiety-driven
α =0.82, Cronbach α =0.85).
hypercompetitive uninterested
Achievement Goal Questionnaire. To measure goal orientations, we used the
Achievement Goal Questionnaire (AGQ, Elliot et al., 2011; Hungarian adaptation Urbán et
al., 2014). The questionnaire includes six goal-achievement constructs – differentiated by the
definition of the goal and its valence – such as task-approach (“To answer a lot of questions
correctly on the exams in this class”; Cronbach α =0.90), task-avoidance (“To avoid
task-approach
incorrect answers on the exams in this class”; Cronbach α =0.84), self-approach
task-avoidance
(“To do better on the exams in this class than I typically do in this type of situation”;
Cronbach α =0.90), self-avoidance (“To avoid doing worse on the exams in this class
self-approach
than I normally do on these types of exams”; Cronbach α =0.87), other-approach
self-avoidance
(“To do better than my classmates on the exams in this class”, Cronbach α =0.95),
other-approach
and other-avoidance (“To avoid doing worse than other students on the exams in this class”)
Cronbach α =0.93). These goal-achievement constructs are assessed by three items
other-avoidance
each, adding up to an 18-item questionnaire in which respondents indicate how true each
statement (item) is for them on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (not true for me) to 7
(extremely true for me).
Mastery Behaviors in Competitive Context. We used the modified Hungarian
student version (Orosz, Török, et al., 2024) of the Persistence, Effort, Resilience, and
Challenge-Seeking Task (PERC; Porter et al., 2020) to assess mastery behaviors in a
competitive context. In the PERC, participants completed different sets of Raven’s
intelligence matrices. The task was set up to measure mastery behaviors. In this new
competitive adaptation, we rephrased the instructions for the task, making participants
believe that they were participating in a competition among university students. Therefore, in
the general introduction, we described the task: “In the following task, we will focus on visual
problem-solving. We would like to compare students' individual performance regarding
logical skills to determine who is the best. Strong problem-solving skills can be useful in
many ways. They can help examine different problems from various perspectives and solve
them more creatively. Let's see what problem-solving skills you currently have compared to
others!” Furthermore, the mastery tasks were embedded in a competitive context in the
following way. “In this section, you can compare yourself with other participants within the
framework of a competition. First, we will provide information on whether you answered the
tasks correctly or incorrectly. Then, if you wish, you will have the opportunity to read the
solution tips of other participants for the examples where you answered incorrectly, as well
as for those where you provided a correct answer.” After each task, participants were
4).
Using this competitive framing, we assessed challenge-seeking, effort, persistence,
and resilience. After participants completed a set of easy puzzles as a baseline exercise, they
needed to choose whether to continue with similarly easy or more difficult tasks (challenge-
seeking). Despite their choice, participants solved a mix of medium-difficulty tasks. After
each task, they had the chance to review the solutions of each task, and effort was measured
in terms of time spent viewing these solutions. Subsequently, students received a set of
difficult puzzles, and persistence was measured in terms of time spent on these difficult
puzzles. Lastly, participants had the chance to solve a final set of easier items after this
difficult set of tasks. Resilience was assessed in terms of accuracy on these tasks, which
represented resilience after solving the previous difficult block (“post-failure performance,”
Porter et al., 2020, p. 7.). These dimensions were aggregated to a general indicator of mastery
behaviors.
Sociodemographic information. Age, gender, ethnic minority status, and parental
level of education were assessed in terms of first-generation (none of the parents had tertiary
education) vs. continuing-generation (at least one of the parents had tertiary education) status.
Grade point average (GPA). As a valid behavioral measure, the universities
provided participants’ official GPA earned in their post-intervention academic term, which is
rated on a five-point scale (1=worst grade (fail) ~E/F in the US grading system, 5=best grade
~A in the US grading system where 2=passing) in the Hungarian higher educational system.
We also asked participants about their pre-intervention end-of-semester GPA.
Analytic Strategy. We used multilevel (MLM) regression analyses (with nested
universities) to measure the condition’s effect on implicit beliefs about competition,
competitive orientations, goal orientations, mastery behaviors, and post-intervention grades.
We were also interested in whether the intervention has academic benefits regarding term
grades. We supposed the intervention could have a greater impact when there was more room
for development (e.g., students with low pre-intervention grades) and that it is hard to make
someone even more self-developmental competitive who is already self-developmental
competitive. To explore these ideas, we conducted separate analyses examining the
interaction between the intervention condition and pre-intervention grades, as well as the
interaction between the intervention condition and competitive orientations.
Results
Random Assignment. The random assignment of the participants was successful, as
there were no pre-intervention differences between the participants on the sociodemographic
variables (age, gender, ethnic minority, first-generation status, pre-intervention grades) or
psychological measures (such as competition-is-facilitating mindset and the four competitive
orientations). There was no difference between the experimental groups in any variables (all
ps≥0.083).
Self-Reported Outcomes
Competition-is-Facilitating Mindset. The results showed that participants in the
intervention group demonstrated a higher competition-is-facilitating mindset (b=0.26,
t(2,550)=4.45, k=6, p<0.001, d=0.27) and a lower competition-is-debilitating mindset (b=-
0.18, t(2,550)=-2.50, k=6, p=0.013, d=0.18) post-intervention compared to the control group
while controlling for their initial beliefs about the facilitating nature of competition.
Competitive Orientations. Based on the pre-intervention self-developmental
orientation, 75.1% of the respondents characterized themselves by self-developmental
orientation (gave responses higher than 3.5 on a 6-point scale), with 9.5% characterizing
themselves exclusively in this way.
While we did not find any interaction between the conditions and the competitive
orientations (all ps≥0.097), the condition did have a main effect on the self-developmental
competitive orientation. Participants in the treatment condition showed higher levels of self-
developmental competitive attitudes while controlling for the pre-intervention score, b=0.35,
t(2,550)=5.50, k=6, p<0.001, d=0.32. We were mainly interested in changes in self-
developmental competition, but all competition orientations changed due to the intervention.
It decreased anxiety-driven competitive orientation, b=-0.19, t(2,547)=-2.75, k=6, p=0.006,
d=0. 15; marginally reduced lack of interest in competitive situations, b=-0.14, t(2,542)=-
1.88, k=6, p<0.061, d=0.11, and unexpectedly, it was also higher in hypercompetitive
orientation, b=0.17, t(2,541)=2.71, k=6, p=0.007, d=0.16.
Achievement Goals. The intervention did not change either approach or avoidant
other-focused goals (ps>0.82). However, both the task-approach, b=0.17, t(542)=2.05, k=6,
p=0.041, d=0.17, and task-avoidant goals, b=0.24, t(542)=2.75, k=6, p=0.006, d=0.23, as
well as the, and self-approach, b=0.34, t(549)=3.05, k=6, p=0.002, d=0.26, and self-avoidant
goals, b=0.33, t(549)=3.45, k=6, p<0.001, d=0.29, were significantly higher compared to the
Behavioral Outcomes
Mastery Behaviors. According to the significant interaction between the treatment
and prior academic performance, ß=-0.17, t(2,543)=-2.13, k=6, p=0.033, the intervention
increased the overall mastery score (which assessed persistence, effort, resilience, and
challenge-seeking) among students with low pre-intervention grades, b=0.22, t(2,543)=1.98,
k=6, p=0.048, d=0.24. However, the main effect of the intervention on the PERC score was
not significant (p=0.510).
Post-Intervention Academic Grades. We observed a significant interaction between
the treatment and the pre-intervention GPA on post-semester grades, ß=-0.19, t(2,549)=-2.62,
k=6, p=0.009. Among students whose pre-intervention GPA was one standard deviation
below the mean, the intervention significantly improved grades compared to the control
condition, b=0.13, t(2,546)=2.11, k=6, p=0.035, d=0.22. Additionally, students with a pre-
intervention GPA two standard deviations below the mean demonstrated even greater
benefits from the intervention, with an increase in grades, b=0.25, t(2,548)=2.49, k=6,
the Coopetition Intervention
Discussion
The present study aimed to develop and test a social-psychological intervention that
forges the benefits of self-developmental and cooperative aspects of competitive mindsets.
We found that the intervention led to a competition-is-facilitating mindset, stronger self-
developmental competitive attitudes, stronger academic task- and self-orientation, elevated
mastery behaviors (persistence, effort, resilience, and challenge-seeking), and semester-end
grades among academically at-risk students with lower pre-intervention grades. The
intervention did not lead to more other-oriented goals, but it decreased anxious competitive
orientations. Since the present study found higher levels of hypercompetitive orientations
among the participants from the intervention group, in Study 3, we revised the intervention to
avoid its potentially harmful effects. In the new intervention material, we clarified the
potential negative consequences of the hypercompetitive orientation.
Study 3: The Revised Coopetitive Mindset Intervention
We carried out two major changes in the intervention material. First, we added a slide
provided an introductory slide that helps reframe and properly introduce the intervention
material. The latter was needed as we received feedback from some students that they would
appreciate a general introduction. Therefore, we grasped this opportunity to demonstrate that
competition is present in various parts of life, to normalize the various perspectives on
competition, and to suggest that certain mindsets can be more adaptive, especially those that
integrate and combine collaborative and self-developmental aspects. We introduced the
negative consequences of hypercompetitive orientation in the middle of the intervention. We
used descriptive norms to draw the participants’ attention to the fact that while
hypercompetitive competitive orientation can have short-term benefits, it cannot pay off in
the long run.
We asked hundreds of people in Hungary about their competitive
orientations. Less than 10% of the people have a hypercompetitive
orientation.
Hypercompetitors:
want to win in every situation,
want to win at any cost,
use unfair means (e.g., cheating) to achieve victory, and
can become aggressive and harm their competitors. For them,
winning is more important than anything else.
However, for them, winning does not come with learning and self-
improvement, and it distances them from other people.
Thus, while this orientation may bring short-term successes in some
situations, it does not result in long-term development and by itself
does not lead to further victories.
In this study, a limited budget was available to assess the effectiveness of the
intervention, so access to implement outcome measures was also limited. Therefore, we
selected two main outcomes—self-developmental competitive orientation and the
competition-is-facilitating mindset—while keeping the hypercompetitive orientation
unchanged in the new version of the intervention, which we tested with a more
comprehensive probability sample.
Method
Participants
In July 2024, this study used a stratified probability sample of 1,364 internet-active
Hungarians aged 18 to 69, selected from a 38,000-member panel managed by SEDO
Research Hungary. The sample, which was representative in terms of gender, age, education
level, and residence type, involved members who accessed the Internet weekly. Individuals
providing rapid or inattentive responses or having invalid email addresses were excluded to
maintain panel quality. The final sample demographics included 43.3% male and 56.7 %
female participants, with an average age of 45.7 years (SD=13.5). Among respondents, 26.5%
had a higher education degree, and while 18.8% resided in the capital city, 81.2% lived in
rural areas.
Procedure
This study was conducted with the ethical approval of the Hungarian University of
Sports Science’s institutional review board, by the Declaration of Helsinki, and with the
participants’ informed consent. The material was very similar to the intervention in Study 2
(except for the two above-mentioned slides). However, due to financial constraints, the study
was conducted in conjunction with another project. Consequently, the control condition
conveyed an unrelated yet significant message, which was entirely distinct from the present
research questions. This approach enabled us to retain a valid active control condition while
adhering to budgetary limitations.
Measures
Competition-is-Debilitating Mindset. We used only the negative dimension of the
competition-is-facilitating mindset scale, the three-item measure of competition-is-
debilitating mindset (α=0.79) from Study 2 (one item pre- and three items post-intervention).
Competitive Orientations. From the Multidimensional Competitive Orientation, we
assessed only self-developmental (α =0.90) and hypercompetitive (α =0.84) orientation
post post
(one item pre- and three items post-intervention for each).
Analytic Strategy
We used OLS regression analyses to measure the condition’s effect on implicit beliefs
about competition and the two competitive orientations while controlling for single-item pre-
intervention scores (respectively).
Results and Discussion
Random Assignment. The random assignment of the participants was almost entirely
successful, as there were no pre-intervention differences between the participants on the
sociodemographic variables (age, level of education, type of residence) or psychological
measures (such as pre-intervention competition-is-debilitating mindset and the two
competitive orientations), all ps>0.157, except for gender, ß=-0.26, z(1363)=-2.41, p=0.016.
Therefore, we added gender as a covariate to examine the effect of conditions.
Competition-is-Debilitating Mindset. The results showed that participants in the
intervention group (EMM=2.55, SE=0.04) demonstrated a lower level of competition-is-
debilitating mindset post-intervention compared to the control group (EMM=2.84, SE=0.04)
while controlling for gender and pre-intervention beliefs, b=-0.29, t(1360)=-5.73, p<0.001,
d=0.28.
Competitive Orientations. Based on the pre-intervention self-developmental
orientation, 76.80% of the respondents characterized themselves as self-developmentally
oriented (gave responses higher than 3.5 on a 6-point scale), with 46.5% characterizing
themselves exclusively in this way.
In contrast to the control (EMM=3.76, SE=0.04), participants in the treatment
condition (EMM=4.06, SE=0.04) showed elevated levels of self-developmental competitive
attitudes while controlling for gender and the pre-intervention score, b=0.30, t(1360)=6.04,
p<0.001, d=0.25. Furthermore, instead of strengthening the hypercompetitive orientation, the
revised intervention significantly decreased hypercompetitive inclinations, b=-0.24, t(1360)=-
5.18, p<0.001, d=0.23, in the treatment (EMM=2.11, SE=0.03) in contrast to the control
group (EMM=2.36, SE=0.03) while controlling for gender and pre-intervention
While the study replicated the positive effect of the intervention on self-
developmental orientation from Study 2, the findings indicate that the revised version does
not foster hypercompetitive orientation, which could have various negative consequences.
Instead, it provides insights into why and how hypercompetitive orientation may be
maladaptive and highlights its rarity within the general population.
General Discussion
Numerous studies demonstrate the benefits of cooperative behaviors over competitive
ones. However, as competitive and cooperative situations are deeply intertwined, focusing on
and promoting only cooperative features and suppressing competitive ones might be
suboptimal and hard to implement. It appears that if one aims to kick competition out the
classroom door, it climbs back through the window. The fact that competition is often present
can hardly be changed; however, the way we think about it apparently can.
Theoretical Contribution
To our knowledge, no prior intervention work aimed to change people’s competitive
orientation within a randomized controlled trial. The lack of such attempts might be related to
the “negative reputation” of competition in social psychology (see Fülöp, 2009; Fülöp &
Orosz, 2015). Our first attempt contributes to understanding the dynamics and malleability of
competitive orientations, which were previously shown to have strong temporal stability
(Orosz et al., 2018; Ryckman et al., 1990; 1996, 2009). These studies may have created a
view of competitiveness set in stone; however, it is possible that people only lacked the
platform and dedicated time to express the malleability of their competitive orientations. The
mechanism might be similar to the study of prosocial purpose (Yeager et al., 2014), growth
mindset (Yeager et al., 2016), and stress mindset (Crum et al., 2013) interventions. Students
do not think about how they can contribute to other people and communities, how their
intelligence can be improved, or how stress can be good for them until they are instructed to
elaborate on these ideas within the framework of an intervention, which might lead to
fundamental belief changes. The present work suggests that competition is not an exception;
people can change their beliefs about competition, leading to adaptive behavioral and
psychological consequences.
Our results highlight some psychological mechanisms the present intervention can
change and leave intact. However, further research is needed to examine longer-term
consequences and the details of the underlying psychological mechanisms. We did not
explore the effectiveness of this intervention in environments with more vs. less intense
competition. Quality besides quantity may matter too: the present work did not examine the
role of the competitive context in terms of constructive vs. destructive competitive
environments (Fülöp, 2004; Orosz et al., 2012; Tjosvold et al., 2003, 2006): good vs. hostile
relationship between competitors; respected vs. ignored rules, perceived presence vs. lack of
control over the competitive processes. Based on Walton and Yeager's seed and soil model
(2020), students in a highly intense, constructive, competitive context are likely to benefit
more from the intervention messages than those in a destructive, result-oriented competitive
environment.
Applied Contribution
Competition emerges spontaneously in many social situations. People, even
involuntarily, frequently compare themselves with others (Festinger, 1954; Garcia et al.,
2024). These situations can be approached differently according to one’s competitive
orientation. This study presents a domain-general intervention that redirects the interpretation
of competitive situations toward self-development. In doing so, individuals may prioritize the
ultimate goal of self-improvement in competitive situations when comparing themselves to
others, even if they lose. We also pointed out that competition can be placed in a longer time
perspective, regardless of winning the current match, but they can learn from it and be better
in the long run.
In the present paper, we demonstrated that people’s general approach to competition
is primarily focused on self-development. By reinforcing (and strengthening) a learning-
oriented, coopetitive mindset, academic performance can be improved. This improvement
was observed among students with lower pre-intervention grades, with more room for
growth. Students with poorer pre-intervention academic performance may develop a less
constructive view of academic competitive situations. Therefore, shifting their competitive
orientation towards self-development might lead to greater involvement and a stronger
mastery focus on competitive academic contexts.
This intervention, highlighting self-developmental competitive orientations and self-
and task-goals, appears to reorient the individuals’ focus on themselves in a way that can lead
to long-term adaptive responses, leading to academic performance benefits among low-
achievers. Self-developmental competitive attitudes are related to several aspects of well-
being and psychological health (Orosz et al., 2018), and this intervention might have these
downstream consequences if the belief change is sustained.
Limitations and Future Directions
This work represents the first steps toward changing competitive orientation among
university students, though it has certain limitations. First, despite the fact that in Study 3, we
could deploy a nationally representative intervention, we did not measure behavioral
outcomes, only self-reported ones. In future studies, it would be important to assess
behavioral outcomes on representative samples (similar to Yeager et al., 2019). Second, we
found a single relevant moderator—low prior academic achievement. It is possible that other
moderators are also important, such as minority status, which can hardly be assessed in the
Hungarian higher education context as very few minority students reach higher education.
Third, we focused on sports and studies in the intervention content; we did not focus on other
important contexts like the arts or the workplace. Fourth, it is possible that self-
developmental competitive orientations are prone to self-enhancement bias, and this can lead
to a high proportion of people who self-report this orientation. Despite these potential biases,
people want to see themselves as self-developmental competitors and this intervention allows
them to self-perceive this way and behave accordingly. Fifth, although the present research
was conducted in not a typical WEIRD context (Henrich et al., 2010), it was deployed in one
country and one cultural context. Therefore, examination of the efficacy of the intervention in
different cultural contexts could be one of the future directions that allows broader
generalizability. Sixth, we received behavioral outcomes one semester after the intervention
but not several years later. Future studies should explore even longer-term behavioral
outcomes (Brady et al., 2020). Seventh, students’ letters could be analyzed using Natural
Language Processing (Demszky et al., 2024; Orosz, Faragó, et al., 2024) to discover further
opportunities for developing the intervention materials.
Conclusion
Since the middle of the 20th century, researchers and practitioners, building on
Deutsch’s (1949a) seminal work, promoted cooperation interventions instead of changing
how people think about competition. For example, the recent book of Garcia et al. (2024) is
on the same wavelength. The book deals with self-developmental and self-improvement
aspects relatively peripherally, and the tone remains descriptive. The present work represents
a new approach focusing on changing competitive orientations more adaptively, leading to
learning, growth, and enhanced well-being. Promoting a self-developmental competitive
orientation leads to competition-is-facilitating beliefs, self-related goals, improved mastery
behaviors, and elevated semester-end grades among lower achievers while reducing
hypercompetitive orientation.