Emerging Researchers Network (ERN) of the University of
Copenhagen School of Archaeology
1*
Nørtoft, Mikkel : MNoertoft@palaeome.org, 0000-0002-8936-557X
Fagernäs, Zandra : zandra.fagernas@sund.ku.dk, 0000-0003-2667-3556
Halvorsen, Asta Salicath : astash@hum.ku.dk, 0009-0008-0280-3866
Iraeta-Orbegozo, Miren : orbegozo@sund.ku.dk, 0000-0002-6965-6353
Kasso, Tuuli : tuuli@palaeome.org, 0000-0002-9652-9093
Lanigan, Liam Thomas : liamlanigan@palaeome.org, 0000-0001-6415-3506
Monnereau, Aurore : aurore.monnereau@sund.ku.dk, 0000-0002-4683-2529
1,5
Pintér, Margaréta Hanna : map@hum.ku.dk, 0009-0003-4735-3823
4,6
Viñas-Caron, Laura C. : laura@palaeome.org, 0000-0002-3577-0799
& Emerging Researchers Network
1 Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Saxo Institute, University of Copenhagen, Karen Blixens Plads 8, 2300
Copenhagen S, Denmark
2 Section for Molecular Ecology and Evolution, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5,
1353 Copenhagen K, Denmark
3 Near Eastern Archaeology, Department of Cross-Cultural and Regional Studies, University of Copenhagen, Karen
Blixens Plads 8, 2300 Copenhagen S, Denmark.
4 Section for GeoBiology, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, 1353 Copenhagen K,
Denmark
5 Centre for Sustainable Futures, Saxo Institute, University of Copenhagen, Karen Blixens Plads 8, 2300 Copenhagen
S, Denmark
6 Centre for Textile Research, Saxo Institute, University of Copenhagen, Karen Blixens Plads 8, 2300 Copenhagen S,
Denmark
*Corresponding author
All authors contributed equally to this paper.
Abstract
The Emerging Researchers Network (ERN) was established in 2023 as an extension of the
University of Copenhagen's School of Archaeology (SoA), which aims to break down structural
barriers between faculties, including the Faculties of Humanities, Health and Medical Sciences,
and Theology, and actively promote interdisciplinarity. In this context, ERN aims to foster
collaboration among early-career researchers (ECRs) across the university's different faculties
and departments. Its key objectives include creating an open and supportive community for
predoctoral, PhD, and postdoctoral researchers; facilitating networking and collaboration; and
increasing the impact of archaeological research through outreach activities. ERN, like SoA,
seeks to raise the visibility of archaeological research at UCPH and contribute to the future of
the field by making it more inclusive and dynamic.
Keywords
Archaeology; University of Copenhagen; Emerging Researchers; Networking; Interdisciplinarity;
Community
Introduction
Archaeology is a discipline that studies the many different fragments of our past, however, the
field itself must not remain fragmented. As a step forward in this direction, the University of
Copenhagen School of Archaeology (SoA) has been established. For many years, researchers
working within the field of archaeology have been dispersed across different departments,
institutes, and faculties within the University of Copenhagen, which have been bound by
traditional (disciplinary) boundaries. Despite numerous attempts to foster collaboration in
research and education initiated by the staff and the management, this structural division has
previously hindered initiatives to build a more cohesive community. Therefore, researchers at
UCPH decided to create a more official and effective infrastructure that would facilitate cross-
faculty collaboration, for both staff and students alike. This includes bridging the gap between
humanistic and natural science approaches to archaeology as well as breaking down the
terminological and theoretical barriers between their different schools of thought, i.e.
differences in epistemologies, research agendas and research outputs (UCPH School of
Archaeology 2023). After several years of collaborative decision-making aimed at defining and
building this framework, the University of Copenhagen (UCPH) School of Archaeology (SoA)
was officially launched in May 2023. SoA brings together the rich diversity of expertise in the
field of archaeology found at the University of Copenhagen connecting researchers from the
Faculty of Humanities (HUM), Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences (SUND), and Faculty of
sections.
As a direct extension of SoA, the Emerging Researchers Network (ERN) was established in April
2023. ERN is a network of early-career researchers (ECRs), such as predoctoral, PhD and
postdoctoral researchers, and aims to provide a space for shared growth for all ECRs affiliated
with the University of Copenhagen who fit within the increasingly broadening definition of
archaeology. For ERN, the wide distribution of dynamic ECRs in the field is seen as a strength
rather than a weakness. We believe that it is through a culture of collaboration and sharing,
practised as early as possible in our academic careers, that we can develop the field even
further. Leaning on the diversity of researchers in the network not only allows us to expand the
scope of archaeology but also to widen the impact of our work, enabling us to step outside of
the academic sphere.
Purpose
The objective of this article is to introduce SoA and ERN to the wider archaeological community
and highlight their objectives. ERN is articulated around three aims aligned with the broad goals
of SoA but focused on ECRs: i) to create an open community, ii) to foster research collaboration
and networking and iii) to increase the impact of research through outreach and engagement
activities. These are framed by the following actionable targets.
1. Open Community
ERN is an open community, defined as a collaborative and inclusive community, where we
encourage dialogue, support and guidance among its members. We want to ensure that
everyone finds their place in this community, removing the restrictions imposed by a rather
rigid faculty-based university structure. This is within the greater goals of SoA, where ERN may
be a pragmatic and tangible demonstration of the collaborative nature of archaeology as a
diverse discipline. In addition, early-career researchers face a number of challenges specific to
their career stage, including uncertainty in future career prospects, work-life balance or
isolation (Vinther 2019). Inclusion in the ERN community offers opportunities for addressing
these pressing challenges.
1.1 Support
ERN will provide a supportive academic atmosphere through mutual solidarity. This is a
response to the otherwise competitive nature of the academic environment, where ERN wants
to act as a sounding board for its members to work through everyday challenges that they face
whilst navigating the academic system. For example, ERN can be a community where we help
each other with tools to maintain a healthier work-life balance and a place to address mental
health openly and receive peer support.
1.2 Peer-feedback
ERN will offer a forum to ask open-ended questions, use knowledge and experience from peers
to enrich our work and reflect on personal areas of improvement, establishing a sense of
community essential for creating trust and confidence. This can include feedback on
manuscripts, conference presentations, or upcoming public talks, to mention a few. It will be a
valuable way of contributing not only to the network as a whole but also to advancing one's
career and research.
1.3 Skill sharing and development
We see archaeology as an inherently collaborative discipline because many skill sets are
required to carry out rigorous research. The strength of ERN lies precisely in the diversity of
skills and knowledge of its members, which ensures that everyone can contribute to the
different activities and initiatives. This platform can be used to share practical skills between
members of ERN but also to learn from more established researchers at SoA through a diverse
array of activities including workshops and seminars. Our focus spans technical skill
development but also transferable skills such as effective communication and presentation,
project and budget management or event organisation, which can also be useful in sectors
outside academia and thus broaden career prospects.
2. Networking & Collaboration
As the next generation of voices in academia, we acknowledge the responsibility and gratitude
for working with the pre-existing connections which will multiply with the establishment of SoA.
Additionally, we seek to add novel partnerships that keep the field’s theories, methods and
overall research practices relevant, meaningful, and useful.
2.1 Idea development
In ERN we come together to share and give feedback on ideas which could turn into
collaborative research projects. In practice, this involves regular visits to each other’s facilities
and labs, as well as visits to different museums, and interdisciplinary workshops and seminars
where we can share our work. This helps ERN members to understand the approaches and
limitations of other methods and the theoretical frameworks in other fields, encouraging more
open-minded and well-informed scholars now and in the future. When new ECRs enter ERN,
they are asked to give a speed presentation about their work at their first ERN meeting so we
maintain an overview of the research and methods present in the ERN community. We are also
continually mapping out research interests in ERN, which provides a visual overview of shared
research interests and potential future collaborations within ERN (Fig. 2). This overview and
continuous input by new ERN members is an important source of new ideas for cross-
collaboration.
random).
2.2 Funding
ERN is committed to fostering a culture of openness and collaboration by actively sharing
successful funding applications and offering advice to one another. We also aim to translate the
ideas that emerge in our encounters into joint funding applications for interdisciplinary
projects, thus facilitating the feasibility of the projects, advancing mutual career development,
as well as strengthening archaeological research in the long term. Recognizing the absence of a
centralised platform for accessing national and international funding opportunities, we are
continuously updating a shared database to keep track of available opportunities. Finally, we
plan to engage with more senior researchers within SoA, who have been successful in specific
grant applications and organise workshops tailored to these grants to offer structured
mentorship and support.
2.3 Networking and cross-communication
Recognising the strength in identifying the overlap between our mutual networks, we see ERN
as a way to maximise exchange between these intersections. In addition to networks within
SoA and ERN, we see our members as links to external partners with whom collaborations have
been or may be fruitful. As part of SoA, many of the ERN members are already visible on the
SoA website, and as a group, we maintain a community through the Slack platform and an
email list. Through these different channels, we keep each other updated on external events,
relevant courses, seminars, and conferences related to archaeology. ERN members also come
together to organise joint sessions or talks at international conferences, such as the European
Association of Archaeologists in 2024 with the session “Tracing Ovicaprine Lives:
Bioarchaeological perspectives on sheep and goat husbandry”.
2.4 Interdisciplinarity
One of the strengths of archaeology is its multidisciplinarity. ERN thus practises the SoA vision
to strengthen the connections between departments and disciplines through ongoing
collaborations of any form. In this context, we prioritise a constructive and supportive
environment, even when disciplinary differences may arise. A recent example of this is an
interdisciplinary peer-reviewed paper involving three ERN members across two of the SoA-
connected faculties. This study gave an updated review of the current multidisciplinary
evidence for the origins of sheep’s wool combining ancient DNA, proteomics, textile
archaeology, zooarchaeology, and comparative Indo-European linguistics (Viñas-Caron, Nørtoft
et al. 2024).
3. Outreach & Engagement
We see outreach and engagement as important responsibilities for researchers, especially in
Denmark where research projects are often publicly funded. In this section, we propose a
number of approaches to wider engagement with the public and also students.
3.1 Visibility
A significant role for SoA and ERN is to serve as a visible and approachable resource for
archaeology students and other archaeologists (e.g. at local museums) and create more
visibility of ongoing research within SoA and UCPH, as demonstrated by our public outreach
activities outlined below.
3.2 Public dissemination and outreach
Within the larger framework of SoA, one of the goals of ERN is to increase engagement and
showcase the archaeological research being conducted at the university. Our aim is to organise
at least one public outreach event per year. This will be achieved by organising public events,
such as the Golden Days event organised in 2023 with the theme “På landet” (“In the
countryside”) , about how research conducted by ERN members relates to the evolution of the
Danish landscape. In 2024, an outreach event was held by ERN members across the SoA-
connected faculties as part of Kulturnatten (Culture Night) in Copenhagen by creating an
archaeological mystery game. Hundreds of people became archaeological detectives that night
with our help. Smaller, more topic-specific events could also be arranged throughout the year
in the form of workshops, lectures, or similar events.
3.3 Encourage careers in research
As ECRs, we understand the current climate of the field and how it informs opportunities
generated in the academic arena. Our joint experiences navigating a competitive research
environment can aid in managing the expectations of those considering a future career in
research within the field of archaeology, including, but not limited to, current students at UCPH.
Future Perspectives
The study of our common past has implications for the present and future. It equips us with the
tools to navigate current issues and build a more resilient future. The establishment of SoA and
ERN is a direct recognition of this. It aims to promote more flexibility, interdisciplinarity and
openness within the field, break down walls between faculties and disciplines, and connect
academia and the general public. In the future, we imagine that ERN could also include ECRs
from other faculties, as well as provide mutually beneficial collaborations with other
institutions, such as Danish museums. We are hopeful that the vision of SoA and ERN will
continue to have a positive impact on archaeology and society for many years ahead.
Acknowledgements and funding details
We would like to thank the School of Archaeology, which is funded by the University of
Copenhagen, for their continued support.
M.N. has received funding from the Saxo Institute, University of Copenhagen, and Independent
Research Fund Denmark (DFF, grant no. 4255-00005B).
Z.F. has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation
programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 101106627 (PROMISE).
A.S.H. has received funding from the Department of Cross-Cultural and Regional Studies,
University of Copenhagen, The Danish Institute in Damascus, and the H. P. Hjerl Hansen
Mindefondet for Dansk Palæstinaforskning.
M.I.O. has received funding from the European Research Council as part of the project The Fall
of 1200 BC (ERC Consolidator Grant No. 772753).
T.K. has received funding from Carlsbergfondet as part of the ArcHives project (Semper Ardens
No. CF18-1110).
L.T.L. has received funding from the European Commission’s European Horizon program as part
of the project PaleoMIX (101079396).
A.M. has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation
programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 101109463 (THAIS).
M.H.P. has received funding from the Saxo Institute, University of Copenhagen, and the
Elisabeth Munksgaard Fonden, National Museum of Denmark.
L.C.V.C. has received funding from the European Research Council as part of the project
Fashioning Sudan (ERC Starting Grant No. 101039416).
Declaration of interest statement
All authors declare no competing interests.