Reinforcement learning is positively associated
with anhedonia symptoms
Authors: Shiyi Liang1,2, G. Elliott Wimmer1,2
Affiliations:
1Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and
Ageing Research, University College London, London, UK.
2Functional Imaging Laboratory, Department of Imaging Neuroscience, UCL Queen
Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK
Contact: e.wimmer@ucl.ac.uk
Preprint server: PsyArXiv. CC-BY 4.0 International license.
Abstract
Impairments in reward-related behavior are characteristic of major depressive
disorder and closely linked with anhedonia. While previous research has suggested
a negative relationship between reward-related behavior and symptoms of
depression or anhedonia, findings across clinical and non-clinical studies are mixed.
To investigate this relationship, we conducted three online studies with a combined
sample of more than 600 participants. Participants completed reinforcement learning
tasks which involved the selection of either the more rewarding response or more
rewarding stimulus. Contrary to expectations, we observed a positive association
between reinforcement learning performance and anhedonia symptoms across all
three studies: an exploratory study, a preregistered replication, and an independent
dataset utilizing a distinct learning task. Depression symptoms in general exhibited
only weak positive associations with performance. Our results contrast with the
assumption of a negative association between reward-related task behavior and
symptoms of depression or anhedonia. Instead, our findings in large non-selective
samples suggest that anhedonia symptoms can be positively associated with
reward-guided behavior.
Introduction
Deficits in reward-guided behavior are a core characteristic of major depressive
disorder (MDD) and are closely associated with anhedonia, defined as a lack of
interest and pleasure in normally rewarding experiences (American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). These impairments are often attributed to disruptions in
reinforcement learning, which guides adaptive decision-making based on feedback
(Husain and Roiser, 2018; Huys et al., 2013). Despite this connection, experimental
studies utilizing common reward learning paradigms have yielded inconsistent
findings, reporting a mix of negative and null associations between symptoms and
performance in both clinical and non-clinical populations (e.g. Brolsma et al., 2022;
Pike and Robinson, 2022; Vrizzi et al., 2023).
In research on major depressive disorder, anhedonia has emerged as an
important focus due to its association with poor treatment outcomes and long-term
prognosis (McMakin et al., 2012; Vrieze et al., 2014). Anhedonia is also of particular
interest because it is observed in other mental health conditions beyond MDD,
including schizophrenia, post-traumatic stress disorder, bipolar disorder, and
substance use disorder (Shankman et al., 2014). Furthermore, brain imaging studies
have reported anatomical changes associated with transdiagnostic anhedonia
severity, such as decreased striatal volume (Husain and Roiser, 2018; Schaub et al.,
2021) and potential differences in task-evoked brain activity (Husain and Roiser,
2018). Understanding how anhedonia interacts with processes like reinforcement
learning is thus important for improving our understanding of these disorders and
informing treatment development.
To investigate the relationship between reinforcement learning, depression,
and anhedonia, we conducted three online studies with over 600 participants. We
employed two different learning tasks, with features designed to minimize the
influence of working memory and thus increase the relative contribution of
reinforcement learning processes (Collins and Frank, 2012; Wimmer and Poldrack,
2022). Contrary to expectations, we consistently found a positive association
between reinforcement learning performance and anhedonia symptoms. This
relationship was observed in an initial study, confirmed in a preregistered replication,
and extended to an independent dataset employing a distinct learning paradigm.
This unexpected finding challenges common assumptions about behavioral
measures of reinforcement learning and anhedonia.
Results
Our analyses focus on the relationship between reinforcement learning performance
and depression symptoms. After collecting data for study 1 (n = 133), we
preregistered hypotheses for a replication experiment, study 2 (n = 130;
a different type of learning task, we analyzed data from an independent experiment,
study 3.
Studies 1 and 2.
In studies 1 and study 2, participants learned to select the optimal response
over time for each of eight abstract stimuli, followed by choice test and ratings
phases. This learning paradigm has previously been used to investigate reward
association learning and generalization assessed in post-learning measures
(Wimmer et al., 2018; Wimmer and Poldrack, 2022; Wimmer and Shohamy, 2012).
For reward-associated (‘reward’) stimuli, the optimal response (‘Yes’) would lead to a
mean reward of £0.50 on 75% of trials and zero otherwise, with reversed outcomes
for the alternative response (‘No’). For loss-associated (‘loss’) stimuli, the optimal
response (‘No’) would lead to zero on 75% of trials and a mean loss of –£0.50
otherwise. Learning for reward-associated stimuli proceeded rapidly, consistent with
previous findings. An overall bias for initially respond “Yes” resulted in performance
for reward stimuli starting near asymptote (study 1 first trial mean ± SEM 79.29 ±
2.10%; study 2 mean 79.81 ± 2.11%), while performance for loss stimuli approached
performance for reward stimuli reached 81.50 ± 2.08% (mean ± SEM; last four
repetitions) and performance for loss stimuli reached 80.29 ± 2.15%. In study 2,
performance for reward stimuli reached 83.49 ± 1.92% and performance for loss
stimuli at the end of learning reached 77.81 ± 2.23%.
Learning phase trial – Study 1 & 2
Yes
Yes
+£0.52
No
Learning phase trial – Study 3
+£1.00
No
learned which response (‘Yes’ or ‘No’) usually led to a better outcome for a given
stimulus. For some stimuli, the best outcome was a reward (example shown above),
while for other stimuli, the best outcome was avoidance of a loss. b) The two-armed
bandit paradigm used in study 3. Participants learned to select the stimulus that
more likely led to a reward.
Following the learning phase, participants completed a choice test phase
without feedback. We focus on performance for choices composed of individual
reward- and loss-associated stimuli. Test accuracy was 87.75 ± 1.68% in study 1
and 86.25 ± 1.83% in study 2. In study 1, test performance correlated positively with
several measures of depression symptoms: the MASQ anhedonic depression
DASS (depression and anxiety), STAI (depression and anxiety), and negatively with
The positive correlation between performance and MASQ anhedonia symptoms was
that test performance was also positively correlated with anhedonia symptoms
strongest correlation was with positive valence symptoms (PVSS; r = -0.154, p =
symptoms (SDS; r = 0.0101, p = 0.908).
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
masq
and b) the same correlation in study 2. The black line represents the line of best fit,
while each dot represents an individual participant, with darker shading indicating
overlap; dots were jittered slightly along the x-axis for visualization purposes.
Mood ratings (“happiness”) were collected prior to the task in all experiments,
and in studies 1 and 2, we also collected occasional mood ratings immediately after
feedback during learning (Rutledge et al., 2014). The pre-task baseline mood ratings
allow us to examine the influence of overall mood on performance. Across all scales,
baseline mood ratings showed the strongest negative correlation with anhedonia
reinforcement learning performance and anhedonia remained significant with the
inclusion of baseline mood ratings in the regression model (study 1, p = 0.010; study
2, p = 0.0254), while performance was not correlated with baseline mood (p-values >
0.631).
Feedback-evoked mood responses during the learning phase were
significantly modulated by feedback valence (reward versus loss; study 1: t =
(122)
5.939, p < 0.001; study 2: t = 6.296, p < 0.001). Notably, in study 1, anhedonia
(130)
was negatively associated with the magnitude of reward minus loss feedback mood
to blunted emotional responses to outcomes. However, this effect was not present in
study 2 (r = 0.0367, p = 0.685). In study 1, the relationship between performance
and anhedonia remained significant with the inclusion of differential mood responses
to feedback in the regression model (r = 0.208, p = 0.0231), while the effect in study
gen
wer
tset
rewsingle rewvneg study2 r=0.1943
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
masq
gen
wer
tset
rewsingle rewvneg study1 r=0.2567
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
masq
gen
wer
tset
rewsingle rewvneg study1 r=0.2567
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
masq
gen
wer
tset
Anhedonia correlation with test – Study 1 Anheredwosniinag cleo rrreewlavtinoeng w sittuhd tye2s rt =–0 S.1t9u4d3y 2
Anhedonia (MASQ) Anhedonia (MASQ)
ycarucca
tseT
ycarucca
tseT
a b
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
masq
gen
wer
tset
rewsingle rewvneg study1 r=0.2567
2 was marginally decreased (r = 0.175, p = 0.0526); performance was not
significantly related to mood response to feedback (p-values > 0.101).
After the learning, participants also completed a stimulus rating phase,
indicating on a graded scale how strongly each stimulus was associated with reward
versus loss. While preregistered analyses focused on choice test performance,
these ratings may help understand the relationship between anhedonia and
reinforcement learning. We found no consistent relationship between anhedonia and
ratings or the difference in ratings (study 1 reward minus loss ratings, r = 0.166, p =
0.057; study 2, r = 0.049, p = 0.584). These results suggest that either that the
ratings do not capture as clear a measure of valuation as test phase choices,
possibly due to their lack of incentivization and widely varying individual differences
in usage of the scale, or that anhedonia may specifically affect decision processes
engaged during choices.
Approximately one week after the initial learning session, participants were
invited to a follow-up session. Here, participants completed another round of choices
between reward- and loss-associated stimuli and again provided reward ratings for
stimuli. In study 1, 124 of 133 participants returned. In study 2, 113 of 130
participants returned; however, a list-generation error resulted in the loss of choice
test data for many participants, leaving usable data for 83 participants. In study 1,
the positive correlation between test performance and anhedonia symptoms
remained significant after a one-week delay (r = 0.1973, p = 0.0281, rank
correlation). In the reduced set of 83 participants with usable data in study 2, we
found no significant relationship (r = 0.089, p = 0.426). Thus, while results are mixed
across the two studies, the maintenance of the relationship between reinforcement
learning performance and anhedonia symptoms in study 1 is notable given the
relatively long delay between sessions.
Study 3. To further examine the relationship between reinforcement learning
performance and anhedonia symptom, we analyzed data from an additional large
online experiment (study 3, n = 366). This experiment utilized a common two-armed
bandit task. This session served as a follow-up session to a separate study, where
participants had already participated in two sessions across two days. Symptom
questionnaires in study 3 were completed 1-2 days prior to the reinforcement
learning task, whereas in studies 1 and 2, questionnaires were administered during
the same session. In the two-armed bandit task, participants learned to select the
more frequently rewarded stimulus in each of six stimulus pairs (78% versus 22%
reward probability), pseudorandomly intermixed over the course of learning. No post-
learning choice test or ratings phases were administered. Learning performance,
quantified as the proportion of selections of the higher reward probability stimulus,
showed clear improvement across repetitions (first four repetitions 62.16 ± 0.77%;
0.75
0.5
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
rep
stimulus pairs was repeated 18 times during learning. b) Correlation between mean
learning performance and anhedonia symptoms. In panel (a), the grey band
indicates SEM. In panel (b), the black line represents the line of best fit, while each
dot represents an individual participant, with darker shading indicating overlap; dots
were jittered slightly along the x-axis for visualization purposes.
Importantly, we found that overall mean learning performance was
= -0.108, p = 0.0381, uncorrected). Learning performance was not correlated with
general depression symptoms (SDS; r = 0.0305, p = 0.561, uncorrected). Baseline
mood ratings again exhibited the strongest negative correlation with anhedonia
significant when including mood as a covariate (p = 0.0062), while the anhedonia-
mood correlation was not significant (p > 0.95; note that in study 3 we only collected
mood ratings outside of the task). The correlation with performance was also
ycarucca
learn navrisk
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
masq
nrael
Anhedonia colreraerlant nioanv rwisitkh r l=e0a.r1n6i2ng – Study 3
Anhedonia (MASQ)
ycarucca
gninraeL
Learning – Study 3
Time (repetitions)
ycarucca
gninraeL
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
masq
nrael
learn navrisk r=0.1473
supported by a reinforcement learning model, where model-fit learning rate
correlated with anhedonia scores (r = 0.159, p = 0.0023, uncorrected, rank
correlation). Thus, the results from study 3 replicate and extend the findings of
studies 1 and 2, overall demonstrating a consistent positive relationship between
reinforcement learning performance and anhedonia symptoms across three studies
and two distinct reward learning paradigms.
Discussion
Across three studies with a combined sample of more than 600 participants, we
consistently observed a positive relationship between anhedonia symptoms and
reinforcement learning performance. This unexpected finding was identified in an
exploratory study, confirmed in a preregistered replication, and further extended in a
study using a distinct learning paradigm. The tasks employed involved learning from
reward versus loss feedback (studies 1 and 2) and learning from reward versus
omitted reward feedback (study 3), providing convergent evidence for this
association. Our results contrast with the expectation that anhedonia-related deficits
in reward-guided behavior in everyday life would also be reflected in deficits within
experimental settings. While previous research has reported a mix of negative or null
associations between depression or anhedonia symptoms and reinforcement
learning (e.g. Brolsma et al., 2022; Pike and Robinson, 2022; Vrizzi et al., 2023), we
are unaware of any studies reporting a positive association.
Our findings suggest that the relationship between anhedonia and reward-
guided decision-making may be more nuanced than previously understood. Here,
we discuss two potential interpretations of the observed positive association
between anhedonia and reinforcement learning. First, the effect may arise from a
contrast-based or contextual mechanism. Individuals with higher anhedonia might
experience diminished reward expectations and experiences in their daily lives.
When in a controlled experimental task with rewards, they may perceive the rewards
as relatively large, leading to enhanced reinforcement learning performance.
Conversely, individuals with lower anhedonia, who may encounter more rewarding
experiences in their daily lives, might perceive the experimental rewards as relatively
small, potentially reducing their task performance. This interpretation aligns with
evidence of within-experiment reward magnitude context effects in reinforcement
learning (Palminteri and Lebreton, 2021). Related to this interpretation, differences in
attentional allocation or ‘offline’ processes may contribute to this effect. Individuals
with lower anhedonia might automatically allocate attention and/or low-level
processing resources more toward their relatively richer mental representations of
real-life rewards and goals, thereby impairing task performance.
An alternative interpretation centers on the core features of anhedonia:
diminished reward anticipation and reduced enjoyment of rewards. In our studies,
anhedonia symptoms exhibited the strongest negative correlation with baseline
mood ratings. We did not measure emotional engagement during choices, but at
feedback, we found evidence in one of two studies with such measures that higher
anhedonia was associated with blunted mood responses to feedback. Thus, it is
possible that individuals with higher anhedonia experience blunted emotional
responses to task events, leading to a greater reliance on analytical, less emotional
cognitive processes. This interpretation is somewhat paradoxical, as depression is
often associated with cognitive impairments (Ahern and Semkovska, 2017).
Furthermore, it contrasts with the hypothesis that emotional engagement is
beneficial for feedback-based learning (Lerner et al., 2015). Nevertheless, and
without relying on a simplistic dichotomy between ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ cognition, it is
possible that if performance is supported by a gradient of emotional and less-
emotional processes, in some contexts, a shift toward less-emotional cognitive
processes could be beneficial.
Mechanistically, the observed positive association between reinforcement
learning performance and anhedonia may arise from several factors. Common
reinforcement learning models of “model-free” learning suggest two potential
sources: differences in the learned value of associations or differences in how those
values are translated into choices (Robinson and Chase, 2017). Behaviorally,
greater divergence in learned values can resemble reduced decision-making noise
(variability). Typically these parameters cannot be dissociated in reinforcement
learning models (Huys et al., 2013; Robinson and Chase, 2017). As a potential
independent measure of learned stimulus values, we collected post-learning
subjective ratings of stimulus-reward and stimulus-loss associations in studies 1 and
2. These ratings, calculated as the difference between reward and loss ratings,
showed no consistent relationship with anhedonia symptoms. This null finding
suggests that differences in learned values may not be the primary source of the
association with performance. However, this interpretation is tentative, as it is based
on a null finding. Moreover, the null finding may be related to the fact that ratings
tend to be noisy, perhaps in part as the ratings were not incentivised.
Regarding the two learning paradigms employed in our studies, one point of
divergence from most prior research is that we aimed to decrease the contribution of
working memory and increase the relative contribution of reinforcement learning to
performance (Collins and Frank, 2012; Wimmer and Poldrack, 2022). Specifically,
the learning phases in our experiments intermixed at least six different sets of
stimuli. This level of load has been demonstrated to decrease the contribution of
short-term maintenance of stimulus and response associations to behavior (Collins
and Frank, 2012). In contrast, most prior research on reinforcement learning and
mental health-related symptoms utilized designs with immediate or near-immediate
repetition of stimuli (e.g. Brown et al., 2021; Vrizzi et al., 2023), which could
potentially influence associations with symptoms. For instance, studies in patients
with schizophrenia have demonstrated that apparent deficits in reinforcement
learning are better explained by working memory impairments (Collins et al., 2014).
Notably, in study 3, we included a separate working memory measure, and the
positive correlation between anhedonia symptoms and performance remained when
accounting for working memory as a covariate.
Although our findings diverge from previous literature on depression
symptoms and reinforcement learning, prior studies may not have specifically
assessed or reported associations with anhedonia symptoms. When focusing on
general depression symptoms, we found no consistent relationship with
reinforcement learning. While all correlations were numerically positive, only in study
1 did this reach significance (at an uncorrected level). Second, it is possible that the
relatively large sample sizes in our studies allowed us to detect the moderate effect
size association with anhedonia that smaller studies might have missed. Studies with
smaller sample sizes would have less statistical power to reliably detect such effects,
which would often lead to null results that may not be reported or published due to
historical biases against non-significant findings.
An important question concerns the relationship between our findings and
participants’ real-world behavior, as well as their potential clinical implications and
translational value. The observation of intact, and even relatively enhanced,
reinforcement learning in individuals with higher anhedonia symptoms suggests that
anhedonia is not universally associated with a decreased potential to learn and
make reward-guided decisions. Depending on the underlying mechanism, this
finding also suggests that some core neural mechanisms underlying reinforcement
learning have the potential to function normally in individuals with higher anhedonia
symptoms. However, it is important to recognize that these experimental results may
not directly relate to behavior outside of isolated tasks. For example, the
reinforcement learning tasks may not represent key features of real-world situations
(Steiner and Frey, 2021), such as the sustained engagement and effort required for
many goals. Nevertheless, the relative success of participants with higher anhedonia
symptoms in these tasks could provide leverage for using such paradigms as
exercises or as measures of the efficacy of treatment components (Norbury et al.,
2024). Alternatively, if individuals with higher anhedonia exhibit improved
reinforcement learning both in tasks and in the real world, a moderate benefit might
be overshadowed outside controlled task environments by other depression- and
anhedonia-related factors not represented here, such as the need for behavioral
activation or physical effort (Treadway et al., 2012).
Our findings have some limitations. Regarding the sample of participants, we
did not collect diagnostic information or conduct clinical interviews. Instead,
participants in our studies were recruited with no exclusion or inclusion criteria
regarding symptoms, leading to a wide range of scores on self-reported symptoms.
Across the three studies, approximately 20-25% of participants met the threshold for
clinical depression on the SDS scale. While the current sample of online study
participants is unlikely to be representative of the general population, we would
expect that our sample included individuals with diagnosable disorders, such as
major depressive disorder (MDD), at rates comparable to the population average.
Anhedonia symptoms are primarily associated with depression but are also
observed in a range of other disorders, including bipolar disorder, post-traumatic
stress disorder, schizophrenia, and substance use disorders (Shankman et al.,
2014). A benefit of our non-selective recruitment strategy is the resulting
heterogeneity in symptom profiles, which contrasts with the highly selective samples
frequently used in clinical research, where exclusion criteria for comorbidities may
limit the generalizability of findings (Brolsma et al., 2022). By studying a sample that
allows for mixed symptoms, our results provide insights into the broader population-
level relationship between anhedonia and reinforcement learning.
In conclusion, across three non-clinical studies including over 600
participants, we consistently observed a positive association between reinforcement
learning performance and anhedonia symptoms. While anhedonia is known to
profoundly impact well-being and functioning in everyday life, our findings suggest
that individuals with elevated anhedonia symptoms retain the capacity for adaptive
reward-guided learning in decision-making within controlled experimental settings.
These results challenge conventional assumptions about the detrimental effects of
anhedonia on reinforcement learning and contrast with prior findings reporting
negative or null associations in both clinical and non-clinical populations
(Halahakoon et al., 2020; Husain and Roiser, 2018; Pike and Robinson, 2022; Vrizzi
et al., 2023). Although the mechanisms driving this association remain unclear, our
findings suggest that anhedonia may play a more nuanced role in reward-related
behavior, which can inform future research into aspects of motivated behavior and
potential clinical translation.
Methods
Participants were recruited from the online platform Prolific. Eligibility criteria
included residing in the United Kingdom, being between 18 - 38 years old, and
fluency in English. Informed consent was obtained in a manner approved by the
University College London Research Ethics Committee (Approval ID No.: 3451/001).
Participants accessed the experiment via a web browser on a computer (excluding
phones and tablets). Participants were compensated at a rate of £8.21 per hour, plus
bonus earnings based on the learning and test phases in the tasks. Study 2 was
Participants were excluded based on poor task performance or failure to pass
(in)frequency catch questions embedded within the questionnaires; see
Supplemental Methods for details. In study 1, out of a total of 143 participants with
complete data (148 including incomplete submissions), 7 were excluded for
performance. Of the 136 remaining participants, 3 additional participants were
excluded for poor performance on (in)frequency catch questions, resulting in 133
participants for symptom-related analyses. In study 2, out of a total of 146
participants with complete data (147 including incomplete submissions), 9 were
excluded for performance. Of the 137 remaining participants, 7 additional
participants were excluded for poor performance on (in)frequency catch questions,
resulting in 130 participants for symptom-related analyses. In study 3, out of a total
of 456 participants with complete data (464 including incomplete submissions), 78
were excluded for performance. Of the 378 remaining participants, 12 additional
participants were excluded for poor performance on (in)frequency catch questions,
resulting in 366 participants for symptom-related analyses.
In studies 1 and 2, participants were recruited for a two-session study; the first
session was composed of the learning and test phases, while the brief second
session which followed seven days later included only test phases. In study 3,
participants were invited 1-3 days after completing a preceding two-day study, which
initially enrolled 510 participants. Questionnaire data used in our analyses were
collected during the second day of the preceding study.
Experimental task
All experiments were programmed in JavaScript using the JsPsych library (de
Leeuw, 2015). In study 1 and study 2, we used a reward learning task paradigm
adapted from previous research (Wimmer et al., 2018). The paradigm involved
learning reward or loss associations for single stimuli, enabling rapid acquisition of
stimulus-value associations (Wimmer et al., 2018). Study 3 used an alternative and
very common two-armed bandit reinforcement learning task. In all studies, reward or
loss associations were fixed across learning. In all studies, participants rated their
current mood (happiness) before and after the task.
In study 1 and 2, participants learned the best response for each of 8 unique
stimuli to maximize their reward. After learning, participants completed a choice test
phase and a stimulus-reward ratings phase. See Supplementary Methods for
complete information. Stimuli were pseudorandomly intermixed across 16 repetitions
(128 total trials). For each learning trial, participants chose between the options
(‘Yes’) would lead to a mean reward of £0.50 on 75% of trials and zero otherwise,
with reversed outcomes for the alternative response (‘No’). For loss-associated
stimuli, the optimal response (‘No’) would lead to zero on 75% of trials and a mean
loss of –£0.50 otherwise. For the two ‘neutral’ stimuli, both responses led to zero
outcomes. Note that neutral stimuli had not been included in previous versions of
this task but were added here to examine questions specifically addressed in the
post-learning ratings phase. In the early part of the learning phase, participants were
presented with occasional mood ratings following feedback (Rutledge et al., 2014).
Depending on performance, between 1-4 ratings were collected following both 1)
reward feedback for a correct response for reward stimuli, and 2) loss feedback for
an incorrect response for loss stimuli.
After learning, participants completed the first half of a mental health
questionnaire battery and then completed a choice test phase. Participants were
presented with two options from the learning phase and were instructed to select the
option that would lead to a better outcome. Feedback was not presented, but
participants were informed that their choices would contribute to their earnings.
Choice confidence ratings were also collected after choice. Participants then
completed a reward- and loss association ratings phase. For each stimulus,
participants entered a response on a graded scale ranging from “100% loss” to
“100% win”. Finally, participants completed the second half of the questionnaire
battery.
Approximately one week after the completion of study 1 and 2, participants
were invited to return for a follow-up session. This session included a choice test
phase, partially composed of novel choices, and a repetition of the reward ratings
phase. An error in list creation led to the loss of choice data for approximately 30
participants in study 2.
In study 3, participants completed a two-armed bandit learning task, a widely
used reinforcement learning paradigm. See Supplementary Methods for complete
information. Six stimulus pairs were pseudorandomly intermixed across 18
repetitions (108 total trials). Participants learned to select the more frequently
rewarded stimulus in each pair (78% versus 22% reward probability). Feedback was
only provided for the chosen option. Unlike studies 1 and 2, no post-learning choice
test or ratings phases were collected.
In all studies, participants completed a comprehensive battery of mental
health questionnaires, including: the Zung Depression Scale (SDS), mini Mood and
Anxiety Symptoms Questionnaire – anhedonic depression (MASQ-AD), Apathy
Evaluation Scale (AES), State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), Obsessive Compulsive
Inventory – Revised (OCIR), Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS), Barratt
Impulsivity Scale (BIS), Hypomanic Personality Scale – Short (HPS), Intolerance of
Uncertainty Scale – Short (IUS), Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS), Positive
Valence Systems Scale (PVSS), Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ), and
State Trait Inventory of Cognitive & Somatic Anxiety – somatic anxiety (STICSA).
See Supplemental Methods for details.
Behavioral analysis
Behavioral analyses were conducted in MATLAB 2024b. Results are from the
following analyses: t-tests versus chance, Pearson correlations, Spearman rank
correlations, and linear regressions.
In studies 1 and 2, learning performance was calculated for positive and
negative stimuli separately, for each repetition, averaging the proportion of learning
phase trials which correctly selected the optimal option. To test whether test phase
choices were related to symptoms, we calculated the choice phase performance
(choice accuracy for pairs of positive versus negative stimuli choices) and used
Spearman rank correlation (given the skewed distribution) to examine correlations
with mental health questionnaires. Partial correlation was used to test for the
addition of covariates.
In study 3, average learning performance was calculated across all pairs and
trials. Pearson correlation was used to examine correlations with mental health
questionnaires. Linear regression was used to test for the addition of covariates. No
post-learning phases were collected in this experiment.
Acknowledgements
We thank Robb Rutledge for helpful conversations. This research was funded by an
award from the Medical Research Council to G.E.W. [MR/V032429/1]. For the
purpose of Open Access, the authors have applied a CC BY public copyright license
to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
Author contributions: S.L. and G.E.W. designed the experiments. S.L. and G.E.W.
collected and analyzed the data. S.L. and G.E.W wrote the analysis code. S.L. and
G.E.W contributed to data interpretation. S.L. and G.E.W wrote the paper.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.