HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 1
How Reliable is Adult Statistical Learning? A Critical Review of Literature Since Saffran,
Newport, and Aslin (1996)
Chiung-Yu Chang
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
Author Note
Submitted to Meta-Psychology. Participate in open peer review by sending an
email to open.peer.reviewer@gmail.com. The full editorial process of all articles under
review at Meta-Psychology can be found following this link:
You will find this preprint by searching for the first author’s name. The author thanks
Adrian Staub for helpful comments and Lisa Sanders for inspiring this work. The author
has no relevant conflict of interest to declare.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Chiung-Yu Chang,
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst,
Tobin Hall, 135 Hicks Way, Amherst, MA 01003, United States. Email:
chiungyuchan@umass.edu
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 2
Abstract
Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) demonstrated that adults can recognize words of an
artificial language at an above chance level after mere exposure to statistical regularities in
the speech stream. This seminal work led to a resurgence of interest in how experience
contributes to language acquisition. Although statistical learning in adults has been replicated
in many studies, null effects have also been reported in the literature. In this paper, I critically
review the statistical analyses performed by Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) and discuss
how some practices could have increased the false positive rate and caused difficulties in
interpreting the results, including the lack of generalizability. As effect sizes are commonly
inflated in earlier publications, I also conduct a publication-bias-adjusted meta-analysis
focused on 20 studies that closely followed the original experimental design. The adjusted
effect size is between the two original effect sizes from Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s (1996)
Experiments 1 and 2. Suggestions are given for future research on adult statistical learning
and the broader field of psycholinguistics.
Keywords: statistical learning, meta-analysis, effect size
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 3
How Learnable is Adult Statistical Learning? A Critical Review of Literature Since
Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996)
Language is one of the defining features of humans, and language acquisition is
undoubtedly a remarkable feat. Given the complexity of human language, researchers have
long been intrigued by the apparent ease of language development throughout infancy and
childhood. The principles and mechanisms of language acquisition remain hot topics of
inquiry in language science. Understanding language acquisition also has practical
implications, such as improving interventions for developmental language disorders.
Since Chomsky (1959)’s critique of Skinner’s (1957) behaviorist approach, extensive
research has been dedicated to the innate aspects of language acquisition. Because learners
are never exposed to all instances of language, imitation alone cannot fully explain how
learners master the intricacies of language. This sort of poverty of the stimulus argument has
propelled generative linguists to posit universal grammar and resort to genetic bases of
language acquisition. Within this framework, less emphasis is placed on the role of
experience. However, generative linguists still acknowledge that language acquisition is
largely guided by experience (Lidz & Gagliardi, 2015).
Indeed, the environment can shape language development in a way much more
complicated than what Skinner (1957) described. Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s (1996)
pioneering work is the first to provide evidence that learners are sensitive to not only
deterministic patterns but also statistical regularities in language. They tested whether human
adults can learn and segment continuous speech of an artificial language into its composite
words based on transitional probabilities. For two elements X and Y, the transitional
probability of Y given X is the frequency of the sequence XY divided by the frequency of X.
Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) manipulated the transitional probabilities of syllables that
made up artificial words. Because words are stand-alone and free to combine with other
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 4
words, they reasoned that two syllables spanning a word boundary have lower transitional
probabilities than those within the same word. Therefore, transitional probability is a
potential cue to word segmentation. During the exposure phase in the experiments,
participants passively listened to 21 minutes of concatenated syllables without pauses.
Learning was assessed by a subsequent two-alternative forced-choice (2AFC) test, where
participants chose between a word from the artificial language and a foil. All five groups of
participants assigned to slightly different experimental conditions had accuracy above chance
level, indicating a robust effect of statistical learning in adults.
Later in the same year, Saffran, Aslin, and Newport (1996) published another study
on infants using the same paradigm. As of April 23, 2024, Saffran, Aslin, and Newport’s
(1996) number of citations on Google Scholar is 7,179, and that of Saffran, Newport, and
Aslin (1996) is 1,737. Although Saffran and colleagues’ adult study appears less impactful
than the infant one, the statistical learning literature up to 2020 comprises more studies on
adults than on infants and children combined (Isbilen & Christiansen, 2022). These
subsequent studies have examined the effects of various moderators other than those reported
by Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996). Other methods of testing learning success have also
been devised, including online behavioral (e.g., reaction time, Franco et al., 2015) and neural
measures (e.g., electroencephalographic inter-trial phase coherence, Batterink & Paller,
2017). Moreover, since adults are subject to interference from their native languages,
statistical learning in adults is even more impressive than in infants. In this respect, adult
statistical learning is closer to second language acquisition, which is more effortful than first
language acquisition. Research into adult statistical learning can thus potentially contribute to
second language acquisition and teaching (Onnis, 2012). For these reasons, this paper will
focus on adult statistical learning.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 5
Notably, although adult statistical learning has been demonstrated multiple times,
some studies failed to replicate it. One recent case is Experiment 1c by Hartshorne et al.
(2019), which was designed to directly replicate Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996). A major
difference between these two studies is the speech synthesizer that produced the stimuli.
Because the synthesizer used in the original study, MacinTalk, was unavailable at the time of
replication, Hartshorne et al. (2019) used IBM Watson’s Text to Speech to generate the
stimuli. They also ran two other experiments with another synthesizer, MBROLA. Ironically,
although MBROLA has poorer audio quality and is less natural sounding than IBM Watson’s
Text to Speech, learning was successful in the two experiments with the MBROLA stimuli
but not the IBM Watson’s Text to Speech stimuli. Hartshorne et al. (2019) did not compare
these two stimuli sets in detail, but they hinted that “the monotone, constant-rate speech” is
“critical for many word segmentation studies” (Hartshorne et al., 2019, p. 4). Of course, other
differences (e.g., non-native speakers of English) might have caused replication failure, and it
is difficult to rule out each nuisance variable.
Replication may also fail simply due to chance because the statistical power of
replication did not reach 100%. To achieve the desirable power, we have to estimate the
effect size first. An intuitive solution is conducting a replication study with approximately
100% statistical power. However, as we have learned from Hartshorne et al. (2019), direct
replication of Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) is tricky. Some aspects of the original study
are just not replicable nowadays. In addition to the unavailable speech synthesizer,
Hartshorne et al. (2019) noticed several inconsistencies in the original method descriptions,
making replication even more challenging. A related pitfall is how we should define the
effect of adult statistical learning. Several methodological specifics appear to influence
learners’ performance in known or unknown ways. Doing a direct replication implies that we
are defining the effect narrowly, as exactly what Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996)
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 6
reported. However, the effect must be defined broadly enough to be practically useful or
theoretically meaningful (Shiffrin et al., 2018). For example, researchers who intend to use
the statistical learning paradigm to entrain neural oscillations (e.g., Henin et al., 2021) may
not be able to expose participants to 21 minutes of non-stop speech due to other constraints.
In addition, as a proposed general mechanism underlying language acquisition, statistical
learning must apply to a reasonably wide range of situations, such as learners who speak
other languages.
This paper attempts to estimate the effect size by adopting an alternative meta-
analytic approach. Specifically, I review 20 studies that adhered to Saffran, Newport, and
Aslin’s (1996) paradigm in at least one condition. This approach circumvents the need to
replicate every detail of the original study and naturally mirrors the methodological variations
of interest to researchers. Another goal is to discuss the problematic statistical practices in the
original paper, as detailed in Section 3. Before delving into these issues, I provide more
details of the original paper’s experimental design and results in the following section.
The Seminal Study by Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996)
Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) reported two experiments, both consisting of an
exposure phase and a test phase. In the exposure phase, participants passively listened to six
trisyllabic artificial words (e.g., babupu) randomly concatenated into a continuous speech
stream. The syllable inventory contained 12 combinations of four consonants and three
vowels. Among the syllables, some occurred in more words than others, resulting in varying
transitional probabilities across syllable boundaries. The transitional probabilities within the
words ranged between 0.31 and 1.0, whereas those between the words ranged between 0.1
and 0.2. Participants passively listened to three hundred tokens of each of the six words,
which amounted to 21 minutes of exposure stimuli. The test phase was a 2AFC task, where
participants chose from a word and a foil consisting of three syllables from the inventory of
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 7
the artificial language. Six foils were created and paired exhaustively with the six words,
resulting in 36 trials. The order of stimuli was randomized for each participant.
In Experiment 1, two types of foils were used. The nonword foils comprised syllables
that were never adjacent to each other in the exposure stimuli. The part-word foils were
created by replacing the first or the last syllable of the words. Three part-word foils differed
from the corresponding word by the last syllable (e.g., the word pidabu versus the part-word
pidata) and the other by the first syllable (e.g., the word dutaba versus the part-word pidata).
The authors speculated that the part-word foils, which were more similar to the words, would
lead to a lower accuracy than the nonword foils. The foil type was a between-subject
variable: 12 participants received the nonword foils while the other 12 participants received
the part-word foils.
inference criteria explicitly, but they only judged results with a p-value smaller than .05 as
statistically significant. The dependent variable in all tests was basically the accuracy of the
2AFC task for each participant, averaged across different partitions of items and conditions.
Single-sample t-tests established that the recognition accuracy was generally above chance
across multiple items and conditions. Additionally, a two-sample t-test showed that the
accuracy for the nonword foils was higher than that for the part-word foils, consistent with
the authors’ prediction. Transitional probabilities and the location of the replaced syllables in
the foils also seemed to affect the 2AFC accuracy.
Experiment 2 investigated the role of prosody in statistical learning by comparing the
2AFC accuracies in three conditions. The first and last syllables in three out of six words
were lengthened in the initial and final lengthening conditions, respectively. No syllable was
1 The authors misinterpreted p-values larger than .05 as supporting the null hypothesis. See Section 3
for a discussion of this problem.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 8
lengthened in the no lengthening condition. The foils were nonwords with matched prosodic
patterns and if applicable, the same lengthened syllable as the corresponding words in the
2AFC trial. Thus, the no lengthening condition in Experiment 2 was equivalent to the
nonword foils condition in Experiment 1. The prosodic pattern was a between-subject
variable: eight participants were assigned to each of the three conditions.
tests confirmed that the accuracy in all three conditions (i.e., initial, final, and no lengthening)
was above chance. A series of two-sample t-tests indicated that the accuracy in the final
lengthening condition was higher than the two other conditions, which did not differ
significantly. Consistently, a paired-sample t-test showed that participants in the final
lengthening condition learned lengthened words better than unlengthened words. In contrast,
the difference in accuracy was not significant between lengthened and unlengthened words in
the initial lengthening condition. Taken together, these results suggested that final
lengthening facilitates statistical learning.
Note that lengthening or not could be viewed as a within-subject variable for the two
lengthening conditions because each participant in these conditions learned three words with
lengthening and three words without lengthening. Thus, the between-subject and within-
subject variables were fully crossed in the initial and final lengthening conditions.
Mathematically, it is also possible to incorporate the no lengthening condition into a full
factorial design by arbitrarily dividing the six words into two sets. There should be no
difference between the two arbitrary sets of words in the no lengthening condition. If either
the initial or final lengthening effect was significant, the interaction between the two factors
(i.e., the prosodic pattern and lengthening or not) should be significant. Nevertheless, the
2 There was a minor difference between the two experiments: [m] and [n] were substituted for [b] and
[d], respectively. The authors did not explain their reason for the substitution.
3 The authors did not adjust the p-values for multiple comparisons. See Section 3 for further discussion.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 9
authors analyzed their data using t-tests instead of ANOVA. The consequences of such
practice are discussed along with other problems in Section 3.
Although the authors did not provide the raw data, each dot in their Figures 1 and 2
represented each participant’s accuracy in one condition aggregated across all test items. No
missing data or statistical outliers were identified. The reanalysis presented in the following
section was based on these by-subject accuracies in Figures 1 and 2.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 10
Statistical Tests in Experiment 1 of the Original Study
Hypothesis (alternative) Statistical test Results
The accuracy in the nonword foils condition is different from chance. one single-sample t-test t(11) = 6.78, p < .01
The accuracy in the nonword foils condition for each of the six words is
six single-sample t-tests all ps < .01
different from chance.
The accuracy in the part-word foils condition is different from chance. one single-sample t-test t(11) = 3.38, p < .01
The two types of foils have different accuracies. one two-sample t-test t(22) = 2.66, p < .05
The accuracy in the part-word foils condition for each of the six words is p < .05 for one word, p < .01 for
six single-sample t-tests
different from chance. two words, p ≥ .05 for three words
Words with higher transitional probabilities have different accuracy from
one paired-sample t-test t(11) = 2.31, p < .05
words with lower transitional probabilities.
The accuracy for the three part-words sharing the first two syllables with
one single-sample t-test t(11) = -61.3, p < .01
the corresponding words is different from chance.
The accuracy for the three part-words sharing the last two syllables with
one single-sample t-test t(11) = -0.39, p > .05
the corresponding words is different from chance.
The two types of part-words have different numbers of false alarms. one paired-sample t-test t(11) = -3.25, p < .01
a b
The authors only specified that the first statistical test was two-tailed. I assume that the rest were also two-tailed. A false alarm occurred when
a part-word foil was incorrectly chosen in the 2AFC task. Thus, it is the number of trials minus the number of correct responses.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 11
Statistical Tests in Experiment 2 of the Original Study
Hypothesis (alternative) Statistical test Results
The accuracy in the initial lengthening condition is different from chance. one single-sample t-test t(7) = 4.4, p < .01
The accuracy in the no lengthening condition is different from chance. one single-sample t-test t(7) = 2.6, p < .05
The accuracies in the initial and no lengthening conditions are different. one two-sample t-test t(14) = 0.672, p > .05
The accuracy in the final lengthening condition is different from chance. one single-sample t-test t(7) = 7.5, p < .01
The accuracies in the initial and final lengthening conditions are different. one two-sample t-test t(14) = 2.23, p < .05
The accuracies in the no and final lengthening conditions are different. one two-sample t-test t(14) = 4.12, p < .01
In the initial lengthening condition, the accuracy for lengthened words is
one paired-sample t-test t(7) = 1.36, p > .05
different from that for unlengthened words.
In the final lengthening condition, the accuracy for lengthened words is
one paired-sample t-test t(7) = 3.5, p = .01
different from that for unlengthened words.
I assumed that the tests were all two-tailed.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 12
Critiques of Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s (1996) Statistical Analyses
Lack of By-Item Analysis
Hartshorne et al. (2019) pointed out that Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) only
considered human subjects as the experimental unit. Because they treated subjects as a
random effect, their results could generalize to other subjects not observed in the
experiments. However, another issue in language science is the generalizability of the stimuli
or “items” (Clark, 1973). Just as subjects have variability, the effect for one item likely
differs from another. Depending on the research questions being asked, generalizability of
stimuli may or may not be critical. If researchers are only interested in the particular stimuli
set used in the experiment, there is no need to treat items as a random effect. On the other
hand, if researchers selected a set of stimuli rather arbitrarily and wish to test if the effect
holds even when other stimuli are selected, they should consider items as a random effect.
The latter is likely the case of Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) as they did not have clear
motivations to limit the effect to their stimuli set.
Although Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) analyzed the accuracy for each word
separately, the results could not be generalized to other possible words. In fact, they reported
that only three of the six words were recognized significantly better than chance in the part-
word foils condition. If we take the demonstration of statistical learning as their primary
contribution, it may be acceptable that at least some stimuli were learnable. Nevertheless, the
problem of generalizability is severe if the claim is about the stimuli properties, which often
bear theoretical importance. For example, Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) tested whether
the strengths of the transitional probabilities affect learnability by comparing subjects’ mean
2AFC accuracies for two sets of words: three words with higher transitional probabilities and
the other three words with lower transitional probabilities. They performed a paired sample t-
test and reported a significant effect of transitional probabilities. However, it is not replicable
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 13
in later studies (Hartshorne et al., 2019; Isbilen & Christiansen, 2022; Soares et al., 2020).
One reasonable explanation is that other factors also affected the learnability of each
stimulus. The effect of transitional probabilities was not generalized to other studies using
other stimuli sets due to the unknown between-item variation.
In summary, lacking items as a random effect restricted the original findings to a very
small set of stimuli. The most prevalent method nowadays is incorporating items and subjects
into mixed-effects modeling. Unfortunately, Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) did not
report each item’s accuracy or transitional probability, and I cannot reanalyze their data.
Using t-Tests to Analyze Binary Accuracy
Also noticed by Hartshorne et al. (2019), Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) used t-
tests instead of logistic regression to analyze their data. The dependent variable from the
2AFC task is binary, i.e., correct or incorrect choices. To fit into t-tests, the correct items
were counted for each condition and each participant. Although the resulting counts appear to
be continuous, they can only take on certain values bounded between 0 and the number of
testing items or between 0% and 100% in terms of percentage correct. This violates the
normality assumption of t-tests. Conceptually, logistic regression is more suitable here
because it first transforms binary responses into log odds (Jaeger, 2008). The original data are
analyzed below to see whether the choice of analytic tools affects the results.
the glm() function in the R software (R Core Team, 2024). The model for Experiment 1
includes an intercept and one dummy coded categorical predictor, condition, with the part-
word foils condition being the baseline. Thus, the intercept estimate corresponds to the log
odds of the correct responses in the part-word foils condition, which can be mapped to the
4 Syntax: glm(accuracy/36 ~ 1 + Experiment1_condition, data = Experiment1_data, family = binomial,
weights = 36)
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 14
count of correct responses. The intercept is positive and significantly different from 0,
indicating that the percentage of correct responses is higher than 50%. The condition
coefficient corresponds to the difference between the log odds of the two conditions: part-
word and nonword foils. It is significant and positive, indicating that the percentage correct
for the nonwords is higher than that for the part-words.
model again includes an intercept and one dummy coded categorical predictor, condition.
The baseline here is the initial lengthening condition. The positive and significant intercept
estimate thus indicates that the percentage correct in the initial lengthening condition is above
chance. The coefficients for the two other conditions correspond to the differences between
their log odds and that for the baseline condition (i.e., initial lengthening). Although both
coefficients are positive, only the one for the final lengthening condition reaches significance.
Logistic Regression Models Fitted to Data from the Original Study
Effect Estimate SE z p
Experiment 1
Intercept 0.481 0.099 4.860 < .0001
Condition 0.642 0.149 4.299 < .0001
Nonword
Experiment 2
Intercept 0.437 0.121 3.624 .0003
Condition 0.984 0.192 5.134 < .0001
final
Condition 0.179 0.173 1.034 0.3010
no
5 Syntax: glm(accuracy/36 ~ 1 + Experiment2_condition, data = Experiment2_data, family = binomial,
weights = 36)
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 15
Overall, the logistic regression analysis is consistent with the t-test results reported by
the original paper. In this case, using t-tests did not overturn Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s
(1996) conclusions. A less noticeable difference, however, is the order of p-values. Some of
the t-tests in the original paper showed p-values between .01 and .05. As discussed in the next
subsection, these original p-values may not survive corrections for multiple comparisons.
Missing Corrections for Multiple Comparisons
The original paper performed 27 t-tests. While some comparisons aimed to answer
different research questions, others require p-value corrections for multiple comparisons as
they test the same hypothesis. Not adjusting the p-values increases false positive rates.
Below, I discuss two instances of such problem.
The first instance of multiple comparisons is six separate one-sample t-tests for each
item in Experiment 1. These tests all shared the same alternative hypothesis: whether the
accuracy is above chance. Because there were two conditions, the number of tests increased
to 12. Suppose that the six tests for each item form a family of tests. The α level after the
Bonferroni correction would be .05 divided by 6, which is equal to .008. Since the original
paper only reported either “p < .05” or “p < .01” for these two sets of item-wise tests but not
the actual t statistics, it is impossible to recompute all Bonferroni-adjusted p-values. A
notable exception is one p-value reported as “p < .05.” We can infer that its exact value is
between .01 and .05 and greater than .008, i.e., the adjusted p-value. It is thus a potential false
positive finding.
The second instance of this problem is in Experiment 2, where multiple t-tests are
used instead of one ANOVA followed by post-hoc tests. The authors used three two-sample
t-tests to examine the differences between conditions but did not adjust for multiple
comparisons. The α level after the Bonferroni correction would be .05 divided by 3, which
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 16
equals .017. The comparison between the final lengthening and initial lengthening conditions
was reported to have “p < .05.” If this p-value is higher than .017, then it will be non-
significant after the correction.
Misinterpretation of Non-Significant Effects
Throughout the paper, Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) adopted the framework of
null hypothesis significance testing (NHST). We reject the null hypothesis if the results are
significant, but a non-significant outcome does not mean the null hypothesis is true. The first
place they misinterpreted the results is when referring to the comparison between the
accuracies in the initial lengthening and no lengthening conditions: “The means of these two
conditions are statistically equivalent: t(14) = .672, p > .05” (Saffran, Newport, and Aslin,
1996, p. 617). Such a claim requires not just a basic t-test but also an equivalence test
(Lakens, 2017). To test if this statement holds after switching to this more appropriate
method, I ran the two one-sided tests (TOST) equivalence procedure using the R package
scale is the count of correct items. Critically, the 90% TOST confidence interval
encompasses the lower and higher equivalence bounds set at Cohen’s d of 1 and -1,
respectively. The equivalence test is non-significant at an α level of .05, t(9.46) = 1.328, p
= .108. Therefore, we remain uncertain about whether the accuracies in initial lengthening
and no lengthening conditions are different.
In Experiment 2, the authors made a similar error involving interaction. As described
earlier, this experiment had a full factorial mixed design. Two variables were manipulated:
one between-subjects variable (which type of lengthening is ever present in the speech
stream) and one within-subjects variable (whether the word is lengthened). An intuitive
analysis would be mixed-design ANOVA, but the authors conducted a series of t-tests
instead. The authors stated that “In the first [a.k.a. initial] syllable lengthening condition,
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 17
subjects’ mean scores on first-syllable [a.k.a. initial-syllable] lengthened words were not
different from their scores on the other three words [a.k.a. not lengthened words]: t(7) = 1.36,
p > .05.” (Saffran, Newport, and Aslin, 1996, p. 617). This lack of difference was contrasted
with the final syllable lengthening condition, where the items with lengthening led to
significantly higher accuracy than those without lengthening.
Confidence Intervals of the Difference between the No Lengthening and Initial Lengthening
Conditions in Experiment 2 of the Original Study
Equivalence bounds -4.462 and 4.462
Mean difference = -1.5
TOST: 90% CI [-5.567;2.567] non-significant
NHST: 95% CI [-6.51;3.51] non-significant
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4
Mean Difference
Note. TOST stands for two one-sided tests, and NHST for null hypothesis significance
testing.
The authors thus implicitly tested the interaction between lengthening and the type of
lengthening. However, their interpretations hinged on the difference between the significance
levels of the t-tests rather than the difference of the effects, i.e., the interaction between the
two variables. This is particularly concerning because the non-significant effect (i.e., the
initial lengthening condition) was in the same direction as the significant effect (i.e., the final
lengthening condition), and the difference between the effects may not be significant
(Nieuwenhuis et al., 2011). Moreover, as we have seen above, not all items are equally
learnable. Some items could be more learnable regardless of lengthening because of other
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 18
factors (e.g., syllable frequencies). To rule out these alternative explanations, the authors
should have compared the accuracies of the two sets of words under the no lengthening
condition.
Publication-Bias-Adjusted Meta-Analysis
This section summarizes a robust Bayesian meta-analysis (RoBMA; Bartoš et al.,
2022) that detects publication bias and adjusts the estimated effect size accordingly. Previous
large-scale replication efforts have shown that the replication study’s effect size is generally
smaller than the original study’s (Camerer et al., 2018; Open Science Collaboration, 2015).
This is evident when comparing the nonword foils condition in Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s
(1996) Experiment 1 and the no lengthening condition in Experiment 2. Although they should
be the same condition, the accuracy decreased from 76% to 65%.
One recent meta-analysis by Isbilen and Christiansen (2022) has also estimated the
effect size of adult statistical learning, but they included studies with very different
paradigms. For example, Mitchel and Weiss (2010) reported five experiments involving
additional visual cues, but Isbilen and Christiansen (2022) did not include modality as a
predictor. More importantly, although they detected publication bias in the literature, they did
not correct for its impact on effect size estimation. This is done here using RoBMA.
In essence, RoBMA is a Bayesian model averaging approach that simultaneously
considers various frequentist methods, including models assuming publication bias and those
assuming no publication bias (Bartoš et al., 2022). The latter further comprises multiple
approaches to adjust for publication bias. The estimation of effect size is based on a weighted
average of these models, where the weights are decided by how well the observations support
each model. RoBMA is favored over simpler methods, such as p-curve (Simonsohn et al.,
2014), because different adjustment methods can yield different conclusions. Additionally,
the BF obtained by RoBMA quantifies relative evidence for the competing hypotheses and
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 19
allows sequential updating. An in-depth explanation of RoBMA can be found in the tutorial
by Bartoš et al. (2022).
Methods
I filtered the data from Isbilen and Christiansen (2022) with the following criteria: (1)
the participants were adults; (2) the study used Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s (1996)
paradigm, and (3) the testing method was 2AFC. This yields 22 studies. In each study, I
identified the experimental condition most similar to the nonword foils condition in Saffran,
Newport, and Aslin’s (1996) Experiment 1. Since most studies were interested in a moderator
of adult statistical learning, they usually included a baseline condition like the nonword foils
condition. When the researchers did not specify a baseline, I judged the closest match. For
example, Toro et al. (2009) tested English, Spanish, and French native speakers. In this case,
only the results of the English group were submitted to subsequent analysis. Two studies
intentionally manipulated other variables (prior lexical knowledge in Palmer et al., 2019, and
audiovisual facial cues in Mitchel & Weiss, 2010) but did not incorporate a separate baseline
condition. These two studies were also excluded. For the remaining 20 studies, the mean and
standard deviation of 2AFC percentage correct in the selected condition were extracted from
either the publication or Isbilen and Christiansen’s (2022) data set. These descriptive
statistics and sample sizes were submitted to RoBMA with default priors.
Results
standard errors. As standard error increases, effect size becomes more variable. The rather
symmetrical distribution of effect sizes suggests no publication bias, and RoBMA found
moderate evidence against publication bias, BF = 0.313. As for heterogeneity, RoBMA
revealed weak evidence against it, BF = 0.691, with mean model-averaged estimate τ =
0.063, 95% CI [0.000 0.321]. Finally, RoBMA showed strong evidence in favor of the effect
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 20
of adult statistical learning, BF = 850.68. The mean model-averaged estimate of Cohen’s d is
1.026, 95% CI [0.767 1.216].
Funnel Plot with Fisher’s z as the Effect Size Measure
Observed Outcome
Discussion
In contrast to the larger literature analyzed by Isbilen and Christiansen (2022), I did
not detect heterogeneity or publication bias in these 20 studies. Perhaps heterogeneity is
mainly due to moderators in other conditions or other studies not analyzed here. When the
moderators are filtered out, the effect size of adult statistical learning in the sense of Saffran,
Newport, and Aslin’s (1996) experimental paradigm appears to be quite homogeneous. Since
later research mostly sought new findings, often interactions with other variables or even new
dependent variables, whether such studies could be published might not depend on
replicating Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s (1996) study. For example, the accuracy in
Cunillera et al.’s (2016) non-anchor condition, selected as a replicate of Saffran, Newport,
and Aslin (1996) here, was not statistically above chance. However, they could still get
published because their main findings were the effect of the anchor condition and the event-
rorrE
dradnatS
931.0
772.0
0 0.2 0.6 1 1.2
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 21
related potential results. The primary effect of adult statistical learning was thus not subject to
publication bias.
Cohen’s ds corresponding to Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s (1996) nonword foils
condition in Experiment 1 and no lengthening condition in Experiment 2 are 1.956 and 0.926,
respectively. The estimate of RoBMA is close to the second effect size in the original study
(i.e., 0.926) but much lower than the first one (i.e., 1.956), indicating that the first original
effect was overestimated. The current effect size estimate is also slightly smaller than that of
Isbilen and Christiansen’s (2022) meta-analysis (i.e., 1.50).
Suggestions for Future Research
This section starts with suggestions about sample size for future research adopting
Saffran, Newport, and Aslin’s (1996) experimental paradigm. According to Cohen’s (2013)
classification, the current effect size estimate is large, i.e., > 0.8. A simple power analysis for
a one-tailed one-sample t-test showed that the sample size must be larger than 7 to achieve
power of 0.8. The original sample size in Saffran, Newport, and Aslin (1996) was 8 or 12 and
thus sufficient to discover the effect. However, one caveat is that the sample size must be
greatly increased if researchers are interested in between-group variables or even interactions
(see Brysbaert, 2019, for an illustration). For example, suppose that the between-group
variable (e.g., final versus no lengthening) has the same effect size (i.e., 1.026). The power of
a corresponding two-sample t-test would require more than 12 participants to reach 0.8. As
later studies probably have more complex designs, the sample size must be planned
accordingly. Moreover, the present meta-analysis ignored between-item variation. For the
mixed-effects logistic regression approach I advocated in Section 2, simulation-based power
analysis is a viable way to determine the sample size, such as using the simr package (Green
& MacLeod, 2016).
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 22
It is worth noting that later studies have developed other measures of statistical
learning. In particular, some tests do not require learners to consciously introspect their
knowledge of the words (Batterink et al., 2015; Franco et al., 2015; Isbilen et al., 2020).
Compared to reflection-based measures such as 2AFC accuracy, these processing-based
measures have been argued to better probe into the implicit knowledge accrued during
statistical learning (Christiansen, 2019). Isbilen and Christiansen’s (2022) meta-analysis has
also revealed a significant effect of task on effect size, with forced-choice tasks associated
with the lowest effect size. In this paper, I focus on the 2AFC accuracy because it is by far
the most common paradigm. Nonetheless, future studies should consider more sensitive
measures to achieve the same statistical power with a smaller sample size.
Of course, statistical power and sample size are essential to experimental studies in
general. Below, I have two other suggestions for the broader field of language science. First,
open data facilitates later reanalyses and meta-analyses. If we were analyzing data in the
1990s, we might have made the mistakes outlined in Section 2. Thanks to the continual
development of statistical analytic tools, more powerful methods are now available. The
research community is also continuously reflecting on and trying to improve its research
practices. The original researchers or other people can benefit from these state-of-the-art
techniques and insights only if the data remain accessible. The second suggestion is to
document the stimuli used in the study clearly. The stimuli should be digitized and uploaded
to an open online repository. If this is not possible due to privacy issues or technical
difficulties, the stimuli should be described to the extent that later studies can replicate the
critical aspects of the stimuli (e.g., transitional probabilities in Saffran, Newport, and Aslin,
1996). This is particularly important in language science as manipulations often pertain to
stimuli.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 23
In conclusion, the main finding of adult statistical learning reported by Saffran,
Newport, and Aslin (1996) is replicable. However, their misuses of statistical tests likely
caused false positive findings of moderators. Even though the effect size for adult statistical
learning is large, researchers should be cautious if they plan to test its interactions with other
variables. If possible, researchers should publicize data and stimuli to facilitate later
reanalyses and meta-analyses.
HOW RELIABLE IS ADULT STATISTICAL LEARNING 24