Towards a Theory of Lifespan Personality Trait Development
Wiebke Bleidorn
Department of Psychology, University of Zurich
Author Note:
When citing this paper, please use the following: Bleidorn, W. (2024). Towards a theory of
lifespan personality trait development. Annual Review of Developmental Psychology, 6,
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Wiebke Bleidorn, Department
of Psychology, University of Zurich, Binzmühlestrasse 14, Box 7, Zurich, CH-8050, Switzerland.
Email: wiebkebleidorn@gmail.com
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Peter Haehner, Christopher Hopwood, Michael
Krämer, Brent Roberts, and Richard Robins for prior feedback on the manuscript. These
individuals are by no means responsible for potential inaccuracies or mistakes.
Abstract
The lifespan development of personality traits has evolved from a niche topic to a core subject
of psychological science. Looking back at 20 years of research, I review the personality
development literature against three criteria for strong psychological theories. Overall, the field
has come a long way in refining our theoretical understanding of lifespan personality trait
development. Major accomplishments include the establishment of evidence-based trait
measures, the identification of robust patterns of trait stability and change, and the
documentation of both environmental and genetic contributions to lifespan personality
development. These insights put the field in the position to make transformative advances
towards stronger and more precise theories. However, there are still several open questions. I
discuss ideas to overcome existing obstacles to the development of strong lifespan personality
theories and close with an overall evaluation of the theoretical status of the field.
Keywords: Big Five, Longitudinal, Genes, Life Events, Traits, Causality
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
1. Introduction
Traditionally, personality traits have been conceptualized as highly stable, genetically
determined individual differences that are largely immune to environmental influences (e.g.,
McCrae et al., 2000). Two decades ago, Caspi and colleagues (2005) were among the first to
challenge this view in their widely cited Annual Review article on personality development.
Since then, the lifespan development of personality traits has evolved from a niche topic to a
core subject of personality science (Costa et al., 2019; Roberts & Yoon, 2022; Robins et al.,
2024). Spurred by the promise of lifelong plasticity proclaimed by the early works on
personality development (e.g., Roberts & DelVecchio, 2000; Robins et al., 2001), a large body of
research has amassed substantial evidence that personality traits can and do change across the
lifespan (Bleidorn et al., 2022; Specht et al., 2014; Graham et al., 2020).
Much of this research has been exploratory, descriptive, and data-driven, often
designed to show that personality traits can change throughout the lifespan (Lucas &
Donnellan, 2011; Roberts et al., 2006; Anusic & Schimmack; 2016). In contrast, there has been
considerably less theoretical work on the causes and process of personality trait change
(Hopwood et al., 2021; Wagner et al., 2021). Notable exceptions include a handful of influential
theoretical works that have inspired ongoing research efforts to uncover the nature and
sources of lifespan personality trait development (e.g., McAdams & Olson, 2010; McCrae &
Costa, 2008; Roberts & Wood, 2006; Wrzus & Roberts, 2018).
After 20 years of research on lifespan personality trait development, it seems
appropriate to reflect on the theoretical status of this area. What have we learned and what
questions need to be answered before we can refine our theoretical models? In this article, I
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
review the current state of the personality development literature against three criteria for
strong psychological theories. In doing so, I weigh major accomplishments against lingering
challenges, discuss ideas to overcome important obstacles to the development of strong
theories, and close with an overall evaluation of the theoretical status of lifespan personality
trait development .
2. What Are the Ingredients of a Strong Theory of Lifespan Personality Development?
Generally speaking, the strength of a theory is measured by its explanatory power,
predictive accuracy, and ability to withstand empirical testing and scrutiny (Popper,
1934/2002). A strong theory of lifespan personality development should thus explain a wide
range of developmental personality phenomena and offer a comprehensive and coherent
framework for understanding how and why traits change or remain stable across the lifespan. A
strong theory should also make testable and falsifiable predictions about observations including
those that have not been made yet. It should be supported by rigorous and reproducible
empirical evidence. Examples of strong scientific theories include the theory of evolution in
biology, the theory of relativity in physics, and the germ theory in medicine.
Psychological theories rarely reach the status of strong scientific theories when
evaluated by these standards (Eronen & Bringmann, 20121; Meehl, 1978). In recent years,
several scholars have called attention to the fact that the theoretical foundations of psychology
are fragile with few existing theories that stand the test of time and rigorous empirical scrutiny
1 I will focus on changes from adolescence to old age (see, e.g., Shiner et al., 2022, for a review on
personality assessment and development in children) and broad personality trait dimensions (see, e.g.,
McAdams & Olson, 2010, for developmental research on personality variables beyond traits).
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
(e.g., Eronen, 2020; Oberauer & Lewandowsky, 2019). The field of personality psychology is no
exception in this regard (Leising et al., 2022). Despite several commendable theoretical
attempts to explain how or why personality traits change (e.g., Hennecke et al., 2014; Geukes
et al., 2018; McCrae & Costa, 2008; Roberts et al., 2005; Wrzus & Roberts, 2018), there are
currently few theories of lifespan personality development that would meet the very high
standards of a strong theory.
Why is it so difficult to develop specific and falsifiable theories in psychology? Eronen
and Bringmann (2021) discuss three requirements for the development of strong psychological
theories: 1) clearly defined constructs and valid measures to test theoretical principles, 2)
robust and specific empirical phenomena that constrain theories, and 3) the specification and
examination of the causal relationships between the relevant psychological variables. In the
next sections, I will review the current state of the personality development literature against
these three criteria to evaluate theoretical progress in this area and discuss ideas for future
summary of this review).
3. Validity of the Constructs and Measures in Lifespan Personality Development Research
Clearly defined constructs and valid measures are critical to test and falsify psychological
theories (Loevinger, 1957), to enable communication and promote collaboration in the
scientific community (Mōttus et al., 2020), and to increase the likelihood that a theory can be
generalized to different populations, settings, and contexts beyond the specific conditions
under which it was initially developed (Thalmayer et al., 2020). Considering the importance of
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
valid constructs and measures in psychological theory development, how does the personality
development literature fare?
3.1. Hierarchical Trait Models as Theoretical Building Blocks
To date, most research on personality trait development is organized around
hierarchical trait models, with most studies focusing on the Big Five taxonomy of personality
traits: Neuroticism/Emotional Stability, Extraversion, Openness to Experience, Agreeableness,
and Conscientiousness (John, 2021). Although there are many potential broader and narrower
traits to consider (Ashton & Lee, 2007; Thalmayer & Saucier, 2014), there are several
advantages to the Big Five model.
First, the Big Five represent a useful balance between conceptual breadth and
descriptive fidelity. Each of the Big Five domains can be considered a broad, inclusive group of
interrelated traits that are organized in an explicitly hierarchical structure with broader traits at
the higher levels (e.g., Conscientiousness) and narrower traits (e.g., punctual) at the lower
levels (Schwaba et al., 2020).
Second, decades of research have produced psychometrically sound and well-validated
measures. These have been found to predict important outcomes in various life outcomes, such
as academic achievement, job performance, interpersonal relationships, and mental health
(Jokela et al., 2014; Soto, 2019; Roberts et al., 2007; Wright & Jackson, 2023).
Third, there is some evidence for the generalizability of the Big Five across samples and
measures, which allows researchers to harmonize, compare, and integrate their findings across
studies (John, 2021). The broad acceptance of this trait model is illustrated by the fact that the
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Big Five serve as an organizing framework for virtually all existing meta-analyses and review
articles on personality trait development (e.g., Bleidorn et al., 2022; Briley & Tucker-Drob, 2014;
Caspi et al., 2005; Roberts et al., 2006).
Fourth, Big Five self-report questionnaires are easy to use and cost-effective, which
make them attractive for use in several nationally representative panel studies (e.g., the
German Socio-Economic Panel, SOEP, Goebel et al., 2019). The repeated assessment in such
panel studies enables large-scale cohort-sequential research on the patterns and correlates of
personality trait change across time and age (Graham et al., 2020; Seifert et al., 2023).
Overall, there is broad agreement that the Big Five provide a useful level of analysis
within the personality trait hierarchy and that widely-adopted Big Five measures offer
advantages such as cost-effectiveness, comparability across studies, and strong predictive
validity evidence. Nevertheless, the excessive reliance on Big Five self-report data is not without
problems, particularly with regard to the assessment of lifespan personality development.
3.2. Challenges in the Assessment of Lifespan Personality Development
The widespread use of Big Five self-report scales has several limitations that constrain
the conclusions that can be drawn from existing research on personality trait development
(Hopwood et al., 2022; Rauthmann, 2022). First, all Big Five scales have been developed in
cross-sectional data to capture the relatively stable structure of individual differences in
personality traits. Whether these measures are also suited to assess within-person changes in
personality traits has been largely untested. A recent exception is a study by Beck and Jackson
(2022) who used an idiographic approach to examine periods during which a person’s structure
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
of personality variables changed over time. They found that about 20% of participants
experienced at least one significant change in their personality constellation and that these
changes were highly unique to an individuals’ life trajectory. These findings emphasize that
different conceptualizations of personality trait change beyond traditional nomothetic Big Five
approaches can reveal novel insights about the process of personality development (Wright &
Zimmermann, 2019).
A second critical issue of Big Five measures concerns their largely untested
measurement invariance across age, cohorts, and cultures. Measurement invariance refers to
the consistency of the measurement properties of a scale across different groups or at different
time points. In the context of developmental research, measurement invariance over time is
crucial, and its absence can pose several significant challenges. Specifically, measurement
invariance ensures that observed differences in personality traits reflect true developmental
changes rather than differences in how the constructs were measured at different ages. A lack
of measurement invariance makes it difficult to determine whether observed differences across
time or between age groups and cohorts reflect true developmental changes, measurement
artifacts, or group differences that reflect something other than developmental processes. For
example, can we compare the Extraversion score of a 16-year-old with the Extraversion score of
a 75-year-old? There still is little systematic evidence about the degree to which established Big
Five measures can be compared across different age groups (Olaru et al., 2019; Seifert et al.,
2023). A related problem concerns the limited evidence for measurement invariance of existing
trait measures across samples from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds (Thalmayer et al.,
2021, but see e.g., Ringwald et al., 2023). Most research on personality trait development relied
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
on samples from Western educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic countries (WEIRD,
Henrich et al., 2010) in Western Europe and North America, regions that comprise only 15% of
the world population. There is growing evidence that the Big Five are not ideally suited to
capture personality differences in non-WEIRD cultures (Thalmayer et al., 2020), emphasizing
the need to develop and validate personality trait measures across a larger set of cultures to
ensure that observed differences or similarities in developmental patterns are not due to
variations in the measurement instruments across different cultural contexts.
Third, Big Five self-report scales heavily depend on an individual's self-perception and
may thus deviate from other assessment approaches targeting factors like typical behaviors or
social reputations beyond the person's awareness. It is possible that people do not update their
self-perception despite noticeable changes in their behavior or reputation. Likewise, people
may think that their personality has changed even though there is no behavioral evidence. To
date, few longitudinal studies have used behavioral or peer report measures to complement Big
Five self-report scales. However, these studies allow the cautious conclusion that self-report
measures of personality change tend to converge with peer report measures of personality
change (Lenhausen et al., 2022; Oltmanns et al., 2020).
Fourth, a related concern involves the potential effects of reference-group effects.
Specifically, researchers may overestimate or underestimate change in personality traits to the
degree that people compare themselves with certain reference groups when responding to
self-report items. Just as cross-cultural differences are difficult to find when everyone compares
their traits to people within their culture (Heine et al., 2002), age-graded differences in
personality would be hard to detect if people tend to updates their norms as they age. For
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
example, people tend to get less open to experiences across midlife, but they may compare
themselves to other equally conservative middle-aged adults rather than their younger selves
when rating their personality. Recent research suggests that people indeed rely on same-age
peers as a reference group when filling out Big Five questionnaires (Lenhausen et al., 2023),
implying that both longitudinal and cross-sectional age differences in personality traits may be
underestimated when measured with standard Big Five self-report questionnaires.
Finally, there is little clarity about the lower-order structure of personality traits (Mōttus
& Rozgonjuk, 2021). As such, established Big Five questionnaires differ substantially in their
number of lower-order trait scales. How many and which lower-order facet traits are needed to
capture more specific individual differences in personality across the lifespan? Recent empirical
efforts to solve this problem have made little progress in answering this question, suggesting
that questions about the lower-order structure of personality may be better addressed through
theoretical considerations about e.g., relevant manifestations of broader trait dimensions in
certain age groups (Brandt et al., 2023; Schwaba et al., 2020).
3.3. Towards More Valid Constructs and Measures of Lifespan Personality Development
Overall, the predominant use of Big Five self-report measures in research on personality
development provides a solid foundation upon which to build stronger evidence and stronger
theories. It offers a widely accepted framework that combines conceptual breadth and
descriptive fidelity. Decades of research have produced well-validated measures,
demonstrating predictive validity across various life outcomes. The broad acceptance of the Big
Five model facilitates cross-study comparability and accumulation of findings. Additionally, the
ease and cost-effectiveness of Big Five self-report questionnaires have made them attractive for
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
large-scale panel studies, enabling extensive research on personality trait change across time
and age in large representative studies. However, it is also clear that the totality of personality
variation is not captured by Big Five self-report data, and existing measures may not be
optimized for studying personality development. Future research that goes beyond this popular
assessment model and common measures could strengthen the evidence for patterns of
consistency and change across the lifespan documented using self-report measures.
First, scholars need to learn more about the construct validity of existing Big Five
measures when applied to developmental questions. Are existing measures suited to capture
within-person change? Do they the capture the same trait constructs across different age
groups and cohorts? Are these measures invariant across samples from different ethnic and
cultural groups or do we need alternative measures? These questions need to be addressed in
an iterative validation process that requires extensive longitudinal research across age groups,
cohorts, and cultures (Hopwood et al., 2022; Olaru et al., 2023; Thalmayer et al., 2020).
Second, future research should explore new assessment tools and strategies beyond
self-report that are specifically tailored to the assessment of personality change over time.
Viable methods include informant reports, experience-sampling methods, narratives,
behavioral tasks, digital footprints, mobile sensing, or biological markers (e.g., Back & Egloff,
2009; Harari et al., 2017 Stachl et al.,2021). A broader portfolio of personality change measures
would not only enhance the reliability of personality change but may also lead to new insights
about the nature and process of personality change to the extent that there are systematic
discrepancies between different types of assessment methods (Bleidorn et al., 2020).
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Third, developmental research on broad domain traits should be complemented by
longitudinal research on lower-order traits. Knowledge about development at lower levels of
the personality hierarchy is needed to refine our understanding of the lifespan trajectories of
different trait domains as different facets may change at different rates at different ages and in
response to different genetic or environmental triggers (Mõttus et al., 2020; Ringwald et al.,
2023).
In summary, it is hard to overemphasize the importance of clearly defined constructs
and valid measures as the basis for psychological theories (Loevinger, 1957). Owing to decades
of rigorous research on the Big Five (John, 2021) research on personality trait development is
based on a well-defined and broadly validated set of broad personality trait measures. Yet,
more conceptual and empirical work is needed to examine the validity and generalizability of
the Big Five model and measures in developmental contexts and samples from non-WERID
cultures. Critically, this construct validation work should be seen as an important and valuable
part of research on personality development instead of just a hurdle that needs be crossed
(Eronen & Bringmann, 2021), as clearly defined constructs and valid measures are
indispensable to specify psychological phenomena, draw causal inferences, and, thus, develop
stronger theories of personality development.
4. How Robust are the Phenomena in Lifespan Personality Development?
Valid constructs and measures are also critical for the second criterion of strong theories
– a robust description of psychological phenomena that constrain theories. Phenomena refer to
the relatively stable features of the real world that can be derived from data (Haig, 2013). For
example, the trajectory of age-graded changes in Extraversion is a phenomenon that can be
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
derived from longitudinal data. Theories are then needed to explain how the phenomena come
about (Eronen & Bringmann, 2021). Available psychological theories are often too vague to
make precise predictions regarding relevant phenomena (Leising et al., 2022). At the same
time, phenomena are often not sufficiently described to impose constraints on the possible
theories.
The history of medical theory provides a striking example for the importance of robust
and specific phenomena. Before the acceptance of germ theory in the 19th century, there was
a prevailing belief in miasma theory which states that diseases, and particularly epidemics, are
caused by "bad air" or noxious vapors arising from decomposing organic matter. Miasma
theory, originally advanced by Hippocrates, had been based on centuries of observations. It
survived over 2,000 years partly because it was extremely difficult to come up with a theory
that would have fit the observed phenomena better or equally well. It took over 2,000 years of
observations, data collection, and experiments to challenge the prevailing belief in "bad air" as
th
the primary cause of diseases. In the 19 century, when John Snow, Louis Pasteur, and Robert
Koch developed the idea, based on their own and others’ research, that diseases are caused by
microorganisms such as bacteria and viruses, the space of possible theories was strongly
constrained by the observed phenomena. The slow transition from miasma to germ theory
highlights the critical role of precise and comprehensive descriptions of the relevant
phenomena for the development of strong theories.
In the personality development literature, the relevant phenomena are the patterns of
personality trait development across the lifespan. A comprehensive understanding of these
patterns requires an examination of different indices of stability and change. Indeed, one
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
reason for the long-lasting confusion over whether personality traits are stable or changeable
resulted from the fact that researchers have failed to clarify what type of stability or change
they mean when using such terms (Bleidorn et al., 2019; Specht et al., 2014). Three indices have
emerged as particularly relevant for the description of lifespan personality development: rank-
comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon of personality trait development requires a
thorough, robust, and generalizable description of these different indices as they provide
complementary but non-overlapping information (Roberts et al., 2008).
individuals whose personality was assessed at two time points. The different panels illustrate (a)
rank-order stability with no mean-level change and no individual differences in change, (b) mean-
level change with rank-order stability and no individual differences in change, (c) individual
differences in change with rank-order stability and no mean-level change, and (d) individual
differences in change with no rank-order stability and no mean-level change.
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
4.1. Rank-order Stability of Personality Traits
The rank-order stability of traits, typically estimated as a test-retest correlation across
two assessments, indicates the degree to which the relative ordering of individuals on that trait
is maintained over time. For example, an investigation of the rank-order stability of
extraversion can answer the question whether children who are relatively extraverted
compared to others develop into relatively extraverted adults.
Several meta-analyses have examined the rank-order stability of traits across the
lifespan (e.g., Bleidorn et al., 2022; Roberts & Del Vecchio, 2000). All of these studies found that
personality traits are at least somewhat stable, with rank-order stabilities ranging between r =
.40 to .60, depending on the age of the sample and the time lag between assessments.
Moreover, no study to date has found a perfect rank-order stability, suggesting that personality
traits remain open to change across the lifespan (Roberts & Nickel, 2017). In addition to these
broad observations, existing research converged on three conclusions about the lifespan
patterns of personality rank-order stability, while highlighting several open questions.
First, throughout childhood and adolescence, but particularly during the transition to
young adulthood, traits become increasingly stable with peak levels around age 25 and more
These age-graded increases in rank-order stability are summarized by the cumulative continuity
principle of personality development (Kandler, 2010; Roberts et al., 2008) or the “first law of
personality development” (Roberts & Nickel, 2017, p. 161).
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Second, the rank-order stability of traits decreases as time intervals between
assessments increase. Notably, these decreases are not continuous or linear, but attenuate
over longer time lags, and plateau at modest values around r = .20, even over very long lags of
rank-order changes in traits, it is possible to predict individual differences in personality even
over extended periods of time, supporting the proposition of an enduring or “core” quality to
personality traits that remains stable across the lifespan (Damian et al., 2019).
The trend of increasing rank-order stability across the lifespan. (b) The time-based decay of rank-
order stability, with trend lines reflecting the expected decrease in rank-order stability for varying
permission from Bleidorn et al. (2022); copyright 2022 American Psychological Association.
Third, there is little evidence for differences in the rank-order stability of personality
across different Big Five domains, genders, or assessment methods (e.g., self- vs. other report).
Overall, these findings suggest that the rank-order stability estimates are highly robust and
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
generalizable across various potential moderators (Bleidorn et al., 2022). However, there are
some caveats to this conclusion. Perhaps most important, the vast majority of studies have
focused on younger samples from WEIRD cultures. As such, we still know very little about the
pattern of rank-order stability in older samples and samples from non-WEIRD cultures.
Although there is some evidence for decreasing rates of rank-order stability after age 60, even
the most recent meta-analysis on this topic does not provide a clear answer about rank-order
stability in old adulthood, because of the low data coverage for this life stage.
4.2. Mean-level Change in Personality Traits
Whereas rank-order stability indicates the degree to which people experience more or
less change relative to one another, mean-level change reflects the degree to which a trait
decreases or increases in a sample, on average. This type of change is perhaps the most
commonly held conception of personality change, as it refers to absolute increases or decreases
in personality traits over time and age. For instance, the question of whether people become
more conscientious over the course of adolescence would fall under the domain of mean-level
change (Bleidorn et al., 2019).
Existing meta-analyses also converged on several conclusions about the normative
patterns of mean-level personality change across the lifespan (Bleidorn et al., 2022; Roberts et
al., 2006). First, as with rank-order stability, mean-level changes in personality traits are most
pronounced in adolescence and young adulthood, with peak levels of change around age 20 to
30 and smaller rates of change for the remainder of the lifespan.
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Second, there are some notable differences among trait domains, with the most striking
changes occurring for Emotional Stability and Conscientiousness. Emotional Stability appears to
undergo constant increases through the entire lifespan with only a small drop in the rate of
change after age 20. Conscientiousness exhibits the largest shifts across the lifespan, with
significant increases in adolescence and young adulthood, peak levels around age 60, and
decreases throughout the remainder of life. Agreeableness showed a similar, yet less
pronounced pattern (Bleidorn et al., 2022). This pattern of increasing levels in Emotional
Stability, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness has been referred to as the maturity principle
of personality development (Roberts & Mroczek, 2008). The mean-level patterns of Extraversion
and Openness are less pronounced, with small increases in young adulthood, and gradual
decreases throughout the remainder of the lifespan.
Third, consistent with rank-order stability findings, mean-level changes in personality
traits increase with longer time intervals between assessments, suggesting that trait changes
may be lasting. Historically, personality traits have been often conceptualized as set points
around which people were thought to fluctuate in response to certain experiences, before
eventually returning to their personal set point (e.g., Ormel et al., 2017). Strict set-point models
would imply a null association between time and personality mean-level change, because any
change would represent short-term fluctuations that disappear as people shift back to their set
point. The positive link between time and mean-level change speaks against such a strict set-
point model and provides evidence for lasting trait change.
Finally, there is little evidence that mean-level changes in personality vary as a function
of measurement method, gender, or other potential moderators. However, as with the studies
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
on rank-order stability, there is little longitudinal research on older samples and virtually no
longitudinal research that would permit a test of the cross-cultural generalizability of mean-
level change across samples from non-WEIRD cultures.
4.3. Individual-level Change in Personality Traits
Investigations into individual-level change in personality traits – typically assessed as
standard deviation of or variance in change – focus on patterns of personality development at
the level of the person. Questions about individual differences in change ask how closely
individuals conform to vs. deviate from the overall population trends of mean-level change,
accounting for the fact that some people show more or less pronounced changes in their
personality traits than the average trends. For example, although most young adults experience
moderate increases in emotional stability, some may deviate from this trend and decrease in
this trait. It is essential to understand both average population trends and individual deviations
from these norms to identify the factors that drive these changes (Roberts & Mroczek, 2008).
In recent years, more studies have also reported the individual-level change (Borghuis et
al., 2020; Haehner et al., 2023a). These studies provide some evidence to suggest that, like the
other types of change, individual-level change in traits is also most pronounced in young
adulthood (Schwaba & Bleidorn, 2018). However, meta-analytic evidence on this type of change
is still missing. This is surprising given the empirical, theoretical, and practical relevance of
individual-level change across the lifespan question. Perhaps most important, it is essential to
quantify and characterize individual deviations from the average changes in traits to identify
the factors that cause these deviations from the norm (see, Section 5).
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
4.4. Open Questions About Developmental Personality Phenomena
The long persistence of miasma theory had to do with several blind spots in the
observation of the spread of diseases, including a lacking understanding of microscopic life and
failed observations of waterborne diseases such as cholera and typhoid. To advance theory
development, we need to identify the most important blind spots in our understanding of the
lifespan development of personality traits. An implicit problem of blind spots, of course, is that
we might not be able to identify or articulate them because critical information or tools might
be missing (like the microscope in the history of germ theory). It is thus likely that the following
list presents an incomplete picture of open questions in the investigation of lifespan
development of personality traits.
A first open question concerns the lifespan progression of individual differences in
personality change trajectories. This is important, because a reliable assessment of individual-
level personality change is not only required for a comprehensive understanding of the patterns
of change, but is also critical for examinations of causal influences on personality trait change
(Haehner et al., 2023b). During which life stages and for what reasons are individual differences
in personality trait change more or less pronounced?
A second question concerns the generalizability of existing findings to samples from
non-WEIRD countries and less affluent backgrounds. The vast majority of existing longitudinal
personality research relied on samples from Northern Europe and North America, whereas
longitudinal studies in samples from non-WEIRD cultures are extremely rare (Thalmayer et al.,
2021). Moreover, existing studies have often failed to report the ethnic composition of the
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
sample, precluding researchers from examining the role of ethnic background in personality
trait development.
Third, despite a notable increase in studies that have focused on personality trait
change in older adults (Kandler et al., 2015; Krämer et al., 2023; Wagner et al., 2016), there still
is considerably less research on late versus young and middle adulthood (Bleidorn & Hopwood,
2023). The scarcity of longitudinal data in this life stage complicates the interpretation of meta-
analytic estimations of lifespan development, because we cannot distinguish reliable change
patterns from noise in the data (Bleidorn et al., 2022).
Fourth, there still is little knowledge about the timescale at which changes in traits
unfold. Most existing longitudinal studies to date have been designed under the premise that
personality traits do not change at all or at least not quickly. Consequently, the average interval
between personality assessments ranges between 4 and 5 years (Bleidorn et al., 2022).
However, recent research showed that personality traits can change more quickly, at least in
contrast to prior expectations (Roberts et al., 2017), suggesting that we may overlook critical
parts of the personality change process, because we tend to assess personality too infrequently
(Bleidorn et al., 2020; Rauthmann, 2017). Indeed, long intervals between personality
assessments may lead to an overestimation of personality stability and a misrepresentation of
the underlying change process (Hopwood et al., 2022). A related problem concerns the
overreliance on data from two-wave studies that are not suited to identify the varieties of
shapes and forms of individual change trajectories. As such, we still know little about the pace
and shape of changes over time (Luhmann et al., 2014).
4.5. Towards More Robust Phenomena in Lifespan Personality Development
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
How robust are the phenomena in research on personality trait development? Overall,
the past decades of longitudinal research have produced broad evidence for the patterns of
personality rank-order stability and mean-level change, especially during young adulthood,
which appears to be the most critical life stage for personality trait development. It is during
this life stage that trait differences stabilize and trait levels develop towards a more mature
personality profile. The strong and robust evidence for the normative patterns of personality
development in young adulthood has led to the articulation and consolidation of key
theoretical principles. Indeed, the cumulative continuity principle and the maturity principle are
widely referred to as laws of personality trait development (Caspi et al., 2005; Roberts & Nickel,
2017).
Future work can build upon these broad and abstract principles to generate more
precise theories about how personality changes. There are three broad directions for future
research on lifespan personality development. First, more descriptive longitudinal research on
underrepresented samples is needed to complement the current findings on mostly affluent,
younger samples from WEIRD countries. That is, more research on culturally and ethnically
diverse samples from various sociodemographic backgrounds across all age groups, and
particularly old adulthood, is needed to probe the generalizability of existing evidence on
personality trait development (Atherton et al., 2022).
Second, future research is needed to quantify and integrate findings on individual
differences in change across the lifespan. With a sufficient number of studies across different
time intervals and age groups, these data could then be meta-analytically integrated to provide
a more comprehensive picture of this type of change across the lifespan. A meta-analytic
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
perspective would also allow to identify life stages during which individual differences in change
are particularly large or small, offering relevant information about periods during which internal
or external causes of personality trait change may be particularly potent (Haehner et al., 2024).
Third, given that the timescale and shape of personality change processes are largely
unknown, there should be an emphasis on more frequent assessments with sufficiently short
lags between assessments to explore potential changes in traits with sufficiently high temporal
resolution. Multiple assessments of personality traits would also be needed to identify
nonlinear or discontinuous change trajectories, that may be particularly relevant before and
after the experience of biological or environmental change mechanisms (e.g., Denissen et al.,
2019).
In summary, there is robust evidence for the normative development of personality
traits, especially among young adults from affluent backgrounds and Western samples. The
empirical description of the course of personality traits has led to the articulation of well-
established theoretical principles and stimulated broad research efforts to refine our
understanding of the causes and process of personality trait change during that life stage (e.g.,
Bleidorn et al., 2013; Jackson et al., 2012). In contrast, more descriptive research is needed to
constrain theories of late life personality development, advance our understanding of individual
differences in personality change, and probe the cross-cultural generalizability of existing
findings.
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
5. What Causes Change in Personality Traits?
The third criterion for strong theories is that they identify causal relationships between
variables (Eronen, 2020; Eronen & Bringmann, 2021). For example, in germ theory, the primary
causal effect is the transmission of diseases from one organism to another through various
means, including direct contact, airborne particles, contaminated water or food, and vectors
such as insects. It was the identification of this primary cause that ultimately enabled germ
theory to explain, predict, and treat a plethora of different diseases including the recent
example of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Naturally, a core goal of lifespan personality development research is to identify the
causes of personality trait stability and change. An understanding of the most common causes
of personality change would not only allow researchers to explain the developmental process, it
would also provide key insights into the ways to purposefully manipulate and change
personality traits (Grosz et al., 2020; Stieger et al., 2021). The problem, however, is that
discovering these causal relationships has proven difficult.
5.1. Genetic and Environmental Contributions to Lifespan Personality Development
At a broad level, a key question concerns the broader class of causes that shape the
development of personality traits: Is it genes or features of the environment that best explain
the observed patterns of lifespan personality trait development? Answering this question is
critical to help researchers isolate the group of causes that drive changes in traits.
Personality traits have long been considered highly heritable dispositions that follow
intrinsic paths of development, essentially independent of environmental influences (McCrae et
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
al., 2000). According to this perspective, the observed lifespan patterns of both trait stability
and change are thought to reflect genetic maturation processes, whereas environmental
impacts should be negligible (McCrae & Costa, 2008). Others have emphasized the role of
environmental causes of personality trait developmental, in addition to biological influences
(e.g., Roberts et al., 2005). From this perspective, environmental factors contribute to both
personality stability and change to the extent that they either stabilize or modify an individual’s
patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behavior.
The cumulative behavioral genetic evidence supports the conclusion that both genetic
and environmental factors contribute to both stability and change in personality traits (Tucker-
Drob & Briley, 2019). Like all psychological traits (Polderman et al., 2015), personality trait
differences are shaped by genetic contributions throughout the lifespan. However,
environmental factors appear to play an equal, or perhaps, even more important role in the
explanation of personality trait stability and change. Specifically, meta-analytic evidence
suggests that genetic influences contribute to personality trait stability at a consistent/similar
rate throughout the lifespan, while environmental influences increase substantially with age,
such that by midlife genetic and environmental effects contribute almost equally to personality
stability (Briley & Tucker-Drob, 2014). Similarly, longitudinal twin studies suggest that genetic
and environmental effects contribute almost equally to individual differences in personality
trait change throughout the lifespan (Bleidorn et al., 2009; Hopwood et al., 2011).
Although it is now well established that both genes and environments play a role in
personality trait development, questions arise about how genetic and environmental factors
combine to shape individual differences in personality trait stability and change. The answer to
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
this question is not straightforward, as genes and environments correlate and interact in
different ways to produce unique patterns of causal influences that may shape the observed
lifespan changes in personality traits (Tucker-Drob & Briley, 2017).
Gene-environment correlation (rGE) refers to the association between an individual's
genes and their exposure to certain environments (Scarr & McCartney, 1983). There are
different types of rGE. Passive rGE occurs when biological parents create a rearing environment
that is correlated with their offspring's genetic predispositions. In active and evocative rGE,
individuals select and evoke different environments on the basis of their genetically influenced
preferences, motivations, and traits. Theory and evidence show that, beginning in early
adulthood, people become more likely to shape and select their environments in accordance
with their inherent genetic tendencies, resulting in an increased importance of evocative and
active rGE throughout the adult lifespan (Tucker-Drob & Briley, 2017). These types of rGEs may
explain the observed increases in personality stability and contribute to the maintenance of
consistent genetic effects throughout the lifespan (Bleidorn et al., 2014).
Gene-by-environment interaction occurs when genetic variation in a phenotype is
differentially expressed in different environments (Johnson, 2007). Again, the impact of unique
environments that are not shared with other family members increases as people leave their
parental home and become more independent and agentic (Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001). These
effects of gene-by-environment interactions make genetically-related individuals less similar to
each other which may explain the observed lifespan increases in environmental effects on
personality traits (Briley & Tucker-Drob, 2014).
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
In summary, behavioral genetic research demonstrates the net contributions of genes
and environments to personality development. The hard part, now that we know that both
genetic and environmental factors are likely to be involved, is figuring out which genes, which
environmental factors, and which transactions between the two are relevant causal personality
development mechanisms.
5.2. Identifying Specific Environmental and Genetic Causes of Personality Development
Over the past two decades, a large number of studies have explored various
environmental causes of personality trait change, with a particular focus on major life events
(e.g., Jackson et al., 2012; Krämer et al., 2023; Sutin et al., 2010; Wright & Jackson, 2024). The
hypothesis that life events, like marriage, childbirth, or retirement, can change a person’s
personality is consistent with lay beliefs and theoretical accounts of personality development
that propose behavioral, affective, and cognitive adaptations to environmental changes as
critical change mechanisms (Roberts et al., 2005; Wrzus & Roberts, 2018). The focus on life
events as drivers of personality development was further spurred by the availability of large-
scale panel studies that made it possible to examine the presumably small effects of life events
on trait change in large samples with sufficient power (Denissen et al., 2019; Specht et al.,
2011; van Scheppingen et al., 2016). Bühler et al. (2023) recently meta-analyzed the results of
this literature and found that certain life events are indeed associated with mean-level changes
in personality traits. For example, people who enter a new relationship tend to become more
conscientious, first-time parents tend to decrease in extraversion, and college graduates seem
to increase in emotional stability. Across life events, effects were small, albeit similar in
magnitude to the effects of life events on mental health or well-being (Luhmann et al., 2012).
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Overall, these results provided some evidence that life events play a role in personality
development. However, the effects were less consistent and smaller than expected, leading
some scholars to conclude that life events do not have much of an impact on personality
change (e.g., Roberts & Bonner, 2024).
One argument has been that, life events — operationalized as demographic shifts — are
less relevant than the experiences that emerge from life in explaining the normative patterns of
lifespan personality development (Roberts & Yoon, 2022). For example, continuous experiences
at work (Le et al., 2014) have been linked with changes in maturity-related personality traits.
Specifically, those traits that predict certain workplace conditions and experiences often
seemed to be accentuated by those conditions, supporting a corresponsive principle of
personality development (Roberts & Nickel, 2017).
Consistent with this notion, researchers have also begun to focus on individual
differences in personality change in response to life events (Haehner et al., 2023a; Rakshani et
al., 2022). This line of research aims to identify the biological, psychological, social, and
situational moderators that shape the ways in which people react to major life events. Thus far,
few moderators have been identified that reliably explain why people differ in their reactions to
life events; however, recent research suggests that the subjective perception of life events may
shape their effects on personality change (Haehner et al., 2023b; Schwaba et al., 2023). For
example, some people may experience a divorce as negative and stressful, whereas others may
perceive this experience as positive and liberating, potentially leading to different personality
changes (Bleidorn et al., 2021). However, a more comprehensive analysis of a theoretically
derived set of moderators of event-related personality change is still missing.
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Genetic propensities may expose individuals to different types of life events and shape
their idiosyncratic life experiences (Caspi et al., 2005; Kandler et al., 2012). There are great
hopes that Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) of personality might offer new insights
into the ways genes modify people’s personality trajectory across the lifespan and their
responses to life events. GWAS analyze the entire genome of individuals to identify genetic
markers that may be linked to personality traits. To do this, researchers collect genetic data
from large samples of individuals and compare their genomes of those with different
personality traits. By examining millions of genetic variants across the genome, researchers can
then identify specific genetic markers that show a statistical association with certain personality
traits (Lo et al., 2017). To date, there is only one GWAS on Neuroticism that has a large enough
sample size (N >150,000) to detect small genetic effects with sufficient power, while well-
powered GWAS for the other Big Five traits are still in preparation (Schwaba, 2023). With such
personality GWAS around the corner, the field will be well positioned to test the moderating
effects of polygenic personality scores on the selection into and reaction to certain life events.
5.3. Why is it so Difficult to Establish Causal Effects on Personality Change?
Both methodological and conceptual problems have precluded major breakthroughs in
our understanding of causal effects on personality traits. An obvious dilemma for personality
psychologists is that the declared "gold standard" for causal inference – randomized
experiments – is mostly unethical, impractical, or downright impossible. For instance, randomly
assigning couples to either have a child or remain childless is not ethical or feasible. So, how can
we identify the causal effect of childbirth on personality change? To address the constraints of
observational data and approach causal inferences, personality researchers have used
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
prospective longitudinal data (e.g., Denissen et al., 2019), analyzed moderator variables (e.g.,
Haehner et al., 2023a), controlled for individual third variable confounds (e.g., Specht et al.,
2011), used comprehensive matching approaches to control for multiple confounders (e.g.,
Krämer et al., 2023), or quasi-experimental designs (e.g., Schwaba et al., 2021).
Causal inferences based on observational data require personality researchers to
formulate specific hypotheses and make precise predictions about all relevant variables
involved in the causal process (Rohrer, 2018). The broad hypothesis that major life events or
ongoing life experiences cause trait changes through adaptations in people’s thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors may have been too vague to guide research on the specific causal mechanisms
involved in the personality change process.
Similarly, the idea that a particular combination of gene variants (i.e., a polygenic score)
has causal effects on our personality is not accurate. The relationship between genetic variants
and traits is complex. Polygenic scores should be used as tools for understanding genetic
contributions to traits rather than as indicators of direct causation. Again, establishing
causation would require personality researchers to articulate and test the specific biological
pathways underlying the observed associations between genes and traits (De Young et al.,
2021).
5.4. Towards Stronger Causal Inferences in Lifespan Personality Development
Personality researchers have begun to develop causal theories of personality
development that offer general principles to explain trait changes over time or in response to
environmental experiences (e.g., Wrzus & Roberts, 2018). Yet, current theories and existing
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
research need to be refined to provide all necessary information about the specific causal
determinants, moderators, confounders, and change mechanisms involved in the change
process of different traits (Rohrer, 2018). Moreover, an understanding of the temporal process
at which changes in traits unfold in response to biological changes or environmental triggers
would be required to specify causal change models (Hopwood et al., 2022).
A fundamental barrier to advancements in this literature has been the misalignment
between the presumably complex causal change processes and the common study in this area
in which certain environmental experiences or genetic variants are correlated with changes in
personality traits. To overcome this barrier, it will be critical to develop more precise models of
personality trait change that specify all relevant variables and change mechanisms involved in
the causal change process (Baumert et al., 2017; Jayawickreme et al., 2021; Wright et al., 2024).
Such theoretical models of personality development may be articulated in a more formalized
manner in which all (known) input and output variables are connected with one another by
mathematical or formal-logical operations (e.g., Glöckner & Betsch, 2011; Leising et al., 2022).
To probe these models, personality researchers may benefit from adding computational
modeling techniques to their methodological portfolio (Haslbeck et al. 2022). Computational
models require a precise articulation of the directionality of the expected causal effect (e.g.,
increase or decrease in a trait level), the expected magnitude of the effect (i.e., the effect size),
the anticipated timescale of an effect (e.g., the amount of time after which a certain mean-level
change in a trait can be expected), and the shape of change (e.g., gradual change versus non-
linear step-wise changes in a trait). Thus, a core advantage of computational models over
traditional variable-based approaches is that they not only specify the size and direction of an
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
effect but also articulate how that effect unfolds over time and in context (Riley et al., 2016).
For example, a more comprehensive formalized model of event-related change in emotional
stability would require a specification of the expected magnitude (e.g., small) and direction of
an effect (e.g., negative), the amount of time after which a meaningful change in emotional
stability can be anticipated (e.g., weeks), the shape of change (e.g., linear change), as well as
relevant mediating (e.g., increased daily negative affect) and moderators (e.g., lower baseline
levels of emotional stability) of that effect. Ideally, these theoretical models should then be
tested with rigorous empirical designs that allow for causal inferences and account for the
idiographic nature of personality processes to capture the dynamic, multi-determined
personality change processes at both the individual and population level.
Quasi-experimental designs and randomized controlled intervention also offer
promising ways to strengthen causal inferences. Quasi-experimental designs exploit the
variation in theoretically relevant causal factors that are outside the person’s influence but are
not controlled by research protocols (e.g., Schwaba et al., 2021). For example, research on
personality trait change in response to unemployment could be complemented with data on
economic recessions and business closings that originate outside people’s own actions and thus
are less likely to be confounded by third variables (Akee et al., 2018).
Randomized controlled intervention designs trials are routinely used in clinical
psychology and medical sciences to test the effects of treatment protocols on outcome
variables. Research on personality interventions, on the other hand, has only recently taken
root in personality science (Allemand & Flückiger, 2017; Roberts et al., 2017; Hudson & Fraley,
2015). This fairly young literature suggests that personality traits can be changed through active
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
interventions (e.g., Stieger et al., 2021). However, more research is needed to isolate the causal
effects of specific change mechanisms relevant for the observed lifespan patterns of personality
trait development (Bleidorn et al., 2020). Recent advances in internet and smartphone
technology have made digital interventions a particularly viable method for causal research on
personality change. First, the highly standardized nature of digital interventions allows for the
manipulation of specific change mechanisms while controlling for others, providing researchers
with an experimental paradigm to identify specific causal mechanisms involved in personality
change (Moshe et al., 2021). Second, the ability to include large sample sizes allows researchers
to conduct sufficiently powered trials, and third, the ability to individualize the timing and
dosage of specific intervention components allows researchers to detect intraindividual change
mechanisms (Nahum-Shani et al., 2018). Digital intervention data thus have the potential to
reveal the processes and causal mechanisms involved in personality change at both the
individual and population level.
In summary, both genetic and environmental factors play a role in personality trait
development. In addition to main effects, complex patterns of gene-environment correlations
and gene-by-environment interactions give rise to observed patterns of trait stability and
change across the lifespan. A more difficult question to answer is which specific environmental
and genetic factors are most relevant in shaping the development of personality traits.
Longitudinal research indicates that individual differences in life experiences and subjective
perceptions of life events may be critical moderators of change. Methodological advancements
in causality research together with innovations in personality interventions, genetics, and
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
computational modeling promise to shed more light on the causal processes driving personality
development in future research.
6. Towards Stronger Theories of Lifespan Personality Development
Once a niche topic, personality trait development has become one of the most widely
studied phenomena in personality psychology and beyond. The purpose of this paper was to
evaluate the theoretical progress in lifespan personality development by reviewing the current
state of the literature against three criteria of strong psychological theories (Eronen &
Bringman, 2021): 1) clearly defined constructs and valid measures, 2) robust and specific
phenomena, and 3) evidence for causal relationships.
The present review suggests that we have come a long way in refining our
summarizes the main conclusions of this review and lists ideas for future directions towards the
development of stronger theories of lifespan personality development. Major accomplishments
include the establishment of a well-defined set of evidence-based trait measures, the
identification of robust patterns of trait stability and change, and the documentation of both
environmental and genetic contributions to lifespan personality development. Existing evidence
opens new questions, the answers to which could significantly advance the theoretical progress
in this flourishing area of personality research. The rapidly accumulating evidence and new
methodological innovations suggest that the field is well-poised to address these gaps and work
towards strong theories of lifespan personality trait development.
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
Criterion State of Evidence Obstacles Future Directions
• The Big Five traits balance • The Big Five scales capture stable • Examine the construct validity of
conceptual breadth and descriptive personality structures, but their existing Big Five measures in
fidelity, featuring a hierarchical ability to assess within-person developmental contexts
structure changes is largely untested • Examine the measurement
• Decades of research provide broad • The measurement invariance of Big invariance of existing measures
validity evidence for Big Five Five scales across age, cohorts, and across age, cohorts, and cultures
domain scales cultures is unclear, limiting the and develop strategies to address
• Big Five self-report questionnaires generalizability of current evidence lack of invariance
Construct Validity
are cost-effective and easy to • The predominant use of self-report • Explore alternative assessment
apply, enabling their use in large- questionnaires introduces bias tools beyond self-report, tailored
scale, nationally representative including reference-group effects for assessing personality change
panel studies of personality • In contrast to broad evidence for over time
development the structural and predictive • Examine the structure and
• The wide use and general validity of Big Five domain traits, development of traits at lower
acceptance of Big Five scales there is less clarity about the lower- levels of the personality hierarchy
facilitates scientific communication order structure of personality traits
and meta-analytic progress
• The rank-order stability increases • Insufficient understanding of • Quantify and integrate findings on
from childhood to late adulthood, lifespan progression of individual- individual-level change across the
with particular strong increases in level personality change lifespan
adolescence and young adulthood • Limited understanding of • Examine the rank-order stability,
• Less than perfect rank-order personality trait development in mean-level change, and individual-
stability implies lifelong plasticity of late adulthood level change of traits in late
personality traits • Little knowledge about timescale at adulthood
Robust Phenomena
• The rank-order stability of traits which changes in traits unfold • Scrutinize the shape and timeline of
decreases and mean-level change • Limited understanding of the shape personality trait change over time
increases with increasing of developmental trajectories of in longitudinal studies with
assessment intervals, hinting at personality traits frequent and multiple trait
lasting changes in trait levels • Questionable generalizability of assessments
• The rank-order stability plateaus at observed developmental patterns
correlations of .20 over long to samples from less affluent
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
intervals > 50 years, implying a backgrounds and non-Western
stable core of personality cultures
• The mean-levels of maturity-
related traits (Emotional stability,
Agreeableness, and
Conscientiousness) increase during
adulthood, with particular strong
increases in young adulthood
• People differ in their individual
personality trajectories throughout
the lifespan, with the largest
amounts of individual-level change
in young adulthood
• Strong evidence that both genetic • Little evidence for specific genetic • Causal change models that specify
and environmental factors play a or environmental causes of the relationships between all
causal role in personality trait personality development relevant variables through
development • Existing causal models of mathematical or formal-logical
• In addition to main effects, complex personality development are operations would increase the
patterns of gene-environment underspecified and lack critical precision and falsifiability of change
correlation and gene-by- information about the relevant models
environment interaction give rise to variables involved in the causal • Computational modeling may be
the observed patterns of lifespan process used to specify when, why, and
personality development • The scarcity of sufficiently powered how causal effects on trait change
Causal Relationships
• Some evidence to suggest that life Genome-Wide-Association Studies unfold over time and in context
experiences drive personality of personality traits has precluded • Quasi-experimental designs and
development; however, likely in a an examination of the causal role of intervention studies should be used
more complex way than assumed genetic propensities to complement observational
• Predominant focus on main effects studies of naturally occurring
of individual environmental personality development
features does not capture the • Digital intervention strategies are
dynamic and interactive causal particularly useful to test causal
change processes change processes at both the
individual and population level
LIFESPAN PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT