CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
Contextual History Guides Spatial Attention During Search
1, 2 3 4 1, 2 4
Jumpei Mizuno , Yoshiyuki Ueda , Matthew de Brecht , Nobuhiro Hagura and Jun Saiki
Center for Information and Neural Networks (CiNet), National Institute of Information and
Communications Technology (NICT), Osaka, Japan
Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
Institute for the Future of Human Society, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
Abstract
Humans flexibly allocate attention depending on the given context. The dominant view posits
that attention is guided by spatial and temporal sensory contextual cues that directly specify the
target location. In real-world scenarios, however, such contextual cues are not always accessible,
posing a problem for identifying the current context. Here, using a visual search paradigm
combined with eye movement measurement, we show that humans also rely on the history of the
previous context to infer the most probable context for guiding attention proactively. Participants
searched for a visual target among the distractors. On one side of the display, targets were
consistently associated with a particular fixed distractor configuration (Repeated condition),
while on the other side, targets appeared with non-repeated, novel configurations (Novel
condition). The Repeated condition represented a highly probable context, while the Novel
condition represented rare contexts. Regardless of the current condition, participants’ initial
saccade was biased toward the target direction of the Repeated condition, showing attentional
guidance toward the location indicated by the most encountered context. Importantly, this
attentional bias already existed before the onset of the search display, indicating the proactive
use of contextual history to guide attention. We confirm that the probability of the target location
or the movement parameters to report the target could not explain this context-history bias. Our
study shows that, together with the sensory cue-based context detection mechanism, the context-
history is also proactively used to robustly guide attention in the yet-unknown forthcoming
context.
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
Introduction
When searching for a cup in the kitchen, you may probably look around the cupboard. In
the washroom, you may look around near the toothbrush. As such, even when looking for the
same object (i.e. cup), your attention will be guided to different locations depending on the given
context (Anderson, 2015; Bar, 2011; Braver, 2012; Castelhano et al., 2009; Hutchinson & Turk-
Browne, 2012).
Then what cues do humans rely on to detect the current context to guide our attention?
The dominant view in the visual search literature posits that we use sensory contextual cues that
directly predict the target’s location. For example, spatial cues such as the background scene
(Biederman, 1972; Henderson et al., 1999; Neider & Zelinsky, 2006) or specific distractor
configurations (Chun & Jiang, 1998, 2003) have been shown to facilitate visual search
performance. Recent studies demonstrated that temporal cues, such as information from previous
trials (e.g., target or distractor color or location), can also be effective cues for the visual search
(Li & Theeuwes, 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023). Thus, attention can be allocated
based on sensory input that uniquely specifies the context.
In real-world scenarios, however, we do not always have access to cues that directly
specify the current context. Consider the situation of entering a dark hotel room. You may
perhaps try to turn on the light by exploring the place of the switch that you are familiar with at
your home. In this case, the history of frequently encountered contexts, instead of immediate
sensory information, guides attention.
Indeed, previous literature in the reinforcement learning and motor learning field has
shown that humans effectively utilize the probability of previous contexts to optimize learning
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
and adapt to their environment. (Behrens et al., 2007; Bouchacourt et al., 2020; Eckstein &
Collins, 2020; Herzfeld et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2020; Qian et al., 2016). Therefore, it is likely that
humans also use the history of the previous contexts to allocate attention to relevant locations,
enhancing the robustness of the contextual inference.
Here, using a contextual cueing paradigm in a visual search task, combined with eye
movement tracking, we examined whether the probability of contexts can also work as a relevant
cue to guide attention.
Experiment 1
By measuring eye movements during visual search tasks, we examined if the history of
previous contexts is actively used to guide attention.
Method
Participants
Students from Kyoto University (N = 50, 23 women, M = 20.58 years) participated in
age
this study. The sample size was determined a priori, using the data of the pilot study to estimate
the required sample size to obtain a sufficient effect [G*Power 3.1.9.7 (Faul et al., 2007)]. (see
details in Supplementary Materials)
Task Design and Procedure
Participants performed a visual search task, locating a rotated “T” (target) among “L”
shapes (distractors) and clicking on it using a computer mouse. These letters in white were
displayed on a grey background within a 10 × 10 invisible grid (20.7° × 18.8° visual angle).
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
the target appeared in one of eight fixed locations (see details in the Supplementary Information).
We presented two conditions: Repeated and Novel. Each target location was associated
with a specific configuration of distractors in the Repeated condition, while a new configuration
was generated for every trial in the Novel condition. Thus, the Repeated conditions represented a
highly probable context, whereas the Novel condition represented a rare context.
For half of the participants, targets in the Repeated condition appeared on the right side
the left (yellow boxes). In the Novel condition, targets were consistently presented on the side
opposite the Repeated condition. Although the same context (distractor configuration) repeated
in the Repeated condition, the overall probability of where the target would appear was kept
equal across all possible target locations. This design prevented attention from being guided
toward the highly probable ‘target’ location, avoiding the probability cueing effect (Jiang et al.,
2014). Eye movements were continuously tracked using Eyelink 1000 system (SR Research Inc.,
Canada) to capture the participants’ attention allocation throughout the task (Hoffman &
Subramaniam, 1995).
We focused on the initial allocation of attention measured by the first eye movement as
the signature of contextual-cue-independent guidance of attention. If participants proactively use
the history of the context for attentional guidance, their initial eye movements should deviate
toward the targets associated with the most frequently encountered context, regardless of the
current condition (Repeated or Novel). The visual search task comprised 640 trials, divided into
10 blocks, with half the trials in the Repeated condition. We randomized the order of the
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
Repeated and Novel condition trials so the participants could not predict the upcoming context
At the end of the experiment, participants responded to three questions to assess whether
they noticed the distribution of targets and the repetition of configurations (see details in the
Supplementary Information). We administered a second task designed to test the generalization
of attentional bias to task-independent situations (prediction-based target localization [PTL]
task), which indicated no such evidence of generalization (see Supplementary Information).
Data Analysis
We assessed visual search performance by measuring reaction time (RT) from the
display onset to target clicking. We compared eye movement data from the first three blocks
(pre-learning) with data from the last three blocks (post-learning) to examine the context-
dependent effects on attentional guidance. In the eye movement analysis, we focused on
participants showing a positive contextual cueing effect (i.e., shorter RTs in the Repeated
condition compared to the Novel condition in the final three blocks, N = 35). This manipulation,
although orthogonal to the main focus of the study (the effect of context probability on initial
attentional guidance), ensured that we analyzed participants who had learned the context
effectively.
We measured attentional bias by calculating the deviation from the center of the display
to the landing position of the first saccade (first fixation). We also analyzed the deviation of
fixation points before the onset of the search display—prior to any relevant contextual cue—to
assess attentional bias independent of sensory cue processing. Throughout the manuscript,
positive values indicate the first fixation was biased toward targets in the high-probability
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
context (Repeated), while negative values indicate a bias toward targets in the low-probability
context (Novel).
Results and Discussion
Search Performance and Accuracy
First, we confirmed the classical contextual cueing effect in visual search (Chun & Jiang,
1998). As learning progressed, RTs were significantly shorter in the Repeated condition than the
showed a significant main effect of Condition, F(1, 49) = 41.4, p < .001, η = .46, as well as a
Condition × Block interaction, F(9, 441) = 6.6, p < .001, η = .12. This result indicates that
participants’ search efficiency improved with the repetition of the same distractor configuration
(context), replicating the classical contextual cueing effect. In contrast, accuracy did not differ
significantly between conditions, indicating no speed-accuracy trade-off, suggesting that the
search strategy remained consistent between the Repeated and Novel conditions.
Biased Attention Toward the Target in the More Frequent Context
What we wished to know was whether the initial allocation of attention was influenced
by the history of the prior context. We found that the location of the first fixation was
significantly biased toward the target direction of the Repeated condition, regardless of the
condition of the trial (Repeated or Novel), especially in the final three blocks in which the
contextual cueing effect was well established. A two-way repeated-measure ANOVA (Condition
× Block) revealed a significant main effect of Block, F(1, 34) = 19.82, p < .001, η = .37, and a
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
contextual cues has been reported before, showing an efficient utilization of sensory contextual
cues during the search (Peterson & Kramer, 2001). However, the bias in the current experiment
is not simply driven by the contextual cue, since it also occurs in the Novel condition where no
context exists, and the direction of the bias was opposite to the target direction in the Novel
contextual cueing effect (RT difference between Repeated and Novel conditions in the final
block) and the first fixation in both the Repeated (r = .48, p < .01) and Novel (r = .54, p < .001)
conditions. This finding indicates that learning of the context is closely tied to the development
These results indicate that regardless of the type of the contextual cue, participants’
saccades—and thus their spatial attention—were biased toward the target direction of the high-
probability context. In other words, even in the absence of the familiar context, attention was
biased toward the relevant direction for the familiar context, regardless of whether it is useful for
the current visual search.
More importantly, we found the same tendency even before the onset of the search
display. The fixation location just before the search display onset was also significantly biased
developed through learning the probability of the context, resulting in a significant difference
between the first and last blocks (paired t-test; t(34) = −2.59, p < .05, d = −.44). This strongly
indicates that attention is proactively biased toward the target direction of the most probable
context, even in the absence of sensory input to infer the current context.
Experiment 2
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
In Experiment 1, participants’ initial attention was biased toward the target direction
associated with the most probable context (i.e., the repeated distractor configuration), regardless
of its utility for the current trial. However, because participants needed to click on the target by
moving their hand (computer mouse), it remains possible that this attentional bias resulted from
motor preparation to move toward the target, driven by eye-hand coordination mechanisms
(Johansson et al., 2001), rather than from attentional guidance based on the prior context
probability. We conducted Experiment 2 to rule out this possibility, Experiment 2 was similar to
Experiment 1 except for omitting the mouse movement requirement.
Method
Participants
Students (N = 50, 29 women, M = 21.40) participated in this study. The sample size
age
was chosen to match that of Experiment 1.
Task Design and Procedure
The apparatus and stimuli used in Experiment 2 were identical to those in Experiment 1,
except that instead of using a computer mouse, we instructed participants to detect a rotated
target and report its direction (90° or 270°) by pressing one of two keys (“F” and “J” keys).
Thus, participants did not need to move the mouse cursor to the exact location of the target.
Results and Discussion
Search Performance
We confirmed the primary contextual cueing effect in Experiment 2. A two-way
repeated-measure ANOVA showed a significant main effect of Condition, F(1, 49) = 44.5, p
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
2 2
< .001, η = .48, and a significant Condition × Block interaction, F(5, 250) = 5.9, p < .001, η
p p
Eye Movement
Importantly, we also qualitatively replicated the eye movement pattern observed in
Experiment 1. The first fixation deviated toward the targets of the Repeated condition regardless
of the condition in the given trial (Repeated or Novel). A two-way repeated-measure ANOVA
(Condition × Block) revealed a significant main effect of Block, F(1, 42) = 25.86, p < .001, η
bias was also evident in eye metrics recorded before the onset of the search display (t(42) =
−3.53, p < .01, d = −.54). These results demonstrate that the biased eye movements observed in
Experiment 1 were not merely due to the motor preparation for hand movements but are likely
the result of attentional guidance based on the history of context.
Experiment 3
In Experiments 1 and 2, eye movements were consistently biased toward the target
direction associated with the most frequently observed context, irrespective of the context in the
current trial. However, since RTs in the Repeated condition eventually became faster than in the
Novel condition, this bias might be explained by participants learning to attend to faster-to-click
targets (i.e., history of movements), rather than learning familiar contextual cues (i.e., history of
contexts). If this were the case, making the movement faster for one side of the targets compared
to the other side, even without familiar contexts, should yield the same result. To address this,
Experiment 3 examined whether differences in movement easiness could bias attention before
and after the task onset.
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
Method
Participants
Students (N = 50, 17 women, M = 21.18 years) participated in this study. The sample
age
size was chosen to match that of Experiment 1.
Task Design and Procedure
The apparatus and procedure were similar to those in Experiment 1, with two key
differences. Firstly, random configurations were presented each time the target appeared in any
of the eight locations, such that all the trials were in the novel condition (i.e., no contextual
familiarity effect). Secondly, the gain of the mouse movement was reduced (to 70% of the
normal gain) for one side of the targets, increasing the movement cost in that side of the targets
(slow-RT condition). If such increased time for one side of the targets drives eye movement bias,
we expected to see a bias toward the less effortful target direction (fast-RT condition), even
without contextual information. The target position and the gain of the mouse movement were
counterbalanced across participants.
Results and discussion
Search Performance
We successfully manipulated RT patterns to resemble the contextual cueing effect
observed in Experiments 1 and 2, even without any contextual information. RTs significantly
became shorter in the fast-RT condition compared to the slow-RT condition, as indicated by a
Eye Movement
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
The first saccade pattern was similar to Experiments 1 and 2 but with some distinct
more frequently in later blocks (main effect of Block, F(1, 40)= 41.72, p < .001, η = .51). Thus,
the history of movement easiness can also facilitate the direction of attention, even without
contextual cues. However, the bias was more robust in the fast-RT condition compared to the
slow-RT condition (main effect of Condition, F(1, 40)= 41.72, p < .001, η = .51), which was
not observed in Experiments 1 and 2, in which the bias was similar between the Repeated and
Novel conditions. More importantly, no significant difference in eye movement patterns was
This finding indicates that in Experiment 3, attention was not proactively guided by past
movement experiences but instead influenced after the search display appeared. Taken together,
the proactive attentional guidance found in Experiments 1 and 2 cannot be explained solely by
the history of movements, whereas it is more likely driven by the history of contexts.
General Discussion
It is established that contextual cues are used to guide attention (Beesley et al., 2015;
Brady & Chun, 2007; Chun & Jiang, 1998). Other than such cues that directly specify the target
location, we demonstrate that humans also use the history of the context to infer the most
probable context. Participants consistently biased their attention toward targets associated with
the most frequently observed context. This indicates that attention is not only guided by the
memory of context-target associations but also by taking the occurrence probability of each
context into account.
Previous studies have shown that attention can be guided toward frequently presented
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
targets (probability cueing; Jiang et al., 2014). Our findings critically differ from this, since we
kept the target presentation frequency equal throughout the experiment. Instead, attention in our
study was biased by the frequency of distractor configurations (contexts), suggesting that context
probability, rather than target probability, drives attentional bias.
Importantly, this attentional bias was observed before the search display onset and thus,
was not triggered by the information of the distractor configuration (contextual cue) per se.
Previous studies have shown that the temporal context, such as input from the previous trial, can
guide attention in the current trial (Briscoe & Gilchrist, 2022; Li & Theeuwes, 2020; Stilwell &
Vecera, 2022; Wang et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2023). Although this can be regarded as attentional
guidance without immediate sensory input, it still relies on temporal contextual cues. By
contrast, our findings indicate that attention is guided not by the contextual cue itself, but by the
history (i.e. occurrence probability) of the context. Therefore, our results fundamentally differ
from previous studies reporting contextual cue-based attentional guidance.
These findings provide a fresh interpretation of the classical contextual cueing effect in
visual search tasks. Previous studies have shown that the search times decrease for targets
associated with a particular context, whereas non-associated targets do not benefit similarly. A
typical explanation is that participants improve search efficiency by learning the cue-target
association (Goujon et al., 2015; Sisk et al., 2019), which is absent for non-context targets.
However, our results show that, together with the learning of cue-target associations, attentional
guidance also emerges toward context-targets established through the history of the context. Our
result indicates that both local context-target associations and a global context-history bias
combine to guide attention, enhancing search efficiency
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH
Our task design associates one target side with the novel (random) context, which raises
the question: why did participants not allocate attention to targets associated with the Novel
condition when the context was uncertain? Two explanations are possible. Firstly, humans may
have difficulty learning the absence of regularity (Williams & Griffiths, 2013), making it
challenging to associate a “random configuration” context with a target. Secondly, relying on
familiar contexts may reduce the cognitive effort required to search for a target (Bacon & Egeth,
1994; Leber & Egeth, 2006). Future research could explore why participants do not learn random
contexts (but also see Ogasa et al., 2024)
In conclusion, we found that attention is guided by the history of the previous contexts.
Such proactive contextual inference may contribute to adaptive navigation through complex
environments, particularly when the context is uncertain (Collins & Frank, 2016; Ferrari et al.,
2022; Heald et al., 2023; Mirza et al., 2019).
CONTEXTUAL HISTORY GUIDES SPATIAL ATTENTION DURING SEARCH