EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 1
Evidence-Based Practices for the Psychology Classroom Derived from Universal Design
for Learning
Raechel N. Soicher1, Carolyn Shivers2, Kathleen R. Bogart3, and Morton Ann Gernsbacher4
1Teaching + Learning Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2Department of Psychology, Niagara University
3School of Psychological Science, Oregon State University
4Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Author Note
Corresponding author: Raechel N. Soicher, Teaching + Learning Lab, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, E19-611, Cambridge, MA 02139; raechel@mit.edu
Author Contribution Statement
RS: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – Original Draft, Review & Editing, Project
Administration. CS: Investigation, Writing – Original Draft, Review & Editing. KB: Writing –
Original Draft, Review & Editing. MAG: Conceptualization, Writing Review & Editing.
All authors declare they have no conflicts of interest related to this manuscript.
Word count: 1,999
Draft version 1.0, 12/24/24. This paper has not been peer reviewed.
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 2
Abstract
Although Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is a ubiquitous phrase higher education, we invite
psychology instructors, researchers, and educational developers to look beyond UDL as a
checklist of course design elements. The UDL framework was designed for and continues to be
in dialogue with our disabled students and their educational experiences. In this article, we
introduce the reader to the fundamentals of UDL, briefly review the empirical evidence
supporting the framework, and suggest how instructors can apply the evidence-based practices
derived from UDL in their own classrooms. Importantly, we end the article by drawing attention
to disability justice, to which UDL is inextricably linked.
Keywords: higher education, universal design, disability justice, pedagogy
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 3
Evidence-Based Practices for the Psychology Classroom Derived from Universal Design
for Learning
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) can be defined as “the use of multiple and flexible
strategies to address the needs of all students,” and particularly those with disabilities
(Dolmage, 2015, n.p.). Recently, Boysen (2024) argued that UDL shares “troubling similarities”
with the concept of learning styles, citing a weak research base. We agree with Boysen (2024)
that researchers need to “examine it carefully, not accept it uncritically” (p. 211), however, in this
article, we describe a strong evidence base and disability justice rationale for implementing
UDL. In this article, we provide a brief overview of UDL, examine the empirical support for its
use, and make recommendations for applying UDL to classroom practice. We end with a
discussion of disability justice, an issue which should not be put aside in any review of UDL.
Overview of UDL
UDL was originally conceptualized to support students with disabilities to meet learning
goals under the standards of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) in the United
States (Rose, 2000). As its name suggests, UDL is conceptually related to the universal design
principles in architecture and engineering. Although UDL may have been created with disabled
students in mind, the principles can and do apply to all students, just as a ramp can be
accessed by more than only wheelchair users.
The basic premise of UDL is simple: instructors should provide options for physical,
intellectual, and emotional access to the learning environment. Some of the early claims made
about how UDL principles align with specific neural networks (Rose & Strangman, 2007) are as
of yet unsubstantiated. In the new guidelines (3.0), CAST1 (2024) reiterated that “UDL is a
framework to guide the design of learning environments that are accessible, inclusive, equitable,
and challenging for every learner.” Notably, none of the source material for the framework
implies that “effective instruction should match students’ diverse ways of learning” (Boysen,
2024, p. 214).
In comparing UDL to learning styles, Boysen (2024) relied on the “problematic matching
hypothesis” (p. 214). This hypothesis, derived by Pashler et al. (2008), “is the claim that
individualizing instruction to the learner’s style can allow people to achieve a better learning
outcome” (p. 108). To claim that UDL embraces this hypothesis is to willfully misunderstand the
fundamentals of UDL. As with any complex framework of learning, educators and/researchers
are not required to implement the entirety of the framework at once. Instead, the UDL guidelines
“support educators in any context…to operationalize and implement the UDL framework”
(CAST, 2024). UDL makes no recommendations for instructors to provide hyper-individualized
instruction; rather, UDL focuses on students’ ability to equitably access the educational
materials and required assignments.
CAST is the current name for the former Center for Applied Special Technology
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 4
UDL as a Research Framework
Predicting student learning from UDL, just like any theory of achievement, is complex.
Consider the myriad of theories that have been used to predict students’ achievement
motivation: Bandura’s social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986), self-determination theory (Deci &
Ryan, 1985), and situated expectancy value theory (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020). These theories
have been in development for decades, have continued to be enriched and modified by testing
key hypotheses supported by their frameworks, and are, to this day, engaged in productive
tensions that “make the field stronger and lead to its future growth (Wigfield et al., 2021, p. 105).
We hope research around UDL will be as generative.
As researchers, it is our work to conduct rigorous tests of the hypotheses generated by
UDL, including the development of psychometrically sound measurement tools. Issues of
operationalization with UDL is similar to any other psychological theory. The criticism of UDL
studies for using a myriad of outcome variables (e.g., test scores, course grades, students’
attitudes) is true of all psychological research. To insist that “consensus needs to be reached”
(Boysen, 2024, p. 218) for UDL interventions is problematic for two reasons: (1) triangulation
(similar results across different measures) supports the validity of the framework, rather than
critiques it and (2) this sets a higher bar for UDL studies than any other psychology discipline.
Evidence in Support of UDL
Boysen (2024) made a call to researchers “to learn from the flaws of learning styles and
follow a more scientifically sound path forward” (p. 218). We believe that it is more scientifically
sound to approach the UDL literature from the perspective of synthesis rather than one of
divergence. Instead of pointing out all the flaws in UDL studies, what can we glean from the
existing research that can inform our teaching and course design?
Multiple studies have found that implementation of UDL principles improves student
learning. In a meta-analysis on UDL studies with comparison groups, including those using
random assignment, King-Sears et al. (2023) found a moderately positive effect (g = .43) of
UDL, finding statistically similar benefits for both school-aged and adult learners, students with
and without disabilities, and whether the UDL practices were implemented by the teacher or by
a researcher. However, the meta-analysis found slightly smaller (though still significantly
positive) benefits for students in STEM classes than for students in language or “other” classes
(King-Sears et al., 2023). Similarly, Almeqdad et al. (2023) found a large positive effect (g =
3.56) across English- and Arabic-language classrooms of UDL implementation. However,
Almeqdad and colleagues’ findings should be interpreted more cautiously, because they
included single-group designs. Beyond studies explicitly labeled as UDL, there is extensive
research that shows that various aspects of UDL, such as student choice and autonomy, are
both implementable and beneficial to student learning (e.g., Reeve & Cheon, 2021).
Despite the abundance of evidence that UDL implementation yields positive results for
all students, there are several concerns about the breadth of the UDL guidelines. Many
researchers (e.g., Edyburn, 2021; Hollingshead et al., 2022) have noted that there can be a lack
of consistency in UDL strategies across classrooms, schools, and districts, leading to
considerable heterogeneity of research studies and potential confusion about what UDL is and
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 5
is not. Therefore, we make recommendations below for several individual practices that are
derived from UDL.
Recommendations for Instructors
The crux of UDL involves providing options for student access. Because all students
have different needs and abilities, a single definition of a UDL intervention is therefore
antithetical to UDL. We recognize that this flexibility can seem intimidating. However, the
application of UDL principles is fairly straightforward: are instructors providing multiple means of
representation, both functionally and intellectually, and are instructors providing multiple means
of action and expression?
Educational research (and much of social science research, in general) has never
allowed for rigid application of frameworks. The variation in student needs, teacher capacity,
and organizational support is simply too great. As acknowledged from its original
conceptualization, the idea of customization for each student can seem overwhelming (Rose,
2000). However, improvement does not require perfection. Using UDL as a framework to
increase access, rather than fixating on the magnitude of the ultimate goals of UDL (equal
access and success for all students) is not as complex as it may seem and has been found to
improve student outcomes across a variety of studies.
1. Engagement - Student Autonomy
The concept of autonomy as a fundamental human need has been theorized by
psychologists for decades (e.g., self-determination theory; Ryan & Deci, 1985) and
applied to education for many years prior to the conceptualization of UDL. “Autonomy
supportive” instructors (Black & Deci, 2000, p. 742) acknowledge the students’
perspectives, minimize pressures and demands, and provide opportunities for choice.
Students have demonstrated improved learning and motivation in autonomy-supportive
classrooms in organic chemistry (Black & Deci, 2000) and with ecologically valid
materials in laboratory settings (Vankeenkiste et al., 2004). Providing students with
choice (e.g., whether a reflection activity is completed in paragraph form, a bulleted list,
as a visual representation, or as a video) is also a critical aspect of equity-minded
teaching (Artze-Vega et al., 2023).
2. Representation - Use of multiple media
Multiple means of representation exist, to varying degrees, in almost all classrooms.
Textbooks have both words and pictures; teachers explain concepts verbally and have
students work with hands-on demonstrations. By providing various means of
representation, particularly when those means are dynamically linked (van der Meij &
deJong, 2006), teachers not only increase access to materials, they improve students’
ability to construct mental models and integrate concepts (Sunyono et al., 2015).
3. Action & Expression - Varied assessments
“To learn how to think about, interpret and handle variation, students need to
experience it” (MacGillivray, 2010, p. 23). In highly structured courses, the use of a
variety of assessments is related to decreased failure rates (Freeman et al., 2011).
Importantly, increasing the number of assessment types does not artificially inflate
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 6
student grades. Examples of assessment types, in addition to traditional multiple-choice
exams, include notes summaries, in-class clicker questions, and reading quizzes. Varied
assessments also includes providing multiple testing or retrieval opportunities over a
semester, as opposed to using minimal high-stakes exams, which is an established
principle of teaching and learning (i.e., the testing effect; Agarwal et al., 2021)
The Potential for Harm from Aligning UDL and Learning Styles
Positioning UDL next to learning styles trivializes UDL in the eyes of the scientific
community and questions basic rights of people with disabilities. The notion that “established
principles of effective teaching and learning” are being ignored because of the attention paid to
UDL is a straw-man; educational researchers are not arguing against other strategies when
advocating for UDL. Additionally, there is real harm in trivializing UDL rather than integrating it
into what we already know about effective teaching and learning.
Boysen’s critique of UDL erases the community it was originally designed for by ignoring
disability justice. Disabled people are considered the largest minority group in the United States,
at 26 percent of the adult population (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2024).
Nearly 21 percent of undergraduate students and 11 percent of graduate students reported
having a disability during the 2019-2020 academic year (National Center for Education
Statistics, 2023).
According to the National Center for Education Statistics (2022), a majority of disabled
college students do not disclose their disability to any university officials. Therefore, when
instructors adopt UDL practices, they are benefiting not only those with documented
accommodations, but others who have chosen not to pursue their legally entitled supports.
Colleges and universities vary in how they provide accommodations, with many setting a
prohibitively high bar, requiring extensive clinical testing that may be beyond the financial reach
of marginalized students. Furthermore, due to deeply internalized ableism, some students may
avoid seeking accommodations altogether.
Ultimately, we return to the fact that UDL was conceptualized to better support students
with disabilities. Our educational status quo, no matter how evidence-based, consistently
contributes to poorer outcomes and lower learning for disabled students. There is a significant
disparity in higher education outcomes in the United States, with 38.7% of people without a
disability attaining a bachelor’s degree compared to only 21.2% of people with disabilities
attaining this degree (Institute on Disability, 2024). Therefore, UDL is a disability justice issue.
All students with disabilities in the United States are legally entitled to a Free and Appropriate
Public Education (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act), with many other countries
following suit under guidance by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the like. Providing only a single means of engagement, representation, and
action and expression will not provide an appropriate educational experience for all students
with disabilities. Focusing entirely on “established principles of teaching and learning” ignores
both the needs of disabled students and the basic statistical fact that “on average” does not
mean “for everyone.” We have provided evidence here that UDL principles can improve
outcomes for all students, regardless of disability. However, disability justice demands centering
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 7
the voices of disabled individuals. No claims about education policies or the benefits (or claimed
lack thereof) of UDL can be made without the explicit involvement of disabled learners.
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES FOR THE PSYCHOLOGY CLASS 8