Oxford Handbook of Language
and Music Chapter 28:
Voice-motor control
Michel Belyk1
1Department of Psychology, Edge Hill University, Ormskirk, United Kingdom
RUNNING TITLE: Voice-motor control
Keywords: voice, larynx, respiration, evolution, apes
Correspondence to:
Michel Belyk, Ph.D.
Department of Psychology
Edge Hill University
Ormskirk, United Kingdom
e-mail:belykm@edgehill.ac.uk
Voice-motor control 2
Abstract
The voice is the medium through which we manifest our use of language and music –
through speech and song. Human vociferousness is supported by specialised
adaptations in the brain that grant improved control over the muscles of the larynx and
respiration, and more importantly the ability to learn new patterns of vocal behaviour.
Understanding these adaptations in the human brain, and how they differ from their
homologs in the brains of other species of primate can provide insight into how
ancestral humans came to evolve the faculties of language and music. This chapter
will review the biomechanics of vocal sound production, the comparative vocal abilities
of non-human primates, how the human brain controls the voice, how this differs from
the neural control of the voice in closely related species, and the mechanisms by which
these differences may have evolved.
Voice-motor control 3
28.1 Introduction
From the noble soliloquy to the humble grunt, from a grand aria to singing in
the shower, the voice is a versatile tool controlled by the organ that is colloquially
called the voice box, or more formally, the larynx. This chapter will aim to describe
how this handful of cartilage and muscle in the throat determines the sound of a voice,
how the brain plays this organ to deliver the careful nuance of every witty quip, and
why humans in particular can play this organ so well.
The voice is the acoustical result of the compression of the lungs driving airflow,
the configuration of the larynx introducing periodic vibration with a harmonically rich
timbre, and the articulation of the oral cavity selectively amplifying and dampening
certain combinations of frequency bands. Together these muscular systems control
the volume, pitch, and spectral quality of an acoustical signal which acts as the
physical medium for the spoken word and the melodious song.
While speaking and singing per se are uniquely human, many of the faculties
on which they are built can be observed in the behaviours of non-human primates –
though others that are not shared with humanity’s closest relatives may provide
greater insight into how the mind of one species became a suitable substrate for
language and music. For instance, while non-human apes can learn to whistle, blow
raspberries, or huff pensively on a pair of spectacles, these behaviours rely much more
strongly on the control of respiration and articulation with relatively little involvement
of the larynx (i.e., the source of vocal sound).
These behaviours are supported by a branchiomotor efferent motor system, a
descending pathway from cortex through the brainstem that drives many of the
muscles of vocalisation. Comparative neuroanatomy reveals that humans have a
selective enhancement in the portion of this motor pathway that controls the larynx,
which provides a likely mechanism for the selective enhancement of voice motor
control. However, motor control is not reduced to merely the final few neurons
connecting the chain from brain to muscle, but the result of larger networks of brain
areas that learn, plan, and monitor combinations of respiratory, laryngeal, and
articulatory movements needed for meaningful communication. What implications
adaptations in the motor periphery have had for these broader motor networks remains
an active area of research.
This chapter will detail the mechanisms of human voice production (section
28.2), place their use in context with the behaviours of closely related species through
the lens of comparative biology (sections 28.3 and 28.4), discuss the neural
adaptations that make the human brain one that is capable of speaking and singing
(section 28.5), and review contemporary theories about the mechanisms by which
they may have evolved (section 28.6)
28.2 The voice
Some uses of the voice have little to do with the actions of a person, but instead
reflect the physical attributes of the speaker. For example, while of course a speaker
can alter the pitch of their voice across a considerable range, each voice has a habitual
pitch that it makes by default. This habitual pitch conveys some information which is
obvious, such as biological sex, but also some which is less obvious such as the
current and past profile of sex hormones, which have wide ranging effects on the
physical development of the larynx through adolescence (Abitbol et al., 1999; Dabbs
& Mallinger, 1999; Evans et al., 2008) and adulthood (Markova et al., 2016; Zamponi
Voice-motor control 4
et al., 2021). Other features of the voice are correlated with height (Pisanski et al.,
2014). Together these cues contribute to how attractive (Babel et al., 2014; Fraccaro
et al., 2011; Pisanski et al., 2018; Pisanski & Rendall, 2011; Sorokowski et al., 2019;
Xu et al., 2013), authoritative (Sorokowski et al., 2019), trustworthy (Belin et al., 2017)
and socially dominant (Borkowska & Pawlowski, 2011; McAleer et al., 2014; Puts et
al., 2007) listeners perceive a voice to be. Whether or not these impressions are an
accurate reflection of the speaker’s personality, listeners form a reliable consensus
from even very brief exposure (Baus et al., 2019; Mahrholz et al., 2018; McAleer et
al., 2014).
Voices also help us to identify people much as we can by looking at their face
(Johnson et al., 2020). However, vocal identification can be much less reliable than
facial identification due to the great diversity of speech sounds that can carry the voice
which adds an immensity of within speaker spectral variation (Lavan et al., 2019). This
has long been a cause for concern in police investigations in which suspects are
identified by voice (McGehee, 1937), and is a growing security concern with the
widespread adoption of voice command and voiceprint security technologies.
Some of our expressive range comes pre-wired at birth. For instance, people who
are congenitally deaf and have never heard an emotion expressed none-the-less
express recognisable emotions themselves (Sauter et al., 2020). The voice can also
express a range of feigned and genuine emotions. These can take diverse linguistic
forms from primal shrieks, screams, yells, cries and laughs (Szameitat et al., 2009), to
monosyllabic exclamations such as Mmmm!, Wow!, Damn!, Thanks!, Aww!, or Yes!
(Belyk & Brown, 2014b; Jackendoff, 1999), through to full sentences intoned with
emotions across a broad spectrum of emotions (see also Frühholz & Trost, this
volume). Certain emotions can be expressed using the voice that are not particularly
apparent from facial expression, particularly with respect to positive emotions such as
pride, relief, or pleasure (Sauter et al., 2010; Sauter & Scott, 2007).
Language and music make the most extensive use of human vocal versatility. The
voice carries the melodic line of a favourite song, distinguishes between voiced and
voiceless phonemes to distinguish words like ‘got’ from ‘cot’, encodes the tones of
tonal languages which will be unfamiliar to most speakers of European languages but
are a prominent feature of two thirds of the worlds languages (Yip, 2002), stresses
syllables so that DESert is a place that is very dry while to desERT is to leave someone
high and dry, emphasises words so that ‘THEY don’t like them’ means something
subtly different than ‘they don’t like THEM’, and expresses a range of uncertainty from
questions to commands. These modes of expression together comprise an immense
wealth of the human communicative power driven by the combination of pitch,
loudness, and spectral quality unfolding dynamically over time. Nonetheless, this
wonderful depth of signalling is carried by a single channel – the voice.
28.2.1 The biomechanics of the vocal sound production
Vocalisation is produced by three broad groupings of muscles. This tripartite
respiratory muscles work to compress or expand the lungs like a bellows, which moves
air through the airway and provides mechanical power. Second, the larynx acts as the
sound source that we call the voice. Air whooshing up the airway passes through the
larynx which houses a pair of membranes called the vocal folds. The vocal folds can
be abducted, removing them from the airway and allowing air to pass unhindered,
which is a handy trick when there is need to breathe deeply. Or the vocal folds can be
Voice-motor control 5
adducted, pressed together into a leaky seal across the airway. Pressure builds below
these membranes until a pocket of air bursts through, alleviating the pressure. These
bursts of air vibrate the vocal folds, and the rate at which they vibrate is the frequency
of the voice. Third, the voiced sound produced by the larynx is filtered by the shape of
the vocal tract. The tongue, velum, and lips are all highly mobile articulators with a
huge scope for changing the shape of the vocal tract and therefore its qualities as an
acoustical filter or resonator. In the same way that the shape of a trumpet gives the
instrument a particular timbre so that it can easily be distinguished from the same note
played on a French horn, the different shapes that can be formed by the articulatory
muscles determine the various sounds that make up speech. As an exercise, mouth
the words ‘feet’ and ‘foot’ and notice that the changing configuration of the lips shapes
a resonant cavity, the dimensions of which drive the differing acoustics of individual
speech sounds.
28.2.2 Biomechanics of respiration
The expansion and compression of the lungs are controlled by two sets of
muscles, which allow the lungs to expand downward into the belly or upward into the
chest, respectively (Ratnovsky et al., 2008). The diaphragm is a large sheet of muscle
that separates the lungs from the organs of digestion and is shaped somewhat like an
into a plate, the lungs expand to fill the extra space that has been made for them, and
the organs of digestion are displaced which pushes out the belly. When the diaphragm
is relaxed it returns passively to its inverted bowl shape, compressing the lungs and
causing a gentle exhalation. A more forceful exhalation can be produced by also
contracting the abdominal muscles, which pushes the organs of digestion inwards,
forces the diaphragm upwards, and further compresses the lungs. A second set of
muscles attach each rib with its neighbour. The external intercostal muscles raise each
rib towards the rib above, expanding the lungs and causing inhalation. The internal
intercostals lower each rib towards the rib below, compressing the lungs and causing
exhalation. Occasionally one may find a yoga instructor who directs their students to
either ‘breath from the belly’ or ‘breath from the chest’. In biomechanical terms, these
are instructions to control respiration using 1) the diaphragm and abdominal muscles,
or 2) the internal and external intercostal muscles, respectively. Both of these actions
result in a difference in air pressure above versus below the larynx, and consequently
in air flow that equalises the pressure differential. This mechanism generates the
mechanical power for vocalisation.
28.2.3 Biomechanics of voicing
Voicing refers to the process of producing the harmonically rich sound
characteristic of the human voice. The acoustical features of the voice influence not
only its timbre but also its frequency, which is perceived by the ear as vocal pitch.
Modulations in the frequency of vibration produced by the larynx, and therefore the
pitch of the voice, are the acoustical and perceptual manifestations, respectively, of
melodious song. Likewise, they form one of the primary means by which emotions are
expressed through the voice by means of affective prosody (Banse & Sherer, 1996).
The structure of the larynx is made up of four cartilages and one bone. The
cricoid cartilage is shaped like a signet ring and sits at the top of the trachea where it
Voice-motor control 6
acts as a chassis for the larynx. The thyroid cartilage is shaped like a hollow wedge.
dorsal and anterior views respectively). The notch at the tip of the wedge is what is
colloquially called the Adam’s apple. Though everyone has a thyroid notch, it tends to
be more prominent in men, hence the gendered common name.
The vocal folds are a pair of membranes that sit aloft within the larynx. One end
of the vocal folds is attached to the internal surface of the thyroid notch. On the outside
of the notch is a muscle that extends from the thyroid cartilage to the cricoid cartilage
and is aptly named the cricothyroid muscle. When the cricothyroid m. contracts, the
thyroid cartilage rocks forward, stretching the vocal folds taut increasing the frequency
at which they vibrate, and thereby raising the pitch of the voice (Hollien & Moore,
1960). The vocalis muscle sits within the tissue of the vocal folds themselves and
partially counteracts the cricotyroid m., rocking the thyroid cartilage back and
shortening the vocal folds. However, the position of the vocalis m. within the vocal
folds themselves leads it to have a complicated relationship with pitch. The contraction
of the vocalis m. also makes the vocal folds more stiff which makes them vibrate at a
higher frequency, and hence this muscle can either raise or lower the pitch of the voice
depending on complex interactions with the rest of the laryngeal musculature (Lowell
& Story, 2006; Titze et al., 1989).
The posterior end of the vocal folds is attached to the arytenoid cartilages,
which are a pair of horn shaped cartilages that act as pivots. Contraction of the
posterior cricoarytenoid muscle swings the vocal folds outwards, abducting them into
a silent breathing configuration. Contraction of the lateral cricoarytenoid muscle
reverses this action, adducting the vocal folds into a voiced configuration. The
interarytenoid muscles attach the two arytenoid cartilages together, drawing them
towards the midline, which also contributes to vocal fold adduction (Gray, 1918).
As a demonstration, the reader may place their fingers on either side of the
thyroid notch (find the V shaped bulge in the front of the throat). This position can be
verified by swallowing, which should lead the thyroid notch move upwards.
Conversely, yawning should move the thyroid notch firmly downwards. Now, engage
the larynx by holding the sound of a /z/ as in zebra. The vibration of the vocal folds
can be felt in the fingers. Now make the sound of an /s/ as in snake. The /z/ and /s/
are cognates that are produced with identical articulation but the former is voiced while
the latter is not. Now say the vowel /a/ as in ‘Adam’s apple’ once with a low-pitched
voice and again with a high-pitched voice. Now try these exercises again while
whispering. Whispers are produced with the vocal folds in an abducted position such
that air passes through the larynx quietly. Hence, a whispered /z/ sounds remarkably
like an /s/.
The acoustical result of the larynx is that air moving up the airway travels as a
periodic wave, rather than a torrent of turbulent air. These longitudinal waves are
alternating patterns of compression and expansion nested in a complex harmonic
structure composed of multiple frequencies, or harmonics, that are integer ratios of
one another. For example, the male larynx tends to produce a voice with a
fundamental frequency (f0) of about 100 hz. Breaking down the components of this
complex wave using mathematical techniques such as a Fourier transform reveals
that it is in fact composed of a set of waves with frequencies 100 hz, 200 hz, 300h z,
frequencies. The lowest of these frequencies is f0 and is also usually the distance
between harmonics. The relative amplitude of each harmonic is part of what makes a
voice sound like a voice, and not a trumpet or a kazoo. Subtle differences between
Voice-motor control 7
voices give each speaker a slightly different timbre, which provides a cue to the identity
of the speaker (Johnson et al., 2020; Lavan et al., 2019). This mechanism is the sound
source of the voice.
each division. C) Anatomical drawings of major muscles including i) articulatory
muscles in midsagittal and ii) lateral view, iii) the laryngeal muscles in dorsal and iv)
anterior view, as well as the v) the intercostal respiratory muscles of the chest and vi)
the diaphragm. Anatomical drawings adapted from Gray (1918).
28.2.4 Biomechanics of articulation
The muscles of the mouth and throat shape the resonant cavity of the vocal
compose speech. For example, the initial consonant of “tot” is formed by creating a
closure between the tip of the tongue and the alveolar ridge (behind the upper teeth),
which can be converted to “cot” if instead a closure is formed between the body of the
tongue and the soft palate, or to “kit” if changes are also made to the articulation of
the vowel.
The tongue is composed of intrinsic lingual muscles that alter the shape of the
tongue and extrinsic lingual muscles that move the tongue within the mouth (Sanders
& Mu, 2013; Stål et al., 2003). The intrinsic lingual muscles themselves make up much
of the body of the tongue and unlike most muscles in the human body they are not
attached to any bony structures. These form a three-dimensional grid of longitudinal,
vertical, and transverse muscle fibres that together contribute to the deformation of
the tongue and account for the tongue’s ability to change shape (Bono et al., 2022;
Touré & Vacher, 2006). The extrinsic lingual muscles attach the tongue to the temporal
bone (the side of the skull), mandible (lower jaw), and hyoid bone (a bone from which
the larynx is suspended). These primarily contribute to translating the tongue in space.
The lips form the outer aperture of the vocal tract and can also be protruded to
make the vocal tract longer. The shape of the lips is determined by a complex of
Voice-motor control 8
muscles that are intrinsic to the lips themselves, such as the orbicularis oris m. which
primarily puckers the lips, or muscles of the ventral face, such as the rosarius m. which
primarily retracts the corners of the lips. They are also strongly influenced by muscles
of the jaw. Jaw depressor muscles including the mylohyoid m., geniohyoid m., and
anterior belly of the digastric muscle which lower the jaw and therefore increase the
aperture of the lips. Jaw elevator muscles such as the masseter m., temporalis m.,
and medial pterygoid m., raise the jaw and contribute to closing the aperture of the lips
as well as to chewing (Seikel et al., 2010).
While the mouth may be the primary means by which sound leaves the vocal
tract, sound also carries through the nasal passage. The velum is a slab of soft tissue
that separates the inside of the mouth from the nasal cavity and acts as a valve that
either allows air to flow through the nose or restricts it to the mouth. English uses
nasalisation for the phonemes /n/ and /m/ as well as nasalised vowels in some
contexts (Carignan et al., 2011). These sounds would be very challenging to produce
while plugging the nose, which accounts for the characteristic sound of a person
suffering from nasal congestion.
These muscles and the tissues that they manipulate shape the vocal tract and
thereby determine its properties as an acoustical filter. Just as the physical shape of
a musical instrument or a concert hall determines the ranges of frequencies that
resonate most effectively, the particular shape of the vocal tract at any given moment
will amplify some frequency bands and dampen others. These bands of amplification
are called formants. By convention they are labelled F1, F2, F3, etcetera from the
are the acoustical correlates of what listeners perceive as discrete vowel categories.
The lower formants in particular (i.e., F1 and F2) form an acoustical parameter space
from which listeners infer the identifies of spoken vowels. For example, the vowel /ɑ/
as in “bard” has relatively high F1 and low F2 whereas the vowel /i/ as in “bead” is
these two English vowels as produced by a number of speakers. Despite the large
separation between these vowel categories there remains considerable variation
within and between speakers (Perkell & Nelson, 1985; Whalen et al., 2018).
Voice-motor control 9
spoken with the Standard Southern British accent (Waters et al., 2021). The vowel in
“bead” (/i/) is produced with the tongue in a high-front position, which produces a
different combination of acoustic resonances than the low-back position of “bard” (/ɑ/).
28.3 The speech-ready (and song-ready) vocal tract
While speaking and singing are tautologically human activities, the same
peripheral mechanisms for sound production drive vocalisation at least across
terrestrial mammals. Classically, it was believed that part of the reason that non-
human primates do not speak stemmed from the limitations of their vocal tracts; they
simply could not shape sounds that humans would recognise as speech (Lieberman
et al., 1969, 1972). The greater range of motion in the human vocal tract was credited
in part to the descended position of the larynx relative to other primates (Harrison,
1995), which begins lower in in the throat at childhood and descends even further at
puberty (Fitch & Giedd, 1999; Markova et al., 2016). The change in the position of the
larynx was hypothesised to liberate the tongue for a greater range of motion. However,
initial estimates of the articulatory range of non-human primates were based on post-
mortem models of the vocal tract, and the rigidity of deceased tissue may have led to
an underestimation of the non-human primate vocal tract’s range of motion (Fitch,
2000).
In vivo studies using x-ray videography have demonstrated that the vocal tracts of
live macaque monkeys have a range of motion (Fitch et al., 2016) and movement
dynamics (Ghazanfar et al., 2012) sufficient to produce much, though not all, of the
human speech repertoire. The greater morphological similarity among apes can be
presumed to leave the non-human ape vocal tract no less sufficient for human speech
sounds, despite remaining differences in gross anatomy (Harrison, 1995).
Interestingly, in addition to the change in position of the larynx, a simplification in
human laryngeal anatomy seems to have promoted its usefulness as a stable and
harmonically rich sound source (Nishimura et al., 2022). While not extending the range
of producible sounds, this may reduce the computational cost of controlling the voice.
The fact that non-human apes do not speak or sing as humans do is now
hypothesised to result from differences in the neural control over the vocal tract more
so than to deficiencies in the anatomy of vocal tract itself (Fitch, 2018). This was also
the view favoured by Darwin (1871).
28.4 Evolution of vocal learning
While speech and song are uniquely human, they are built on scaffolds that are
not. Speaking and singing rely on specialised sensorimotor systems to hear and
produce vocal sounds, conceptual-intentional systems to imbue and interpret sound
with meaning (whether that be the words and grammars of language or the motifs and
keys of music), and the ability to teach and learn vocal behaviour (Hauser et al., 2002;
Jarvis, 2019). Among these is the ability to learn new forms of vocal behaviour that
enables us to produce the words and songs of our respective cultures.
Voice-motor control 10
Comparative biology can provide a window into evolutionary history. Phenotypes
that are shared by closely related species (i.e., similarities in the physical traits of their
bodies or in the behaviours that they display), and the phenotypes that they do not
share, build a picture of their last common ancestor. Phenotypes that are shared are
most likely to have evolved before these species diverged, while phenotypes that are
not shared are most likely to have evolved in one branch after they diverged. While by
what means and under which circumstances speciation occurs is beyond the scope of
this chapter, the reasoning of comparative biology seeks to develop a snapshot of the
dynamic process of evolution as it occurred in the distant past (see Fitch, this volume).
All primates (monkeys and apes, including humans) share a common ancestor
who lived approximately 80-90 million years ago (Tavaré et al., 2002). Phenotypes
that are shared across primates most likely evolved before apes and monkeys
diverged and are shared by common inheritance (e.g. thumbs). Phenotypes that we
find in apes but not monkeys (or vice versa) most likely evolved after these clades
diverged, for example the Apes have lost their tails. Likewise, phenotypes that are
observed in humans but not in non-human apes most likely evolved after humanity
diverged from its closest relatives approximately 6-10 million years ago (Hasegawa et
al., 1985). By these means it is easy to observe that language and music as they are
experienced by humans emerged late in human evolution. Though perhaps more
interestingly, many of the underlying faculties upon which language and music rely
may have older and more varied biological histories. Ten Cate and Honing (this
volume) provide a broad review of the analogues to the faculties supporting music and
language that are observed in non-human animals. The remainder of the present
chapter will take a particular focus on one of these faculties – the flexible use of the
voice as a medium of communication – in comparison to humanity’s closest living
relatives.
The use of the voice is a phenotype that merits particular attention due to the stark
contrast it provides between humanity and its primate cousins. All of the species in the
family most closely related to humans, the Great Apes, can be taught to communicate
by using sign language, demonstrating that they can map meaning onto arbitrary
symbols (Gardner & Gardner, 1985; Perlman & Clark, 2015; Shapiro, 1982). None of
these species displays the same facility in learning to speak. This does not imply that
non-human apes, or a wide range of species for that matter, are incapable of exerting
control over their vocalisations or deploying them flexibly as appropriate to their
ecological context. Nonetheless, that there is considerable interspecies variation in
the ways in which vocal communication is used should be readily apparent, and
systematising these differences in the vocal behaviours of different species provides
useful clues towards understanding how and when the abilities that form the
scaffolding for language and music first evolved.
Janik & Slater (2000) distinguish between vocal usage learning by which members
of a species learn to vary the ecological context and the timing of a fixed set of species-
typical vocalisations, and vocal production learning (VPL) by which individuals learn
to produce novel vocalisations, usually by imitating an auditory model. While vocal
usage learning is widespread, evidence of vocal production learning is available for a
more limited range of species. Other forms of learning adjacent to these abilities may
be relevant but are phylogenetically ubiquitous, such as auditory learning (the ability
to associate auditory cues with events in one’s environment) and vocal variation (the
ability to modify vocalisations for greater detectability in response to environmental
noise).
Voice-motor control 11
Petkov & Jarvis (2012) suggested a sensible elaboration of the dichotomous view
of VPL that acknowledges VPL on a continuum. This view accounts for observations
that while many mammals lack the degree of vocality that support speech and song in
humans, to classify them as absent of VPL ignores important variation in their
behaviour. Others have attempted to further amend this scheme in order to account
for differences in the qualia of vocal behaviour that otherwise risk being overlooked
(e.g., Jarvis, 2019; Tyack, 2019). Perhaps the most comprehensive scheme considers
differences in how each species interacts with the auditory model from which they are
learning, the degree of flexibility with which the neuromuscular system (see review in
section 28.2) can modify the acoustical signal produced by vocalisation, and the timing
over which learning occurs (Vernes et al., 2021).
28.4.1 Nota Bene on the Scala Naturae fallacy
Much can be learned about how species have evolved by comparing their
physiological, anatomical, or behavioural phenotypes to those of other closely related
species. However, evolution should not be thought of as a directed process that
marches inexorably from primitive to advanced forms, in which humans unhumbly
classify humanity among the latter. Rather, evolution is a diversification into
increasingly specialised forms that are well adapted to the environments in which they
are unique to humans, it is important to consider the selective pressures that have
made them adaptive for this particular species and the selective pressures that have
made them unnecessary in the ecological niches of other species.
gorillas, chimpanzees, and orang-utans share a last common ancestor estimated to
live approximately 10 million years ago. The commonalities shared by these species
are likely to have been present in their shared ancestry and provides snapshot of the
progenitor species. It also provides a gross means of timestamping specialisations
present in some members of this clade but not others. Extending such a view to
Voice-motor control 12
broader categories and more distant relatives, such as primates, permits a glimpse
even further back in evolutionary time. Mya: million years ago.
28.4.2 Auditory learning
Auditory learning is the ability to use the sounds of the local environment to
make predictions, for example the sounds of bubbling water and the woosh of steam
coming from a kettle suggests that it is nearly time for tea. Auditory learning is relatively
conserved and strong across most vertebrates. For example, monkeys are fair
auditory learners, despite having little capacity to learn to communicate using novel
sounds (Milne et al., 2018; Petkov & Jarvis, 2012). While auditory learning may be an
important requirement for speech and song, it is a requirement that many species
satisfy.
28.4.3 Vocal variation
In some instances, vocal signals may be varied reflexively to optimise
communication in noisy auditory environments. For instance, Human’s speaking in
noise display the Lombard effect as the speaker tries to maintain a signal-to-noise
ratio that is suitable for intelligible communication (Garnier et al., 2010; Lane & Tranel,
1971). Speakers accomplish this not only by increasing the sound intensity of
vocalisations, but also by producing more pronounced articulations (Garnier et al.,
2018). Hyper-articulating in this way ensures that the acoustical filter that is the vocal
tract encodes speech sounds more precisely. This link between sound intensity and
articulation appears to be sufficiently automatic and robust that it can be exploited
therapeutically. Certain neurological patients have symptoms of hypo-articulation (i.e.,
mumbling) which can be mitigated by speaking more loudly as this incidentally also
causes them to speak more intelligibly (Fox et al., 2006, 2014).
The struggle to be heard is not uniquely human. Animals of many species alter
the amplitude, duration, or frequency of their calls in response to environmental noise
(Hotchkin & Parks, 2013). Indeed, noise-dependant regulation of vocalisations is
observed broadly across anurans (i.e., frogs), aves (i.e., birds), and mammals (i.e.,
humans), all of whom adapt their vocalisations to stand out amongst auditory noise
(Brumm & Zollinger, 2011; Kunc et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2018).
28.4.4 Vocal usage learning
Vocal usage learning is the ability to deploy a vocal repertoire flexibly, but
without being able to add to it (Janik & Slater, 2000). For example, a Chimpanzee who
finds some food would typically make a food call signalling nearby chimpanzees that
they have something to share. But Chimpanzees can suppress these food calls when
the food isn’t easily shared, or if there is an opportunity to keep it all to themselves
without being caught out (Brosnan & de Waal, 2002). More formally, primates
(including both Apes and Monkeys) can be trained to make sounds from their species’
typical repertoire on command in exchange for a reward (Pierce, 1985). Vocal usage
learning may facilitate complex social interaction based on how individuals within a
group use their vocal repertoire (Cheney & Seyfarth, 2018). Vervet monkeys have a
specialised set of alarm calls to warn each other about different kinds of predators,
Voice-motor control 13
which they use more diligently when they are near kin or near potential mates (Cheney
& Seyfarth, 1985).
28.4.5 Vocal production learning
Vocal production learning (VPL) is the ability to add new sounds to a vocal
repertoire (Janik & Slater, 2000). Human infants do this spontaneously as they learn
to speak (Kuhl, 2004; Kuhl & Meltzoff, 1996). First, infants babble as they explore the
full range of sounds available to their vocal tracts. Meanwhile they listen to the kinds
of sounds that their carers make, and gradually refine their babbles in imitation of
them. Eventually, this pathway builds up the repertoire of speech sounds that make
up a language. While infants are very effective at this process, anyone who has
learned a new language in their adulthood will attest that this remains possible across
the human lifespan, though with more difficulty.
However, defining VPL narrowly as that process by which humans learn to
speak and sing leads to the misleading conclusion that humans are the paragons of
vocal learning with all other species falling short of the mark. Such a tautological
definition fails to capture the ways in which vocal behaviour is adaptive within the
ecological niche of each individual species, which may manifest in diverging profiles
of vocal strengths and weakness. Vernes et al., (2021) suggest that at minimum, one
must consider the learners’ relations with the mode that is being copied, the degree
and means by which vocal behaviour is modified, as well as the timespan over which
learning occurs.
Human vocal learning primarily takes the form of convergence, with learners
attempting to match the vocalisations of a model, whether that is the speech of a
child’s caregiver or the melody of a singing tutor. Spoken pragmatics can also
converge, as speakers modify spoken accents and speech prosody to converge
towards a common code with the speakers around them (Nardy et al., 2014; Pardo et
al., 2013). However, some species may display vocal divergence as they modify their
vocalisations towards distinctness rather than uniformity, and this is no less evidence
of vocal production learning.
The degree to which calls are modified may seem a somewhat obvious metric
on which to benchmark vocal production as an assessment of how greatly the
acoustics of calls are altered. However, this too may belie qualitative differences
between species in the degree to which respiration, voicing, and articulation,
respectively, are brought to bear on producing novel vocalisations. Morphological
constraints in vocal anatomy limit the types or range of sounds that an animal’s vocal
tract can produce, or the nervous system controlling the muscles of vocalisation may
provide more granular control over some aspects of vocalisation than others. Likewise
vocal behaviour must be considered within appropriate ecological context as animals
may have the ability to imitate a broader array of sounds than they are typically
motivated to attempt. For example, Hoover the Harbour seal (Phoca vitulina) famously
imitated speech, having been orphaned and hand reared by humans from an early
age (Ralls et al., 1985). This case highlights both the extent of the Harbour seal’s
ability to imitate human articulation, but also the apparent lack of motivation to do so
in the wild as this behaviour is not observed in their natural habitat.
Humans learn the phonetic, morphological, and syntactic rules of language
most rapidly during childhood, though learning continues to be possible over the
lifespan. If a similar sensitive period exists for learning the sensorimotor contingencies
of music, they are perhaps more subtle (White et al., 2013). In some species vocal
Voice-motor control 14
production learning is not only restricted to certain developmental periods, but also to
certain seasons or times of day (Bruni et al., 2014; Voigt & Leitner, 2008). Similarly,
the length of time that learning takes, and the duration over which it is retained can
vary between species.
Together, these attributes form a mosaic of implementations for vocal
production leaning with the vocal behaviour of each species best understood with
appropriate ecological context (Vernes et al., 2021). However, in many cases
information on the qualia of vocal learning are understudied and in the following
sections it is sometimes necessary to rely on more course grained distinctions.
28.4.5.1 Vocal production learning in non-human primates
Non-human apes are not particularly strong in vocal production learning. A
Chimpanzee named Viki was raised by humans as though she were a human child
with the goal of understanding the roles of nature and nurture in the development of
intelligence (Hayes & Hayes, 1951). In most respects, the Hayes’ estimated that Viki
developed intellectual capacities similar to those of a human toddler with the notable
exception of language. While Viki babbled enough to convince the Haye’s that her
vocal mechanisms were capable of human speech sounds, she spent considerably
less time vocalising than would be typical from a human infant. In fact, this very specific
deficiency was so striking the Hayes’ broke protocol and attempted to teach Viki to
speak using the reinforcement learning techniques that would normally be reserved
for laboratory animals rather than an adopted daughter. In this way, Viki was able to
learn to whisper the words ‘mama’, ‘papa’, and ‘cup’, but she progressed no further.
In contrast, later attempts at teaching Chimpanzees, Gorillas, and Orang-utans to
communicate via sign language have shown that these animals can learn to use
modest vocabularies of dozens of items to communicate effectively with humans, as
long as they don’t have to use their voice (Gardner & Gardner, 1985; Perlman & Clark,
2015; Shapiro, 1982).
This is not to say that non-human apes are completely devoid of VPL, but
viewing this ability on a continuum non-human apes fall towards the lower end (Petkov
& Jarvis, 2012). Although the calls that apes do make are species specific, there is
none-the-less room for minor modifications in their calls (Fischer & Hammerschmidt,
2019). Some groups of wild Orang-utans use only partially overlapping sets of calls in
a way that is not currently explained by genetic differences, suggesting that colonies
in different habitats may form something akin to dialects (Wich et al., 2012). Captive
Orang-utans can learn to whistle from their human caretakers and some may have
even learned from each other (Lameira et al., 2013; Wich et al., 2009). At least in
humans, whistling involves controlling air pressure with the lungs and carefully
positioning the lips and the tongue to shape a special kind of resonator (Azola et al.,
2018; Belyk et al., 2019; Kaburagi et al., 2018). From the behaviours that non-human
apes can learn in captivity such as whistling (Lameira et al., 2013; Wich et al., 2009),
blowing raspberries (Hopkins et al., 2007), fogging spectacles (Perlman & Clark,
2015), etc., it would seem that these species may have stronger voluntary control over
the muscles of articulation and respiration than they do over the laryngeal sound
source.
28.4.5.2 Vocal production learning in other mammals
Voice-motor control 15
Although the closest relatives of humans are weak in vocal production learning,
other clades of mammal have more impressive vocal learning abilities (for VPL in
birds, see ten Cate and Honing, this volume). The behaviours of some of these species
more closely resemble language and others more closely resemble music, though
these are only analogies and the functions of these communicative behaviours are
best understood within the ecological context of each individual species.
Vocal production learning seems to be almost ubiquitous among the aquatic
mammals: whales, dolphins, and seals. Killer Whales (Orcinus orca) travel in social
groups (pods) which share a common repertoire of songs that are believed to help
identify and locate pod-members (Filatova et al., 2015). Like many kinds of complex
behaviour, the details of these songs can change over time in a way that resembles
cultural evolution (see Ravignani et al., this volume). In one dramatic case a population
of Humpback Whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) off the west coast of Australia was
introduced to an unfamiliar song by a small band of whales who had migrated from a
separate population off the east coast. Within a few years the old song familiar to the
west coast whales was completely replaced by the new tune from the east coast (Noad
et al., 2000). Over the following decade, features of this song were observed to
propagate throughout the South Pacific ocean (Garland et al., 2011). It has since been
observed that far from being exceptional, cultural revolutions in whale song appear to
be commonplace (Allen et al., 2018). While some have argued that these observations
are insufficient evidence of cultural evolution per se (Mercado, 2022) there is little
doubt that Humpback Whales have extensive vocal flexibility even if debate as to its
ecological function continues.
Bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) develop their own individualised whistle
calls that diverge from locally available models (Fripp et al., 2005), to serve as a
personalised signature (Janik et al., 2006). They also copy each other’s signatures as
an affiliative signal, potentially as either a form of address or to maintain close social
bonds (King & Sayigh, 2013). While the vocalisations of whales and dolphins are
primarily carried by changes in pitch, pinnipeds (e.g., seals) can learn to modify vocal
pitch to make their vocalisations distinct from auditory noise (Borda et al., 2021), but
also can learn to modify the formants of their vocalisations (Ralls et al., 1985;
Stansbury & Janik, 2019) and are sensitive to vocal rhythms (Ravignani et al., 2019;
Verga et al., 2022). Other instances of mammalian vocal production learning have
been observed in elephants (Poole et al., 2005; Stoeger et al., 2012), and bats
(Lattenkamp et al., 2020; Vernes & Wilkinson, 2019).
28.5 The neural control of vocalisation
All bodily movements, including those that drive vocalisation, are controlled by
electrochemical impulses from the nervous system. Muscles are innervated by a set
of lower motor neurons in the brainstem or spinal cord and the activity of these neurons
is the direct cause of all muscular activity. The activity of these lower motor neurons
is organised by upper motor neurons in the cerebral cortex. It is the great challenge
and triumph of the motor system to find exactly which combination of motor neurons
will accomplish whatever it is that one has set out to do, sing, or say. Hence in the
absence of anatomical limitations on the kinds of sounds that an animal can produce,
there must be differences in the neuronal systems that control these muscles that
determine whether and to what extent a species may exert flexible control over
vocalisation.
of relevant brain structures (A), the networks that they form in the central nervous
Voice-motor control 16
system (B, upper), and the peripheral nerves by which they access the musculature
of vocalisation (B, lower).
28.5.1 Conserved peripheral nervous system mechanisms of
vocalisation
The innervation of muscles relevant to vocalisation is highly conserved at least
across primates and likely further across mammalia (Jürgens, 2002, 2009). Lower
motor neurons innervating these muscles can be found in the spinal cord and
brainstem in discrete sets of nuclei specialised for particular muscle groups (see
the respiratory muscles), while motor nuclei in the brainstem innervate muscles above
the neck (including those relevant to voicing and articulation).
Just as the muscles of respiration are distributed in different parts of the torso,
the motor nuclei that control these muscles are distributed throughout the spinal cord.
However, they are coordinated by the Nucleus Retroambiguus in the brainstem – so
named because it sits adjacent the Nucleus Ambiguus which controls the larynx
(Subramanian & Holstege, 2009). The Nucleus Retroambiguus projects to each of the
spinal cord nuclei that contain lower motor neurons innervating respiratory muscles
inspiration and expiration (Vanderhorst et al., 2000).
The majority of the muscles of the larynx are innervated by the Nucleus
Ambiguus. Axons descend following the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) which is a large
nerve bundle that carries a range of sensory, motor, parasympathetic, and visceral
signals. Among these are two nerves that innervate the muscles of the larynx. The
superior laryngeal nerve follows a sensibly direct path to innervate the cricothyroid
muscle (the primary controller of vocal pitch). Oddly, the remainder of the laryngeal
muscles are innervated by the recurrent laryngeal nerve which descends far below the
level of the larynx to wrap around the lowest aortic arches of the heart before
ascending back up to innervate the larynx. The aortic arches are asymmetrical,
causing the left recurrent laryngeal nerve to travel nearly twice as far as the right
(Prades et al., 2012). This increased length is compensated by greater thickness,
which increases conduction speed (Walker, 1994) resulting in a relatively synchronous
arrival of motor commands to the left and right laryngeal muscles (Prades et al., 2012;
Thumfart et al., 1992). This synchrony is crucial because the larynx must move with
bilateral symmetry. Nucleus Ambiguus also receives projections from Nucleus
Retroambiguus which may support the intimate relationship between the larynx and
airflow generated by respiration (Vanderhorst et al., 2001).
Most of the muscles of articulation are innervated by brainstem nuclei, including
the Trigeminal, Facial, Hypoglossal, Glossopharyngeal Nuclei (Blumenfeld, 2010).
Most of these nuclei (save the Glossopharyngeal Nucleus) along with the Nucleus
Ambiguus are brachial motor nuclei, so called because they share a developmental
origin in the brachial arches of the embryo. The early evolutionary origin of this system
is evidenced by the fact the same embryological progenitor produces the gills and their
nerves in the development of fish, as indeed brachia is Latin for “gills”.
Voice-motor control 17
dissected model brain indicating major components of the motor system including the
cingulate cortex (pink), supplementary motor area (blue), motor cortex (red), thalamus
(orange), basal ganglia (yellow), cerebellum (cyan), and brainstem (dark grey).
Penfield’s (1937) motor homunculus is displayed above the motor cortex, in which the
dual laryngeal and respiratory motor areas of the dLMC (circle) and vLMC (square)
are marked in black. B) Diagram of the motor network and some of its principal
connections culminating in downstream projections to effector specific motor nuclei.
The dotted line indicates a pathway which has been hypothesised but not yet
demonstrated in humans. The diagram highlights two pathways which are the putative
mechanisms of vocal usage learning and vocal production learning, respectively.
28.5.2 Conserved central nervous system mechanisms for vocal usage
learning
Vocal usage learning is found in a wide range of species, which allows
neuroscientists to study animal models in order to understand this ability in detail.
Stimulation of the Nucleus Ambiguus causes the muscles of the non-human primate
larynx to contract as the cell bodies in this nucleus belong to lower motor neurons that
directly innervate the larynx (Jürgens, 2009; Kuypers, 1958b; Leyton & Sherrington,
1917). However, these contractions form no meaningful communicative pattern and
are not accompanied by vocal sound production.
Meaningful patterns of muscle contractions that produce vocalisation are
The PAG receives extensive inputs from the limbic system (Dujardin & Jürgens, 2005)
and has outputs to many of the brainstem nuclei that directly control muscles relevant
to vocalisation (Thoms & Jürgens, 1987). In monkeys, stimulation of the PAG elicits
species-typical affective vocalisations (Jürgens & Ploog, 1970), and lesioning the PAG
abolishes vocal responses to both environmental stimuli and to electrical brain
stimulation that would normally elicited them (Jürgens & Pratt, 1979a, 1979b).
One of the principal inputs to the PAG is the Cingulate Cortex, part of which is
cingulate cortex is nestled into the medial surface of the brain, and combines cognitive,
Voice-motor control 18
affective, and motoric functions which motivate and initiate goal-directed behaviours
(Bush et al., 2002; Devinsky et al., 1995; Holroyd & Yeung, 2012; Paus, 2001). It is
divided grossly into the anterior, middle, and posterior cingulate cortex (ACC, MCC
and PCC, respectively). Within the ACC and MCC are found a series of motor areas,
each of which contains an ordered map of the body. At least one of these areas
contains a specialised region for the control of vocalisation (Amiez & Petrides, 2014;
Picard & Strick, 1996). This portion of cingulate cortex projects to the PAG and
electrical stimulation correspondingly elicits species-typical vocalisations (Jürgens &
Pratt, 1979b). Lesions to the cingulate cortex prevent the initiation of operantly
conditioned vocalisations, but spare responses to stimuli that would normally elicit an
affective vocal response (Aitken, 1981; Sutton et al., 1974, 1981). Hence, the cingulate
cortex in primates is believed to initiate voluntary control over affective vocalisations
by providing a pathway for the cerebral cortex to regulate the PAG (Jürgens, 2002,
2009). This pathway may either activate vocalisations in the absence of the
environmental stimuli that would normally elicit them or inhibit vocalisations that would
normally be situationally appropriate. The axis from the cingulate cortex, to the PAG,
to the Nucleus Ambiguus and other cranial nerve nuclei provides a pathway for vocal
usage learning in non-human primates. Neurons in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
(the homologue to Broca’s area in humans) can modify the acoustical structure of
these calls to a certain extent, which provides a putative mechanism for vocal variation
(Coudé et al., 2011; Hage & Nieder, 2013).
A similar mechanism for vocal usage learning is found in the human brain. Brain
imaging studies in which speakers expressed genuine or feigned emotions on
command show activation of the cingulate cortex and the PAG (Barrett et al., 2004;
Belyk & Brown, 2016). Participants who were tickled to elicit laughter inside an MRI
scanner showed activation of the PAG along with other parts of the limbic system
when participants were tickled, the PAG without broader limbic involvement when they
feigned laughter, and no activation of the PAG when they inhibited the urge to laugh
while being tickled (Wattendorf et al., 2013; Westermann et al., 2022). Hence, the
neural mechanism for vocal usage learning appears to be conserved across primates.
However, in all of these cases a suite of cortical brain areas associated with high-level
movement coordination were also activated consistent with the broad cortical
connectivity of the cingulate cortex (Zauli et al., 2022), and the human PAG may also
contribute to non-affective vocalisations (Galgano et al., 2019). In humans, the
evolutionarily conserved mechanism for vocal usage learning is at least partially
integrated with the broader system that supports the control of movement.
28.5.3 Specialised central nervous system mechanisms for vocal
production learning
A second pathway to the Nucleus Ambiguus –and through it to the larynx–
comes from a lateral portion of the frontal lobe. Motor cortex has a well-established
It is sometimes further divided into pre-motor and primary motor cortex, with the former
having a greater role in motor planning and the latter a greater role in movement
execution. The defining feature of motor cortex is the presence of giant pyramidal
neurons, or Betz cells, which are very large neurons whose axons project down to
motor nuclei in the brainstem and spinal cord (Brodmann, 1909; Judaš & Cepanec,
2010; Vogt, 1910). The axons descending from these giant pyramidal neurons have a
Voice-motor control 19
large diameter that supports rapid conduction times needed to rapidly execute
movements (Gandevia & Rothwell, 1987; Rothwell et al., 1987).
Motor cortex also has the intriguing property of somatotopy; it is composed of
a series of fields specialised for controlling certain groups of muscles or certain kinds
of movements, in fields arranged in a rough plan of the body (Lotze et al., 2000;
Penfield & Boldrey, 1937; Rao et al., 1995; Stippich et al., 2002). This somatotopy, or
body map, is often called a homunculus from the Latin word for ‘little person’. This
brain region, as well as a large network of brain areas that support it, are responsible
for executing skilled movement. Hence, complex behaviours such as vocal production
learning naturally require the portions of motor cortex that control the respiratory,
laryngeal, and articulatory muscles.
Unlike the pathways governing vocal usage learning, there are striking
differences in the pathway for vocal production learning between humans and other
primates. These differences in brain areas that control flexible and learned patterns of
movement are consistent with the conspicuous differences in vocal behaviour
between species of primate and has led many to theorise that changes in this pathway
at least partially explain the dexterity of the human voice (Belyk, Eichert, et al., 2021;
Belyk & Brown, 2017; Fischer & Hammerschmidt, 2011; Fitch, 2011; Jarvis, 2004;
Mars et al., 2018; Simonyan & Horwitz, 2011). The following sections review the
comparative neuroscience of this pathway in monkeys, non-human apes, and finally
humans.
28.5.3.1 Monkeys
The motor homunculus of the monkey lacks a voice. Electrical stimulation of
the primary motor cortex in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) and squirrel monkeys
(Saimiri sciureus) reveals somatotopic maps with regions that elicit movements of the
hindlimbs, forelimbs, and mouth, including the articulatory muscles of the lips and
tongue (Dum & Strick, 2002; Rathelot & Strick, 2009). However, no region that elicits
vocalisation has been found in the monkey’s primary motor cortex despite extensive
searching (Jürgens, 2009; Simonyan & Jürgens, 2002). Instead, a cortical larynx area
is found in the pre-motor cortex. Pre-motor cortex sits just anterior to primary motor
cortex and contains few of the giant pyramidal neurons that are required to execute
movements. The function of pre-motor cortex, at least in humans, is more associated
with motor planning and understanding the movements of others, than with direct
control of one’s own body (Calvo-Merino et al., 2005; Cross et al., 2006). For
conceptual convenience, the larynx area is commonly referred to as Larynx Motor
Cortex (LMC) across species, regardless of localisation to pre/primary motor cortex.
One consequence of this placement in pre-motor cortex is that the monkey’s
LMC does not send axons directly to the Nucleus Ambiguus. Instead, signals reach
the Nucleus Ambiguus indirectly by way of a relay in the reticular formation (Jürgens
& Ehrenreich, 2007; Simonyan & Jürgens, 2003). This is a loose net of brainstem
neurons involved in a range of automatic functions, including coordinating various
muscles during reflex movements (Kleyntjens, 1955; Sandkühler & Gebhart, 1984).
Although neurons in the monkey LMC do fire when the monkey vocalises (Coudé et
al., 2011; Hage & Nieder, 2013), electrical stimulation of these neurons does not cause
the monkey to vocalise (Hast et al., 1974; Hast & Milojkvic, 1966; Jürgens, 1974), and
experimental lesions do not alter the animal’s vocal behaviour (Kirzinger & Jürgens,
1982; Sutton et al., 1974). Hence, while the monkey LMC likely contributes to the
control of the larynx it does not appear to play a major role in voice motor control.
Voice-motor control 20
28.5.3.2 Non-human apes
Considerably less is known about the corresponding system in non-human
great apes (Chimpanzees, Orang-utans, and Gorillas), primarily due to the greater
intelligence of these species and increased ethical concern over their captivity.
However, what limited information is available suggests that the Larynx Motor Cortex
in these animals has migrated posteriorly towards the border of pre-motor and primary
motor cortex relative to monkeys, has a small but extant population of direct
projections to the Nucleus Ambiguus, and elicits a limited range of vocal behaviours,
such as grunts, when stimulated by electrical current (Kuypers, 1958b; Leyton &
Sherrington, 1917). This great ape phenotype would appear to be an incipient form
that is further elaborated in humans.
28.5.3.3 Humans
Where the monkey’s motor cortex has no voice, the human motor cortex has
two. By convention they are commonly referred to as the dorsal Larynx Motor Cortex
(dLMC) and the ventral Larynx Motor Cortex (vLMC), although these names may be
somewhat misleading as the functions of either area may also incorporate a broader
suite of muscles involved in vocalisation, such as expiration, jaw opening, and the
vertical displacement of the larynx as it concerns either vocal size exaggeration in
speech or vocal registers in singing (Belyk, Brown, et al., 2021; Belyk & Brown, 2014a;
Brown et al., 2021; Loucks et al., 2007; Waters et al., 2021). These brain regions have
been localised by corroborating neurosurgical recording (Bouchard et al., 2013; Chang
et al., 2013; Chartier et al., 2018; Dichter et al., 2018) and brain imaging studies (Belyk
et al., 2016; Eichert, Papp, et al., 2020; Kleber et al., 2013; Olthoff et al., 2008;
Terumitsu et al., 2006).
Unlike the LMC of monkeys, from which axons project only indirectly to lower
motor neurons in the Nucleus Ambiguus, at least one or both of the human LMCs have
a direct projection to the Nucleus Ambiguus though which remains unknown at
present. Evidence for this direct projection comes from natural experiments in patients
who have had infarcts to the middle cerebral artery, which provides the blood supply
to a large area of the lateral frontal lobe including both LMCs (Heinsius et al., 1998;
Theys et al., 2011). Anatomists have traced the degenerating neurons from their target
in the Nucleus Ambiguus directly to the affected portion of cortex, but could not further
determine their source within the large area of naturally occurring lesions (Iwatsubo et
al., 1990; Kuypers, 1958a).
The dLMC is located deep within the central sulcus in the tissue of the primary
motor cortex (Brown et al., 2008; Loucks et al., 2007; Simonyan et al., 2007). This
area is cytoarchitecturally designated as Brodmann Area 4, which is characterised by
an abundance of giant pyramidal neurons that project to lower motor neurons in the
spinal cord or brainstem, forming the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts,
respectively (Brodmann, 1909). Its position within the somatotopic map of primary
motor cortex lies between the representation of the hands and the lips, at the boundary
between the corticospinal and corticobulbar motor divisions (Eichert, Papp, et al.,
2020). Electrical stimulation of the dLMC in surgical patients can elicits vocalisation
that resemble a spoken vowel (Breshears et al., 2015; Dichter et al., 2018; Penfield &
Boldrey, 1937) and disrupts ongoing attempts to speak or sing (Leonard et al., 2019).
Voice-motor control 21
This combination of location, cytoarchitecture, and function diverges strongly from
what has been observed in other primates.
The vLMC is located at the ventral extreme of the somatotopy of motor cortex,
just posterior to the location of the LMC in non-human apes (Kuypers, 1958b; Leyton
& Sherrington, 1917; Mott et al., 1911). This localisation has been corroborated by
both neurosurgical recording (Bouchard et al., 2013; Chang et al., 2013; Chartier et
al., 2018; Dichter et al., 2018) and brain imaging (Belyk et al., 2016; Eichert, Papp, et
al., 2020; Kleber et al., 2013; Olthoff et al., 2008; Terumitsu et al., 2006). Clues to how
brain areas function can be found in cytoarchitecture as the specific functions of
different brain areas are reflect in the properties of the neurons from which they are
composed. In practice, neuroscientists often refer back to detailed cytoarchitecturally
maps produced from the extensive comparative neuroscience efforts of the early 20th
century. From these maps it can be seen that the vLMC lies cytoarchitecturally near
the boundaries of Brodmann Areas 4, (primary motor cortex), 6, (pre-motor cortex),
and 43. Brodmann described Brodmann Area 43 as resembling somatosensory cortex
more than motor cortex. However Vogt observed that this region contains a population
of the giant pyramidal neurons which are the defining feature of motor cortex
(Brodmann, 1909; Judaš & Cepanec, 2010; Vogt, 1910). Together these reports
suggest that the vLMC may have a mixture of motor and sensory functions (Miyaji et
al., 2014).
To date there have been few demonstrations that the dLMC and vLMC have
dissociable functions. Aside from the differences in cytoarchitecture reviewed above,
no clear evidence currently delineates what these two brain regions may contribute
separately to voice motor control. In human brain imaging studies, the dLMC is often
observed activated alone in the absence of the vLMC. However this asymmetry may
stem from a high degree of anatomical variability near the vLMC, which makes
activation in that region more difficult to detect in statistical group averages (Eichert,
Watkins, et al., 2020). Both regions are implicated in producing volitional vocalisations,
whether that be simple phonation (Olthoff et al., 2008), speaking (Bouchard et al.,
2013; Eichert, Papp, et al., 2020; Eichert, Watkins, et al., 2020), or singing (Belyk et
al., 2016; Brown et al., 2008; Dichter et al., 2018; Kleber et al., 2013). Interestingly,
both LMCs are activated by whistling which depends strongly on respiration and has
only minimal involvement of the larynx (Belyk, Brown, et al., 2021). Both regions may
have a fundamental role in integrating disparate muscular systems needed for vocal
communication. Further research is needed to understand what function this duplicate
control of the larynx serves, and by what means it arose.
28.5.4 Broader networks supporting vocalisation
Motor cortices alone are not sufficient for vocal production learning. Even
simple movements are the product of an extensive network of brain regions which
includes the cingulate cortex, supplementary motor area, basal ganglia, thalamus,
cerebellum, premotor cortex, and the inferior frontal gyrus (Brown et al., 2004;
Tourville & Guenther, 2011), not to mention the likely involvement of a broad array of
brain regions that organise the linguistic and musical contents of to be communicated.
While evidence of neural specialisations for voice motor control have so far been
restricted to primary motor cortex, there is good reason to suppose that these are
supported by specialisations throughout the broader motor network (Belyk, Eichert, et
computational model describing how this network controls the pattern of muscular
Voice-motor control 22
contractions that produce speech and song can be found in Zuk, Loui, and Guenther
(this volume).
Since our species lacks close relatives with homologous vocal production
learning abilities, it can be informative study species to that are more distantly related
but with whom humans share some behaviours. Songbirds, parrots, and humming
birds are three large clades with widespread and robust VPL and who learn their
vocalisations by imitating others (Nottebohm, 1972). While the avian brain is organised
differently from the mammalian brain, researchers have sought to establish analogies
based on patterns of functions, connections, and gene expression profiles across
species (Jarvis, 2007; Jarvis et al., 2005; Petkov & Jarvis, 2012; Pfenning et al., 2014).
Songbirds in particular have been a fruitful source of insight. As with humans,
these species have a descending-vocal motor pathway with direct connections to the
brainstem nucleus that controls the syrinx (the avian equivalent of a larynx; Jarvis,
2019; Nottebohm et al., 1976). In songbirds, there is also evidence of a direct-
projection to Nucleus Retroambiguus for coordinated respiratory-syringeal activity
while singing (Wild, 1993, 1997). This pathway is absent in species of birds with little
capacity for VPL (Jarvis, 2004; Petkov & Jarvis, 2012). It has been hypothesised that
humans may have an analogous but not yet demonstrated cortico-retroambiguus
al., 2021; Belyk & Brown, 2017). Others have hypothesised that laryngeal-respiratory
coordination is accomplished by the joint efforts of the cortico-ambiguus and cingulate-
PAG-retroambiguus pathways to provide laryngeal and respiratory control,
respectively (Hage & Nieder, 2016).
Of greater interest is another network within the brains of birds with good vocal
production learning ability. This network forms a loop through the avian forebrain
including areas that are analogous to the human motor cortex, basal ganglia, and
either the supplementary motor area or the inferior frontal gyrus (Pfenning et al., 2014).
This pathway maps songs in the birds repertoire onto the motor commands needed to
sing them (Giret et al., 2014). Whereas lesions to the descending vocal–motor
pathway profoundly disrupt song production (Nottebohm et al., 1976), lesions to the
anterior forebrain loop disrupt vocal imitation and song learning but spare the
production of songs that have already been learned (Bottjer et al., 1984; Brainard &
Doupe, 2000; Sohrabji et al., 1990).
Songbirds modulate the style of their singing based on social context. When a
bird sings as a part of a courtship ritual their songs are highly stereotyped like a well-
rehearsed performance. However, when they sing alone, their song is more variable,
which may be seen as a kind of rehearsal (Hessler & Doupe, 1999). This increased
variability in the structure of birdsong is modulated by the anterior forebrain loop (Kao
et al., 2005; Liu & Nottebohm, 2005; Miller et al., 2010) and lesioning this pathway
prevents this context-dependent switch from practice to performance (Kao & Brainard,
2006). Variability is an important feature for sensorimotor learning as the motor system
explores novel variants of motor commands, whether they be gestures, words, or
melodies, and selectively retains those that are useful (Dhawale et al., 2017; Wu et
al., 2014). Together, these findings suggest that not only is the anterior forebrain loop
required for the acquisition of new songs but also plays an active role in refining and
improving the performance.
Attempts to test predictions derived from the songbird system in the human
vocal-motor system are ongoing. Early efforts sought to study the neural mechanisms
of imitating hand gestures, as the hands are robustly represented across the motor
system and more easily amenable to empirical study (Iacoboni, 2009; Iacoboni et al.,
Voice-motor control 23
1999). Brain imaging studies of vocal imitation have highlighted candidate regions
through the motor system including motor cortex, the basal ganglia, the supplementary
motor area, the cerebellum, as well as the inferior frontal gyrus (Carey et al., 2017;
Garnier et al., 2013; Reiterer et al., 2011; Segawa et al., 2015; Waters et al., 2021).
However, the most direct test of the avian analogy has come from direct comparisons
between imitating novel melodies to singing overlearned melodies (Belyk et al., 2016).
Such comparisons reveal that imitation preferentially activates the dLMC, vLMC,
supplementary motor area, and basal ganglia, in line with predictions from the avian
analogy. This research provides a tempting suggestion that the human analogue to
the avian anterior forebrain loop may serve a similar function for speech and song;
this network may support vocal production learning by facilitating imitation, mapping
intended vocalisations onto the motor commands needed to produce them, and
possibly in moderating the role of practice. While there have been few direct tests of
these predictions to date, they remain a promising avenue for further research.
28.6 Mechanisms of vocal-motor evolution
Phenotypes evolve due to selective pressures that lead some traits to become
more common in a population over time. The biological mechanisms on which these
selective pressures operate are enacted by genes and the proteins that they encode.
In the case of complex behaviours such as vocal-motor control, these are most notably
molecular genetic mechanisms that influence brain development. For example,
systems of molecules such as Slits-Robos and semaphorins-plexins (among many
others) guide developing axons to their neuronal targets (Chisholm & Tessier-Lavigne,
1999; Dickson, 2002). Promising evidence has begun to demonstrate that the human
LMCs have molecular genetic specialisations that may mediate the human specialised
direct-connection to the Nucleus Ambiguus (Pfenning et al., 2014) though available
human gene expression data remain limited.
Regulatory genes that may not directly impact neuronal growth can indirectly
shape the nervous system by modifying the degree and timing of expression for other
genes, including the axon guidance mechanisms mentioned above as well as broader
mechanisms involved in the cellular development and maintenance of neurons. One
notable example is FOXP2 which profoundly influences the development of the
language network in the human brain (Lai et al., 2001; Lai et al., 2003; Watkins et al.,
2002), and the song network in the avian brain (Teramitsu et al., 2004; Teramitsu &
White, 2006). As a regulatory gene, FOXP2 may be capable of coordinating broad
patterns of axon guidance mechanisms towards complex phenotypes such as vocal
production learning (Vernes et al., 2007, 2011).
At a broader scale, it can be informative to consider how brains evolve novel
tissue that supports new specialisations. In songbirds, it has been observed that the
brain structures that make up the avian forebrain loop (which enables VPL) evolved
conspicuously adjacent to pre-existing motor networks that provide flexible goal-
directed control for the rest of the body (Feenders et al., 2008). Parrots, who are
famously prodigious vocal learner, appear to have nested vocal systems including a
core that is homologous with the vocal system of songbirds surrounded by a shell of
novel tissue forming a parallel expanded vocal network (Chakraborty et al., 2015).
Together these findings have led to the hypothesis that one mechanism by which a
novel network might emerge is by the duplication and repurposing of pre-existing
networks (Chakraborty & Jarvis, 2015).
Voice-motor control 24
Alternatively, greater specialisation may simply arise from the geometry of
evolving larger brains (Striedter, 2018). The expansion of the human brain has not
been uniform (Chaplin et al., 2013; Garin et al., 2022; Rilling & Insel, 1999). It is driven
disproportionately by an increase in the size of the neocortex, particularly in the frontal
lobe which includes the cortical portions of the motor network (e.g., primary motor
cortex, pre-motor cortex, anterior/middle cingulate cortex, and supplementary motor
area). Larger brain regions send more axonal projections and compete more
effectively for space in among the dendrites of their neuronal targets (Deacon, 1989,
1990). Therefore, this may explain why, at least among mammals, proportionally
larger neocortical size is correlated with greater connectivity between the cortex and
the spinal cord, yielding improved manual dexterity (Heffner & Masterton, 1975;
Striedter, 2018). As cortical expansion increased in human evolution, it is not
unreasonable to hypothesise that as the number of neurons in the orofacial zone of
motor cortex expanded, the total number of axons descending to the brainstem motor
nuclei also increased and invaded new territory among the dendrites of Nucleus
Ambiguus and Nucleus Retroambiguus. A mechanism such as this could provide the
laryngeal and respiratory dexterity required for speech and song (Belyk, et al., 2021).
28.7 Summary
The voice is the instrument for the audible manifestations of language and music –
speech and song. Humans have a prodigious capacity for the use of the respiratory,
articulatory, and laryngeal components of this system. Similar degrees of vocal
production learning are observed in only a handful of species of mammals and birds,
none of whom share particularly recent ancestry with humans, suggesting that
enhanced control over the voice was either a pre-cursor to – or co-occurred with – the
evolution of music and language. Neuromuscular control over the laryngeal sound
source is particularly notable as an area of advantage in humans relative to non-
human primates. Within the broader network of brain areas for the control of
movement, the human brain contains specialisations for the coordination of laryngeal
and respiratory muscles. These mechanisms allow humans to produce arbitrary
combinations of sounds, which we use to convey culturally defined codes that we
interpret as speech as song. How this specialisation evolved in humans remains an
open question. However, dexterous and voluntary control over the voice may have
been a pre-requisite to the evolution of language and music if one considers that the
chief means of their expression – through speech and song – would otherwise be
lacking.
Voice-motor control 25
Glossary
Auditory learning: The ability to make arbitrary connections between sounds and
outcomes, as when a cat salivates at the sound of a tin of tuna being opened.
Apes: A group of species including humans and their closest relatives,
Chimpanzees, Gorillas, Orangutans, and gibbons.
Formant (F1, F2, F3, etc.): Resonant frequencies produced by the vocal tract which
listeners can use to identify voiced speech sounds (e.g., vowels)..
Fundamental frequency (f0): The acoustic correlate of voice pitch.
Larynx motor cortex: An area or areas within motor cortex that are specialised for the
control of the laryngeal muscles.
Primates: A group of species including humans, their closest relatives (see Apes), as
well as monkeys.
Vocal usage learning: The ability to flexibly deploy an existing vocal repertoire, as
when a dog learns to bark for treats.
Vocal production learning: The ability to add new vocalisations to a repertoire, as
when an infant learns to speak, as an adult learns the sound of an unfamiliar
language, or as a singer tries new melodic and rhythmic patterns.
Biographical paragraph
Michel Belyk holds a PhD in Psychology, Neuroscience, and Behaviour from
McMaster University, Canada. He is currently a Senior Lecturer in the Department of
Psychology at Edge Hill University, UK where he studies the human voice, all of the
things that it says, and how it is able to say them. He seeks to understand the neural
adaptations that make humans able to speak and sing, with a particular focus on the
voice. While his own work concerns exclusively humans, he finds a comparative and
evolutionary lens to be an enlightening means of putting human vocality, along with all
of our ability and deficiency, into context.
Voice-motor control 26