Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Picking the Right Piece:
How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search and Action Planning in Foraging
Danilo A. Kuhn, Jan Tünnermann, and Anna Schubö
Cognitive Neuroscience of Perception and Action, Department of Psychology,
Philipps-University Marburg, Germany
Author Note
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Danilo Kuhn,
Department of Psychology, Philipps-University Marburg,
Gutenbergstraße 18, 35032 Marburg, Germany.
E-mail: danilo.kuhn@uni-marburg.de
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Abstract
Everyday behavior, like grocery shopping, often includes search for multiple objects
of one kind. Such “visual foraging” tasks have recently received more attention in vision
science1–5. However, although object search is usually performed for object interaction, only
few studies have been conducted with real objects6–8. When interacting with real-world
objects, factors such as the type of interaction and its precision requirements are likely to
affect object selection. When high precision is required, actions are performed more carefully
(e.g., with lower speed and a longer deceleration phase)9–13. In addition, action contexts—
such as the type or endpoint of movements—affect adaptive movement planning and action
parameters, including grasp point selection and movement speed11,14–17. To investigate such
influences in interactive real-world visual foraging, we asked participants to pick and place
LEGO® bricks defined by color and varied the precision requirements with different placing
instructions. Movement analysis revealed that participants preferred nearby objects but also
prioritized those beneficial to the task, such as larger objects when instructed to create a pile.
This demonstrates that participants planned reach movements by balancing immediate
movement costs with future precision demands. Our results emphasize that task and action
context, such as placing requirements or the environmental layout, need to be considered for
understanding visual selection in real-world situations.
Keywords: Visual Search; Visual Foraging; Action Planning, Second-Order
Planning, Prior Intention, Action Context, Natural Behavior, Decision Making
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Results and Discussion
Using visual foraging action sequences, we investigated the impact of action
intention18, also studied in isolated actions as “movement intent”11, “prior intention”19,20, or
“second-order (motor) planning”21 on target selection in naturalistic search. In our foraging
experiment with 3D-objects, participants picked and placed a certain number of LEGO®
bricks (search sizes: 3, 4, 5) defined by color. Each trial initially contained six targets, so
participants never had to search exhaustively, but could choose which targets to select or
avoid3. We varied the precision requirements using different placing instructions (collect,
target in the picking area)11,22 and transport phases (the movement with the object to the
placing area)10,23, see Data Preprocessing. In each trial, participants started at a predefined
starting position in front of them and then performed the instructed number of reaches and
transports to complete the trial. In the placing area, they placed the items according to the
In each trial, participants were asked to sequentially pick and place a fixed number of LEGO® bricks defined by
color. Placing instructions varied between trials (collect, sort, pile). For analysis, movements were segmented
into reach and transport movements. The first reach was defined as the movement from the starting position
(pink) to the first target in the picking area (yellow). After grasping and picking up an object, the transport
movement started, which ended when the object was placed in the placing area (blue). There, the second reach
movement started back to the picking area.
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Placing Instructions Influence Object Selection, Planning, and Action Execution
When analyzing how participants interacted with this physical task, we found that
participants had the longest deceleration phase when transporting the items for piling
(54.7 %), followed by sorting (53.5 %) and placing (51 %; Bayes factor* [BF ] for piling
10, U
vs sorting: 4.9; sorting vs collecting: 183). This confirms that participants took the
instructions into account and adjusted their actions toward them, placing objects more
carefully with higher precision demands, in line with earlier studies9–11. Some studies10–12
reported that task goals with higher precision requirements lead to more careful approaches
when picking up objects, indicated by a longer deceleration phase. Interestingly, we did not
observe this effect. Instead, we found that the relative time spent decelerating was equally
long under all instructions (collecting: 49.9 %, sorting: 50.2 %, piling: 49.9 %; BF = 8.4;
excl
Several reasons might have contributed to this pattern: As shown in a meta-analysis9, larger
differences in the precision requirements between two upcoming tasks (e.g., throw vs place)
lead to larger differences in reach deceleration time. Perhaps, our placing instructions were
too similar in difficulty to elicit differences in deceleration duration. Moreover, in previous
studies that showed an increased deceleration duration for more difficult tasks, participants
picked and placed a single, isolated object. In our task, participants searched and collected
several objects in a trial, always selecting targets among other objects. This way, the objects
surrounding a target may have served as obstacles, which required participants to decelerate
their movements to a similar degree in all placing instructions in order to adjust contact
points for grasping24.
* The Bayes factor shows how much more likely an effect (e.g., a difference) is compared to the null
hypothesis (no difference). For more details, please refer to the General Statistical Analysis.
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Previous studies also showed that higher task difficulty leads to a decreased reach
speed9,11. Interestingly, in our study the first reaching movement was the fastest (50.3 cm/s on
average over the whole trajectory) in the most difficult task, the piling condition (compared
to 47.9 cm/s in sorting [BF = 113.4] and 48.3 cm/s in collecting [BF = 3.5]). Note that
10, U 10, U
only the first reaching movements started from the same position in all trials; the other
reaches are more difficult to compare between placing instructions. The faster speed in the
piling condition was accompanied by a longer average reaching distance of 22.2 cm for piling
compared to 20.9 cm (BF = 35.8) and 21 cm (BF = 3.4) for sorting and collecting.
10, U 10, U
Participants might have accepted larger distances when piling to select targets that are
particularly useful in the action sequence. Selecting large items early in the sequence and
small items later facilitates the overall piling process and thus task completion. Indeed,
average first reach distance for large items was highest in the piling condition (22.5 cm)
compared to collecting (21.1 cm; BF = 7.8) and sorting (21.2 cm; BF = 13.2) as shown in
+0 +0
in the piling condition (18.3 cm) compared to collecting (19.4 cm; BF = 8.8) or sorting
0+
(18.7 cm; BF = 6.2). The faster reach speed shows that participants adjust their movement
+0
parameters to compensate for the longer distances, perhaps to maintain a stable rhythm in the
oscillating pick-and-place actions. This seems to agree with findings that discrete actions can
merge into stable rhythmic patterns even though the task does not require periodicity25.
Further tests revealed that participants tended to select larger objects almost six times
placing instructions, BF between 6.157×10+6 and 1.457×10+8 on the arcsine transformed
proportions that they are different from 50 %). This is in line with earlier studies26–28 and
seems to reflect to some degree attentional preferences29. Interestingly, this effect was the
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
strongest for piling with 88.8 % compared to 84.4 % when collecting (BF = 6.1) and 81.9 %
+0
when sorting (BF = 34.9).
+0
In sum, results show that precision requirements induced by placing instructions
influence which target objects are selected, and that action sequences are planned with regard
to the action intention. Selective visual attention presumably fostered the dynamical
prioritization of potential targets in the action sequence14,30. Theories of selective attention
assume that priority is, among other factors, jointly generated from stimulus-driven and goal-
directed guidance31–33. Stimulus-driven factors might have boosted some object locations
more than others, whereas prioritization according to task demands (e.g., finding an object of
particular size) was accomplished by goal-driven factors that ensured picking the right targets
at the right time.
(A) Average first reach distance (y-axis) per placing instruction (green: collect, orange: sort, purple: pile; x-axis)
when large items (dark) or small items (light) were selected. Black diamonds represent the mean value of the
respective task goal. The boxplots show how the data points are distributed. For this purpose, the quartiles were
calculated. The central box ranges from the first quartile to the third quartile and thus shows the interquartile
range (IQR), which includes 50 % of the data. The central horizontal line corresponds to the median, with 50%
of the data lying above or below this value. The whiskers extend to the last data point, which is within 1.5 times
the IQR. Data outside this range are outliers.
(B) Average proportion of the first target being of large size (dark) or small size (light; y-axis) per placing
instruction (green: collect, orange: sort, purple: pile; x-axis). Error bars denote the standard error of the mean.
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Spatial selection patterns
Studies on visual search showed that participants aim to minimize efforts and
maximize performance, for instance by adjusting their attentional control strategies to select
beneficial targets34–37 or nearby items26,38–40. Similarly, studies on motor control showed that
participants choose movements with lower motor costs (in terms of biomechanics, force and
duration)41–43. As in our paradigm both attention-related and action-related costs combine, we
expected such optimizations to be reflected in the spatial selection patterns, given that our
task left participants sufficient freedom by not requiring them to act on all present targets.
picking areas. We found that participants preferably selected targets on the left side, with a
3 D-F). The activity distributions are constrained by the allowed placing areas. In the picking
area, where participants had more freedom concerning where to act, the activity is more
dispersed. For statistical treatment we followed Woods et al.44, and divided the picking area
into four equally-sized quadrants. A Bayesian repeated measures ANOVA with the factors
revealed decisive evidence for a main effect of quadrant on picking preference (BF =
incl
4666367.275) and search size (BF = 7.740×10+11; see Statistical Analysis of Picking
incl
10, U
activation increased with search size (BFs > 119931).
10, U
In sum, participants preferred selecting targets near the placing area and closer to
themselves and the starting position, minimizing the effort incurred by their selections. In
previous research, participants exhibited a search bias to the left side in a 2D visual search
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
task, while also preferring to initiate search in the upper half, analogue to western reading
habits44. In a 3D virtual reality study, however, participants exhibited a bias to initiate search
in the lower visual field which contained objects closest to them45. Together with the spatial
activity patterns that emerged in the present study, these findings show that spatial biases
depend strongly on the task.
In addition to minimizing action efforts, such spatial patterns might also structure the
visual search. When targets are repeatedly found in the prioritized area, attention might be
guided to these areas in repeated searches46,47. Hence, attentional and motoric prioritizations
can align and mutually enhance each other in such tasks.
(A) Mean heatmap activation (y-axis) quantified by placing subareas 1-4 as shown in (B) across placing
instructions (collect, sort, pile).
(B) Division of picking area (left) and placing area (right) into four quadrants for quantification of spatial
preferences.
(C) Mean heatmap activation (y-axis) quantified by picking subareas 1-4 as shown in (B) across placing
instructions (collect, sort, pile).
(D-F) Heatmaps showing activation of local placing preference (always left) and local picking preference
(always right) for separate task instructions across all participants. Brighter and red colors indicate a larger
activation, dark blue indicates no activation.
In (A) and (C) each dot represents the mean of a participant.
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Further observations and outlook
Offering participants a more flexible task than in many other experimental paradigms
enables a greater variability in behavior that can be challenging to quantify or might interact
with experimental factors. We observed that participants interpreted the piling conditions
quite variably. We informally identified three behavioral patterns, with high consistency
within participants. Ten out of 24 participants placed the targets in the central piling area
without piling them there, making it more similar to the collect condition but in a smaller
area. The remaining 14 participants stacked the LEGO® bricks on top of each other or put
them on top of each other without stacking them. Placing targets in the piling area without
piling them there might mean that those participants did not search for a specific item (e.g.,
not the largest), thereby reducing the observed effect that large objects were most frequently
pile condition may hide other, smaller effects of task difficulty on movement parameters, like
reach duration or movement onset. Repeating the same experiment with more constrained
task instructions in the piling condition could shed light on this.
Another point in which our paradigm might need improvements is the stimulus
presentation. We expected to see effects of placing instructions on movement onsets, which
did not emerge. One potential reason is that participants could see the search scene before a
trial started while listening to the search instructions, which were about two seconds long. In
this time, participants might have already started visually selecting the potential targets and
planning their movements. If this was the case, a later onset of vision availability just after
the end of the task should elicit a difference in movement onset between the placing
instructions. Alternatively, no difference in movement onset could suggest sequential
movement planning17. However, this would contrast the finding that participants plan several
targets ahead when foraging in 2D26. Nevertheless, we intend to rule out this issue in future
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
experiments by employing occlusion shutter glasses to control when participants receive
visual input.
Conclusion
Our findings demonstrate that in natural settings, target selection and reach movement
planning depend on goal-related factors such as precision requirements when placing objects.
Targets are selected to minimize action (and possibly also attentional search) efforts but are
biased based on their immediate usefulness for the task goal. The spatial search organization
seemed highly tuned toward the particular task. Taken together, our results highlight that
understanding allegedly visual search in more realistic scenarios needs to take also the
motoric actors into account.
Picking the Right Piece: How Action Intentions Shape Visual Search…
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by “The Adaptive Mind”, funded by the Excellence
Program of the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Art. We thank
Carola Breitmaier and Julia Elina Stocker for their assistance with data collection.
Author Contributions
Initials in alphabetical order; Conceptualization: A.S., D.A.K., J.T.; Stimulus and task
development: A.S., D.A.K., J.T.; Data acquisition: D.A.K.; Formal analysis and modelling:
D.A.K., J.T.; Writing (original draft): D.A.K.; Writing (reviewing and editing): A.S., D.A.K.,
J.T.; Supervision: A.S., J.T.
Data and Code Availability
Preprocessed data and code are available on the Open Science Framework
Declarations of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.