Linking the multiple-demand cognitive control system to human
electrophysiological activity
Runhao Lu
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge
Runhao.Lu@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk
Abstract
The multiple-demand (MD) network serves as a core system for domain-general cognitive control,
with robust activation with increased demand across diverse tasks. While fMRI studies have
characterised the MD network’s role in cognitive demand, linking these findings to
electrophysiological activity remains a critical challenge. This article discusses the potential of
oscillatory and aperiodic neural activity to bridge this gap. Although recent meta-analyses highlight
mid-frontal theta power as a robust marker of task demand, its localised spatial distribution, limited
cross-task generalisability, and potential confounds from aperiodic components limit its ability to fully
represent the MD network. In contrast, aperiodic activity, particularly broadband power, has emerged
as a strong candidate for indexing task demand due to its robust decoding performance and cross-task
generalisability in response to diverse task demands, and spatial overlap with MD regions. Aperiodic
activity may reflect fundamental neural properties, such as spiking rates and excitation/inhibition (E/I)
balance, and is scale-free and exists across modalities, positioning it as a promising mechanism
underpinning domain-general cognitive control that links to the MD network. Meanwhile, multiplexed
low-frequency oscillations (e.g., delta and theta) may implement inter-regional synchronisation within
the MD network, enabling large-scale coordination between MD subregions that supports cognitive
control. Together, this article proposes a hypothetical framework linking the MD network to
electrophysiological responses: Aperiodic broadband power, potentially reflecting population-level
spiking activity, may support activation within MD regions, while multiplexed low-frequency
oscillatory synchronisations may mediate inter-regional connectivity between MD regions.
Keywords: Multiple-demand Network; Cognitive Control; Neural Oscillations; Aperiodic Neural
Activity; Functional Connectivity
Highlights
The MD network serves as the core system for domain-general cognitive control
Linking oscillatory power to the MD network remains significant challenges
Aperiodic broadband power is a strong candidate underpinning the MD network
Increased MD activation might align with a decrease in broadband power
Low-frequency oscillations may coordinate connectivity between MD regions
1. Introduction
Human fMRI studies have consistently suggested the multiple-demand (MD) network as a central
system for domain-general cognitive control (Duncan, 2010; Duncan, Assem, & Shashidhara, 2020).
This network spans distributed but highly specific regions in the frontal, parietal, and temporal cortices
(Assem, Glasser, Van Essen, & Duncan, 2020; Fedorenko, Duncan, & Kanwisher, 2013). MD network
activation is robustly associated with cognitive demands across diverse tasks and exhibits an adaptive
coding property, allowing flexible representation of task-relevant information to meet varying
cognitive challenges (Duncan, 2001; Duncan et al., 2020; Woolgar, Hampshire, Thompson, & Duncan,
2011; Woolgar, Jackson, & Duncan, 2016).
In parallel, numerous studies using MEG or EEG have explored electrophysiological responses,
particularly oscillatory power, underlying cognitive control across different tasks. Evidence indicates
that oscillatory dynamics across a broad range of frequency bands, from delta (~0.5-3 Hz) to gamma
(>30 Hz), may exhibit load-related effects, with power either increasing or decreasing in more
demanding conditions (Chikhi, Matton, & Blanchet, 2022; Pavlov & Kotchoubey, 2022). However,
despite extensive research examining fMRI and MEG/EEG correlates of task demands, significant
challenges remain in linking the robust MD activations observed in fMRI studies to these
electrophysiological findings.
This article first reviews recent meta-analyses studies on the relationship between oscillatory
power and task demands, which suggest frontal theta power (~4-8 Hz) as the strongest oscillatory
candidate for supporting domain-general cognitive control. Nevertheless, substantial challenges persist
in linking frontal theta to MD activity due to its spatial localisation and potential confounds from other
neural components. This review further proposes that aperiodic neural activity, another key component
spiking rates and excitation/inhibition (E/I) balance, offering a more compelling electrophysiological
basis for MD network activation. As strong inter-regional connectivity is another key feature of the
MD network (Assem et al., 2020), I further discuss its potential electrophysiological mechanisms,
focusing on the role of long-range low-frequency (e.g., delta and theta) synchronisations in
coordinating activity between distributed MD regions. Together, with consideration of both aperiodic
activity and long-range functional connectivity (FC), it may shed light on the electrophysiological
underpinnings of the MD network and offer a potential framework for understanding how local and
global neural dynamics support domain-general cognitive control.
The left panels illustrate the pure oscillatory (top) and aperiodic signal (bottom). The right panel shows
the measured power spectrum (orange) as a mixture of oscillatory and aperiodic components. The
aperiodic signal (blue dashed line) reflects the 1/f background, while the mixed spectrum (orange)
incorporates oscillatory peaks with the aperiodic background.
2. Linking oscillatory power to MD activations
2.1. Frontal theta: A strong candidate for domain-general cognitive control
Much like the robust activation of the MD network in response to task demand across diverse
contexts, there has been significant interest in the MEG/EEG literature in identifying reliable neural
metrics supporting cognitive control in various tasks. Among these, the spectral power of neural
oscillations across different frequency bands has been a prominent focus (Cavanagh & Frank, 2014;
Chikhi et al., 2022; Pavlov & Kotchoubey, 2022; Roux & Uhlhaas, 2014). However, despite extensive
investigation, findings in this area have often been inconsistent and sometimes challenging to interpret.
A recent meta-analysis by Chikhi et al. (2022) reviewed 45 effect sizes from 24 studies involving
723 participants to examine the relationship between oscillatory power and cognitive load. The results
indicated that increased cognitive load is associated with increases in theta power (g = 0.68, CI [0.41,
0.95]), decreases in alpha (~ 8-12 Hz) power (g = −0.25, CI [−0.45, 0.04]), and increases in beta (~
15-30 Hz) power (g = 0.50, CI [0.21, 0.79]). Among these, theta power demonstrated the highest effect
size and emerged as the most robust and reliable index for tracking cognitive load (Cavanagh & Frank,
2014; Cohen & Donner, 2013; Cooper, Wong, McKewen, Michie, & Karayanidis, 2017; Jensen &
Tesche, 2002; Ratcliffe, Shapiro, & Staresina, 2022). Furthermore, increased theta power during
cognitive tasks is associated with improved task performance (Tan et al., 2024), which emphasises its
significant role in cognitive processes directly linked to behaviour.
Similarly, Pavlov and Kotchoubey (2022) conducted a meta-analysis of 100 MEG/EEG studies
exploring the relationship between oscillatory power and working memory load. Their findings
reinforced theta power increases as the most consistent neural marker of cognitive load. In contrast,
while cognitive load typically influences alpha power as well, its direction is often inconsistent. Some
studies report increases in alpha power with load (Jensen, 2024; Jensen, Gelfand, Kounios, & Lisman,
2002; Klimesch, 1999), while others observe decreases (Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp,
2014; Grissmann, Faller, Scharinger, Spuler, & Gerjets, 2017). These discrepancies may be driven by
multiple factors such as stimulus presentation style (simultaneous vs. successive) (Hsieh, Ekstrom, &
Ranganath, 2011), task content (verbal vs. visual) (van Ede, 2018), or differing neural sources of alpha
activity (Rodriguez-Larios, ElShafei, Wiehe, & Haegens, 2022). As a result, alpha power appears less
generalisable across different tasks compared to the robust MD activation observed in fMRI studies
across a wide range of tasks (Assem, Shashidhara, Glasser, & Duncan, 2022; Fedorenko et al., 2013).
Beta power, while moderately associated with cognitive load as suggested by meta-analyses,
exhibits significant variability in spatial and frequency distributions (Altamura et al., 2010; Orlandi &
Brooks, 2018; Pavlov & Kotchoubey, 2017), reducing its reliability as a general neural marker of
cognitive control. High-frequency gamma power, which reflects local spiking rates (Vinck, Uran,
Dowdall, Rummell, & Canales-Johnson, 2024; Voytek & Knight, 2015), is another potential candidate.
However, due to the low signal-to-noise ratio of non-invasive MEG/EEG recordings, gamma activity
has been less studied, with existing studies reporting inconsistent results (Brookes et al., 2011; Poch,
Campo, & Barnes, 2014).
2.2. Challenges in linking frontal theta power to the distributed MD network
Although frontal theta power demonstrates a strong association with diverse task demands,
significant challenges remain in linking it to the MD network. The most prominent issue lies in the
differences between their cortical patterns. MEG/EEG source localisation and simultaneous EEG-
fMRI studies consistently indicate that demand-related frontal theta power originates primarily from
medial frontal regions, such as the anterior/mid-cingulate cortex (ACC/MCC) and the pre-
supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) (Brookes et al., 2011; Meltzer, Negishi, Mayes, & Constable,
2007; Michels et al., 2010; Onton, Delorme, & Makeig, 2005). While the MD network includes a
medial frontal patch encompassing these areas, it extends to eight functionally similar patches
distributed across the lateral frontal, parietal, and temporal cortices (Assem et al., 2020; Fedorenko et
al., 2013). Notably, intracranial EEG studies have found that theta power in medial frontal areas (e.g.,
dorsal ACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (DLPFC) can exhibit opposite patterns with memory
load (Brzezicka et al., 2019), suggesting potential distinct functional roles of theta oscillations across
MD regions. Thus, mid-frontal theta power may not account for the electrophysiological correlates
underpinning the entire MD network. Instead, it might reflect the activity of a medial frontal subsystem
within the broader MD network, while oscillations in other regions, such as parietal alpha or lateral
frontal theta, might underpin additional MD subsystems. Supporting this view, recent studies suggested
that frontal theta and posterior alpha work together to support cognitive control, with the frontal theta
associated with target prioritisation and posterior alpha linked to distractor suppression (Riddle et al.,
2024; Riddle, Scimeca, Cellier, Dhanani, & D'Esposito, 2020).
Beyond localisation differences, another challenge arises from the potential confound of aperiodic
neural activity. Recent evidence suggests that modulations traditionally attributed to theta oscillations
may, in fact, reflect changes in aperiodic neural activity. For instance, a recent study disentangled
oscillatory and aperiodic effects during a working memory task (Frelih, Matkovič, Mlinarič, Bon, &
Repovš, 2024). Surprisingly, they found that a substantial proportion of the modulations previously
attributed to frontal theta oscillations were better explained by changes in aperiodic activity. Similarly,
our recent MEG/EEG study (Lu, Dermody, Duncan, & Woolgar, 2024) used multivariate pattern
analysis (MVPA) to investigate the roles of oscillatory power and aperiodic activity in encoding task
demand across six subtasks, including working memory, task switching, and multi-source interference
tasks presented in either alphanumeric or colour formats. This study also assessed the cross-task
generalisability of these neural signals. If a neural response supports domain-general cognitive control,
as the MD network does, it should exhibit a generalisable pattern in classifying task difficulty across
different contexts. While results suggested that oscillatory theta power, along with alpha and beta
cognition.
In summary, although frontal theta power emerges as the most robust metric for tracking task
demand across many cognitive control processes, linking it to the MD network presents several
challenges, including differences in source distribution, the potential confounds of aperiodic
components, and limited cross-task generalisability.
aperiodic activity (Lu et al., 2024). (A) Decoding performance (area under the curve, AUC) of task
demand (hard vs. easy) using oscillatory power (theta, alpha, and beta) across six subtasks. Each dot
means one participant. Error bars represent standard errors. (B) Cross-task generalisation of task
demand based on theta power. Yellow borders highlight significantly above-chance AUC values,
indicating generalisability across the respective subtasks. The inset brain image shows the averaged
source patterns, revealing mid-frontal theta power increases during hard task conditions. (C) Decoding
performance of task demand using aperiodic components (broadband power, slope, and intercept) for
each subtask. (D) Cross-task generalisation of task demand based on aperiodic broadband power. The
inset brain image shows the averaged source patterns, illustrating a widespread frontoparietal
broadband power decrease during hard task conditions. WM: Working memory task; SWIT: Switching
* **
task; MSIT: Multi-source interference task; num: Alphanumeric task; col: Colour task. p < 0.05, p
***
< 0.01, p < 0.001 (FDR-corrected).
3. Linking aperiodic neural activity to MD activations
3.1. Estimation and physiological interpretation of aperiodic neural activity
MEG/EEG power spectra consist of a combination of components, including a broadband 1/f-like
2014; Voytek & Knight, 2015). Separating these components is crucial for understanding their roles in
cognition, as traditional measures of narrow-band oscillatory power can be significantly confounded
by broadband shifts or spectral rotations caused by aperiodic activity (Donoghue et al., 2020).
Several established methods exist to disentangle aperiodic and oscillatory activity from the mixed
signal (Donoghue et al., 2024), including parametric approaches such as Fitting Oscillations & One
Over F (FOOOF) (Donoghue et al., 2020) and non-parametric methods like irregular resampling auto-
spectral analysis (IRASA) (Wen & Liu, 2016). These techniques estimate aperiodic activity by
quantifying its slope (equivalent to negative aperiodic exponent) and intercept (equivalent to the
aperiodic offset) on a log-log scale, alongside broadband power across frequency ranges. Both
approaches yield robust and comparable estimations in general, though they each have their advantages
and limitations (Cross, Corcoran, Schlesewsky, Kohler, & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, 2022; Gerster et
al., 2022).
Aperiodic activity is ubiquitous across a wide range of modalities, including local field potentials
(LFP), MEG/EEG, and fMRI blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signals including resting-state
network dynamics (Bullmore et al., 2001; Fransson et al., 2013; He, 2011, 2014; Maxim et al., 2005).
This cross-modality presence may offer a significant advantage that allows for comparability between
electrophysiological and imaging studies.
Despite its ubiquity, interpreting the mechanisms underlying 1/f-like aperiodic activity remains
challenging. One of the most widely accepted interpretations links the aperiodic slope to the synaptic
E/I ratio (Gao, Peterson, & Voytek, 2017; Trakoshis et al., 2020). A steeper slope reflects increased
inhibition (lower E/I ratio), while a flatter slope indicates increased excitation (higher E/I ratio) (Gao
et al., 2017). This interpretation holds across modalities, including both electrophysiological and fMRI
signals (Chini, Pfeffer, & Hanganu-Opatz, 2022; Trakoshis et al., 2020). Alternative explanations for
aperiodic slope include neural complexity (Mostile et al., 2019), criticality in brain networks (Kardan
et al., 2020; Palva et al., 2013), and neural noise (Dave, Brothers, & Swaab, 2018), though these are
relatively less studied compared to the E/I ratio hypothesis (Donoghue, 2024).
For aperiodic broadband power, which correlates closely with the intercept, evidence strongly
suggests a positive relationship between high-frequency broadband power (e.g., >70 Hz) and neuronal
spiking rates (Fries, Reynolds, Rorie, & Desimone, 2001; Pesaran, Pezaris, Sahani, Mitra, & Andersen,
2002; Voytek & Knight, 2015). Additionally, an intracranial recording study in human patients
extended this relationship across a broader frequency range (2-150 Hz), encompassing both low and
high frequencies (Manning, Jacobs, Fried, & Kahana, 2009).
Taken together, aperiodic activity provides crucial information about fundamental neural
properties such as population-level spiking rates (via broadband power/intercept) and E/I balance (via
slope) (Vinck et al., 2024). Combined with its scale-free nature across modalities, aperiodic neural
activity stands out as a strong candidate for underpinning diverse cognitive processes across both
electrophysiological responses and BOLD signals.
3.2. Functional roles of aperiodic activity in cognitive control
Although the aperiodic 1/f-like background is historically considered as noise, an increasing
number of studies highlight its importance in supporting diverse cognitive processes and behaviours
(Donoghue et al., 2020; He, 2014). For example, aperiodic activity has been found to correlate with
ageing (Dave et al., 2018; Donoghue et al., 2020; Kałamała et al., 2024; Voytek et al., 2015), sleep
stages (Lendner et al., 2020), levels of consciousness (Colombo et al., 2019), psychiatric diseases such
as ADHD (Robertson et al., 2019) and schizophrenia (Molina et al., 2020), and various aspects of
cognitive performance (Canales-Johnson et al., 2021; Churchill et al., 2016; Gyurkovics, Clements,
Low, Fabiani, & Gratton, 2022; He, 2014; Kardan et al., 2020; Ouyang, Hildebrandt, Schmitz, &
Herrmann, 2020).
Several studies have examined the role of aperiodic activity in tracking task demands, particularly
in working memory tasks. For example, Karden et al. (2020) showed that scale-invariance, measured
by the Hurst exponent (H; an indicator of the scale-free aperiodic property, smaller H generally
indicates flattening 1/f slope) diminishes with increased working memory load. Similarly, fMRI studies
have demonstrated that BOLD signal dynamics become less scale-free (decreased H) with increased
cognitive effort (Churchill et al., 2016; He, 2011). These findings align with a theoretical framework
suggesting that the brain, when at rest, operates near a critical state, which optimises information
storage and transfer. During demanding tasks, the brain departs from this criticality, suppressing scale-
free dynamics to allocate resources to task-specific processes. In addition, Donoghue et al. (2020)
applied the FOOOF method to EEG signals during a working memory task, where they found a
decreased intercept (reflecting a downward shift in broadband power) and a flatter slope during
working memory maintenance compared to the baseline. Pei, Northoff, and Ouyang (2023) compared
load effects in a silent backward counting task on a range of EEG indices, including aperiodic slope
and intercept, oscillatory power across frequency bands, and phase-amplitude coupling. They found
that aperiodic activity outperformed oscillatory metrics in indexing cognitive load, with more
demanding conditions showing reduced intercept and flatter slope. Interestingly, in other types of
cognitive control tasks, such as task switching and inhibitory control, studies often report decreased
broadband power but steeper slopes under higher task demands (Jia et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024).
In summary, across cognitive control tasks, hard conditions are generally associated with
decreased broadband power (or intercept). The aperiodic slope, however, may appear to vary with task
type—flattening in working memory tasks but steepening in task-switching or inhibitory control tasks.
These findings highlight the functional significance of aperiodic activity in tracking demand-related
cognitive control, with broadband power decrease emerging as a stable index of task effort.
3.3. Aperiodic broadband power as a compelling candidate underpinning the MD network
Our recent MEG/EEG study (Lu et al., 2024) systematically examined the contributions of
aperiodic and oscillatory activity in domain-general cognitive control across six subtasks. Using
IRASA to disentangle aperiodic (3-30 Hz broadband power, slope, and intercept) and oscillatory [theta
(3-7 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), and beta (15-30 Hz)] components, we applied MVPA to decode task demand
(hard vs. easy) for each subtask. Results showed that while all oscillatory and aperiodic components
decoding performance and the strongest cross-task generalisability in representing task demands
overlapping with the MD network.
To address potential spatial resolution limitations in MEG/EEG, we conducted a follow-up fMRI
study (Lu, Assem, Duncan, Woolgar, unpublished) using the same task set. By combining MEG and
fMRI data with a model-based fusion approach (Hebart, Bankson, Harel, Baker, & Cichy, 2018;
Moerel, Rich, & Woolgar, 2024), we found that aperiodic broadband power demonstrated the greatest
commonality with task demand in MD regions, outperforming oscillatory power and aperiodic slope.
These findings suggest that aperiodic broadband power aligns closely with the core characteristics of
the MD network, including responding to task demand across diverse tasks, cross-task generalisable
coding patterns, and a widespread frontoparietal cortical distribution.
Notably, while fMRI studies typically report increased MD activation with higher task demand,
aperiodic broadband power or intercept appears to decrease (Donoghue et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2024;
Pei et al., 2023). Consistently, a recent study using simultaneous EEG-fMRI during resting state found
that aperiodic EEG components were negatively correlated with BOLD activation in frontal and
parietal regions (Jacob, Roach, Sargent, Mathalon, & Ford, 2021). To interpret this directional
difference in how broadband power and fMRI BOLD signals respond to task demand, it is helpful to
consider their relationship with neuronal spiking rates. Spiking activity has been proposed to positively
correlate with broadband power (Manning et al., 2009). However, evidence directly linking task
demand to neuronal spiking rates in MD regions is limited. One recent study recorded human single-
neuron activity during a working memory task and found that neurons in the pre-SMA, an MD region,
were most active during low-load conditions compared to higher load conditions (Kaminski et al.,
2017). This suggests that robust MD activation in response to increasing task demands might not
necessarily equate to increased firing rates within these regions. In other words, fMRI BOLD responses
and spiking rates (and consequently broadband power) may exhibit opposing trends during cognitive
tasks.
As a more accessible proxy for population-level spiking rates, high-frequency gamma power and
transient gamma bursts provide additional insights into this relationship (Carver et al., 2019; Lundqvist,
Herman, Warden, Brincat, & Miller, 2018; Lundqvist et al., 2016; Pesaran et al., 2002). Recent EEG
studies have shown that gamma bursts increase during working memory encoding and decrease during
the maintenance delay period, while alpha and beta bursts exhibit the opposite pattern (Kavanaugh et
al., 2024). These findings align with results from nonhuman primate studies (Lundqvist et al., 2016)
and suggest that population-level spiking rates, indexed by gamma bursts, may decrease during
memory maintenance—a period during which fMRI BOLD signals within MD regions typically show
increased activity (Li, O'Sullivan, & Mattingley, 2022). Supporting this interpretation, an intracranial
EEG study found decreased broadband power in the DLPFC, a key MD region, during memory
maintenance compared to baseline (Brzezicka et al., 2019). These findings support the idea that MD
activation does not necessarily correspond to increased spiking rates or broadband power (though this
may occur in certain contexts, e.g., Assem et al. (2023)). This potential distinction is reasonable, as
electrophysiological and BOLD signals, while both capturing aspects of domain-general systems, may
reflect different underlying processes: BOLD signals are thought to reflect metabolic demands and
regional activations, whereas aperiodic electrophysiological signals likely index population-level
firing rates and E/I balance.
Taken together, aperiodic neural activity, particularly broadband power, emerges as a compelling
candidate for understanding the electrophysiological basis of the MD network and its role in domain-
general cognitive control. By potentially reflecting fundamental neural properties such as population-
level spiking rates and E/I balance, aperiodic activity provides a scale-free, cross-modality metric for
studying brain function. Evidence from MEG/EEG and fMRI studies highlights its ability to track task
demands and cognitive effort across diverse contexts, with aperiodic broadband power showing
particularly strong associations with demand-related processes and spatially overlapping with MD
regions. These characteristics position aperiodic broadband activity as a strong candidate underpinning
the MD network.
4. Synchronisation between MD regions in low-frequency oscillations
Beyond robust activation within the MD network during demanding tasks, another key feature of
the MD network is its strong FC across its regions (Assem et al., 2020). In electrophysiological studies
using MEG or EEG, FC is often derived from phase synchrony within specific frequency bands or
through cross-frequency coupling, reflecting oscillation-based connectivity (Bastos & Schoffelen,
2016). Alternatively, FC can also be characterised by non-oscillatory activity using information-
theoretic methods like weighted symbolic mutual information (wSMI) (King et al., 2013; Vinck et al.,
2023). Both oscillatory and non-oscillatory FC may provide complementary information about inter-
regional network interactions, offering a more comprehensive understanding of the functional
organisation of large-scale brain networks (Imperatori et al., 2019; Vinck et al., 2023).
Although challenges persist in directly linking oscillatory power to the MD network, oscillatory
activity may still play a critical role in supporting large-scale connectivity between MD regions. Neural
oscillations are thought to enable the coordination of activity between distributed brain regions,
forming the basis of large-scale network communication (Buzsáki et al., 2012; Buzsáki & Draguhn,
2004). Specifically, low-frequency oscillations, such as delta and theta bands, are proposed to mediate
synchronisation between network subregions and support cognitive control (Helfrich, Breska, &
Knight, 2019; Helfrich & Knight, 2016).
Many studies have demonstrated that inter-regional theta synchronisation between MD-like
regions, such as frontal and parietal cortices or lateral and medial frontal areas, increases with cognitive
demand and supports top-down cognitive control (Adamczyk & Wyczesany, 2023; Cavanagh, Cohen,
& Allen, 2009; Cooper et al., 2015; Mizuhara & Yamaguchi, 2007; Oehrn et al., 2014; Polania, Nitsche,
Korman, Batsikadze, & Paulus, 2012; Sauseng, Griesmayr, Freunberger, & Klimesch, 2010; Sauseng
et al., 2006). Recent work has refined our understanding of how different low-frequency oscillations
mediate connectivity between MD-like subregions. For example, Pagnotta, Riddle, and D'Esposito
(2024) combined EEG and fMRI data to investigate oscillatory dynamics underlying hierarchical
cognitive control. They found that delta band connectivity between lateral frontal and parietal areas
supports the control of rule abstraction, whereas theta band connectivity between mid-frontal and
parietal regions supports the control of stimulus-action associations. These findings suggest that
multiplexed low-frequency synchronisations may allow distinct frontoparietal circuits within the MD
network to coordinate diverse aspects of cognitive control. As a follow-up, Riddle et al. (2024)
provided causal evidence by combining transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with EEG. They
found that theta-frequency TMS to prefrontal cortex increased theta band FC in the frontoparietal
network and improved working memory capacity, highlighting the role of theta synchronisation in
prioritising memory representations.
In contrast to oscillatory-based connectivity, non-oscillatory FC has received less attention but
holds considerable promise. For example, studies have shown that non-oscillatory FC metrics such as
wSMI outperform oscillatory-based FC in distinguishing perceptual interpretations of bistable stimuli
(Canales-Johnson et al., 2020) and differentiating states of consciousness (King et al., 2013; Sitt et al.,
2014). Despite these advances, the role of non-oscillatory FC in the MD network remains
underexplored. Investigating whether non-oscillatory FC contributes uniquely to MD connectivity,
particularly in the coordination of task demands across distributed regions, is an important avenue for
future research. Furthermore, integrating oscillatory- and non-oscillatory-based FC approaches may
offer a more comprehensive framework for understanding the functional architecture of the MD
network.
In summary, low-frequency oscillatory synchronisations, particularly in the delta and theta bands,
likely play a key role in coordinating MD subregions and enabling inter-regional connectivity to
support cognitive control. Connectivity between different MD regions might depend on distinct
frequency bands (Pagnotta et al., 2024) or involve the same frequency bands but with different
functions across regions (Brzezicka et al., 2019). Additionally, non-oscillatory connectivity may also
contribute to coordination between MD regions, but further investigations are needed.
5. Conclusions and future directions
In this article, I discuss the challenges and possibilities of linking human electrophysiological
signals to the MD network. While neural metrics reflecting demand-relayed cognitive control have
been extensively studied in both fMRI and MEG/EEG literature, the precise relationships between
these measures remain inconclusive. Based on recent meta-analyses, mid-frontal theta power appears
to be a robust and reliable feature associated with task demand across multiple contexts, surpassing
other frequency bands. However, frontal theta power alone may not account for the entire MD network
due to its spatial localisation and limited cross-task generalisability. In contrast, aperiodic activity,
particularly broadband power, has emerged as a more promising candidate for indexing task demand.
Its robust decoding performance across diverse tasks, spatial overlap with MD regions, and strong
cross-task generalisability position it as a reliable neural metric. Aperiodic activity likely reflects
fundamental neural mechanisms, such as population-level spiking rates and E/I balance, and its scale-
free nature across modalities (e.g., LFPs, MEG/EEG, and fMRI) makes it well-suited for underpinning
diverse cognitive processes and comparable across imaging methods. At the network level,
multiplexed low-frequency oscillations (e.g., delta and theta) likely play a critical role in synchronising
distributed MD regions, enabling large-scale coordination of cognitive functions.
This review proposes a possible framework for the electrophysiological mechanisms underlying
the MD network. At the local level, MD activations in response to task demand may be associated with
decreased aperiodic broadband power and, potentially, reduced spiking rates of specific neuronal
populations within the same area. At the network level, synchronisation in low-frequency oscillations
may coordinate communication between MD subregions, with different frequencies (or the same
frequency serving distinct functions) mediating connectivity across different MD regions.
There are several potential directions for future research. First, despite some initial evidence
(Kaminski et al., 2017), our understanding of how task demand influences spiking activity in different
types of neurons within MD regions remains incomplete. This knowledge is critical for interpreting
the observed decrease in aperiodic broadband power alongside increased BOLD signals with demand.
Future studies could take advantages of intracranial electrophysiology in humans and non-human
primates to explore spiking activity patterns under diverse task demands, bridging neural dynamics
across spikes, LFPs, MEG/EEG, and BOLD signals. Second, recent studies suggest that traditional
metrics of oscillations based on averaged power may, in fact, be driven by transient oscillatory bursts
(Kavanaugh et al., 2024; Lundqvist et al., 2018; Lundqvist et al., 2016). Future research could
investigate how oscillatory bursts in different frequency bands contribute to task demand encoding and
inter-regional communication within the MD network. This approach would provide a dynamic
perspective that contrasts with findings based on averaged power. Third, there is very limited evidence
about the role of non-oscillatory FC in cognitive control. Using advanced methods such as wSMI,
future studies could examine FC between MD regions and elucidate the unique contributions of non-
oscillatory FC to large-scale network-level interactions. Also, investigating the temporal dynamics of
aperiodic neural activity in supporting cognitive control remains an important, yet underexplored, area.
Taking advantage of newly developed methods (Frelih et al., 2024; Wilson, da Silva Castanheira, &
Baillet, 2022) could offer deeper insights into the real-time roles of aperiodic components in task-
related brain activity. In addition, it is a promising direction to develop neural modulation protocols
using TMS or transcranial electrical stimulation and to selectively manipulate periodic or aperiodic
activity. These techniques could provide causal evidence for the contribution of oscillatory and
aperiodic components to MD network function and domain-general cognitive control. Finally, while
oscillatory and aperiodic activity have typically been studied in isolation, investigating how these
components (as well as their FC patterns) might interact and collaborate to implementing cognitive
processes could reveal important insights into the mechanisms underlying cognitive control and the
functional architecture of the MD network.
Acknowledgement
This project was supported by a Gates Cambridge Scholarship awarded to R.L. (OPP1144). For the
purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence to
any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.