METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
What it Takes to Change Your Mind: Consistency of Metacognitive Cues
1 1
Veronika Kosourikhina , Simon J. Handley
School of Psychological Sciences, Macquarie University
Please note that this manuscript has not yet been peer-reviewed or published.
Corresponding author:
Veronika Kosourikhina (Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109, AUSTRALIA)
Email: kosourikhina.v@gmail.com
This research was supported by the Australian Government's Research Training Program
scholarship, allocation number 20213243, awarded to VK. Materials, analysis code, and data
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Abstract
The uncertainty monitoring account proposes that during reasoning, people may
generate several intuitive responses, each contributing to an overall uncertainty parameter
that will trigger conscious deliberation if it becomes high enough. In two experiments (total
N = 186), we test this account by utilising methods and theory of metacognition – which also
describes a second-order process that regulates the operation of first-order cognition. We
analyse which internal cues influence confidence and accuracy, and how the consistency of
cues influences confidence, accuracy, and participants changing their answers. Confidence
judgements were not sensitive to belief-logic conflict when other cues were accounted for,
contrary to prior research. Instead, overall cue consistency was more important for
determining confidence and response changes. We discuss the implications of these findings
in the context of current dual process accounts of reasoning.
Keywords: conflict detection, metacognition, meta-reasoning, dual process models,
reasoning
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
What it Takes to Change Your Mind: Consistency of Metacognitive Cues
A key aspect of many reasoning tasks is their tendency to elicit two responses: one
based on beliefs about the world or superficial heuristics, and one based on logic or
mathematics. Problems are typically structured so that the belief-based and logic-based
responses agree (no-conflict items), or oppose each other (conflict items). Comparing how
problems with and without belief-logic conflict are solved can tell us something about how
conflict is detected and resolved.
The typical finding is that accuracy on conflict problems is lower than on no-conflict
problems, they take longer to solve, and people feel less confident in their answers (e.g., De
Neys et al., 2011; De Neys & Glumicic, 2008; Pennycook et al., 2012; Thompson et al., 2011).
Furthermore, people slow down and show uncertainty even under time constraints or a
working memory load, which is thought to preclude the possibility of them deliberating on
the problem (Bago & De Neys, 2017, 2019; Burič & Šrol, 2020; Johnson et al., 2016; Thompson
& Johnson, 2014). This suggests that people are at least implicitly sensitive to belief-logic
conflict and often try to resolve it, even if they do not succeed.
These findings have been incorporated into contemporary dual process models of
reasoning, which try to describe, in general terms, the different paths reasoning might take,
and the key steps involved. The 3-stage model (Pennycook et al., 2015) is one of the most
detailed current models. It builds on previous dual process models and adds conflict detection
as the switch point between automatic, intuitive processing of the problem (which can
include both heuristic and intuitively logical responses) and reflective, analytical thinking that
is engaged only if the conflict detection mechanism finds that there is something wrong with
the automatic response. According to this view, conflict detection becomes the critical first
step in being able to use our reasoning abilities to their full extent. Understanding how and
when we are able to notice errors in our initial responses is consequently important in
understanding how we can solve difficult or novel problems and avoid common biases.
Most of the studies above consider conflict to occur between a belief-based response
and a logic-based response, and conflict detection to happen when these two responses have
similar speed or strength. Conflict detection is measured as the difference in confidence
judgements or reaction time between incorrectly-solved conflict problems and correctly-
solved no-conflict problems (Pennycook et al., 2015). These subsets of items represent
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
problems where participants were most likely to have noticed that something is wrong but
failed to resolve the conflict, and a baseline indicating how fast or how confidently
participants respond when there is no conflict to be detected.
More recently, a broader conceptualisation of conflict detection has been suggested.
Instead of focusing on only two possible responses that are specific to classic conflict
reasoning problems, the newer model suggests that any number of intuitions can arise (De
Neys, 2023). Each intuition carries some degree of confidence, which are proposed to
combine into an overall uncertainty parameter. If overall uncertainty exceeds some
threshold, further deliberation will be engaged.
Considering the role of multiple intuitions in driving conflict detection cannot be done
by simply comparing conflict and no-conflict items as was previously done. One potential
approach to developing our understanding of conflict detection is by considering similar
concepts in other areas of research, and applying existing theories and methods to reasoning
tasks. In essence, conflict detection is a second-order mechanism that monitors and controls
the output of first-order reasoning processes. Framed this way, it can be considered as a
special case of metacognition, which is similarly concerned with the monitoring and control
of cognitive processes (Ackerman & Thompson, 2015, 2017).
Insights from the study of metacognition have already impacted reasoning research
substantially both in terms of theory (e.g., Ackerman & Thompson, 2017; Thompson, 2009)
and research methods (Thompson et al., 2011, 2013, and subsequent studies with the 2-
response paradigm, e.g., Bago & De Neys, 2017; Newman et al., 2017), the main one being
the use of confidence judgements as a way to gain insight into reasoning processes.
Coincidentally, understanding the formation of confidence judgments, when they are
accurate, and what cues influence them is a major focus of metacognition research (Fleming,
2024; Yeung & Summerfield, 2012). There is also existing work suggesting a number of cues
that are known to impact confidence and could apply to reasoning tasks as well (Ackerman,
2019).
The uncertainty monitoring account (De Neys, 2023) suggests that the overall
uncertainty parameter determines whether further deliberation will be engaged. Assuming
that confidence judgements reflect this uncertainty parameter, understanding what cues
contribute to forming confidence judgements will help our understanding of what factors
determine when people are likely to deliberate. In this paper, we apply an existing model of
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
metacognition to one classic reasoning task (syllogisms) to examine what factors influence
confidence and responding, other than the previously studied belief-logic conflict.
1.1. The self-consistency model
The self-consistency model (SCM) is one of the models that describes how confidence
judgements are formed and how they relate to accuracy. SCM proposes that people can only
monitor accuracy indirectly, based on feelings of confidence, which are in turn based on
integrating heuristic cues coming from one’s performance on the task, general task features,
and personality factors (Ackerman, 2019; Koriat, 2008, 2012). This includes how quickly or
how easily the answer comes to mind (fluency), whether multiple different answers come to
mind at the same time (cardinality), how familiar or coherent the problem features are, one’s
expectations about whether the current task outcomes will be important later, and other
factors (Koriat, 1997; Koriat et al., 2004; Son & Metcalfe, 2005). Feelings of confidence also
evolve over time, presumably based on changes in cue availability or content (Ackerman,
2014; Yeung & Summerfield, 2012).
SCM makes several predictions about how accuracy relates to confidence for more
and less common responses on different types of items. Items with a more coherent, self-
consistent, set of cues pointing towards a single response will produce higher confidence
ratings than items with inconsistent cues to confidence. This means that in a large enough
sample, on problems in which cues align, reasoners will likely choose a consistent response,
so the degree of agreement between participants on a single answer – consensuality – can be
used as a proxy measure of cue coherence.
Confidence is expected to be higher on items with higher item consensuality (more
participants giving the same answer), and within a given item when a participant is giving the
more common, majority response. The link between confidence and consensuality is crucial
because it explains why confidence often does not correlate with accuracy, given that
accuracy does not always coincide with consensuality. In practice, this means people are able
to judge the accuracy of their response well only on relatively easy, consensually correct items
(Koriat, 2012).
The self-consistency model offers two key ideas that are relevant to the study of
conflict detection: that confidence judgements vary depending on the integrated effect from
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
a range of cues, and that confidence judgements relate to accuracy differently depending on
the consensuality status on an item. There is some existing evidence to suggest that cues
other than belief-logic conflict influence confidence and accuracy in reasoning tasks, such as
such as conclusion believability (Shynkaruk & Thompson, 2006), logical coherence (Ghasemi
et al., 2022), and familiarity and counterexample availability (Markovits et al., 2015). There is
also recent work demonstrating that the predictions of SCM generally translate to syllogistic
reasoning tasks, although without manipulating belief-logic conflict (Bajšanski et al., 2019;
Bajšanski & Žauhar, 2019). Bajšanski and colleagues conclude that confidence ratings in
syllogisms are sensitive to consensuality (as a proxy for self-consistency, the key cue to
confidence), and some other cues like response cardinality (number of possible responses to
an item), and reaction time (i.e., response fluency), but not conclusion validity. Reaction time
is one of the cues that contributes to confidence judgments, but not the only one – so we
would not expect measures of conflict detection based on reaction time and confidence to
necessarily align.
This theoretical framework offers a more detailed conceptualisation of how accuracy
and confidence relate to each other than the current conflict detection models, which treat
confidence and reaction time as mutually exchangeable measures and do not account for the
possibility of confidence ratings being systematically distorted. It also aligns with the
uncertainty monitoring account (De Neys, 2023), and offers methods of testing the idea that
conflict detection is triggered by an accumulating sense of uncertainty, rather than the
detection of belief-logic conflict specifically. In the following sections we outline how the self-
consistency model may be applied to explain unusual findings in the conflict detection
literature and to study the impact of multiple cues on confidence.
1.2. Consensuality and conflict
The literature on conflict detection is generally consistent in demonstrating broad
differences between conflict and no-conflict items, but has also accumulated some unusual
results. Some tasks or subsets of participants produce ‘reverse’ detection effects, where
participants seem to be more confident on conflict than no-conflict items (Brisson et al., 2018;
Frey et al., 2018; Kosourikhina & Handley, 2024a; Mevel et al., 2015; Pennycook et al., 2015;
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Šrol & De Neys, 2020). More generally, different conflict tasks show different rates of conflict
detection (Frey et al., 2018; Šrol & De Neys, 2020; Voudouri et al., 2022).
The self-consistency model might explain why some tasks show more conflict
detection effects than others or show ‘reverse’ detection effects. On highly consensual items,
we expect confidence to be high, regardless of whether an item has belief-logic conflict or
not. Participants cannot be expected to experience doubt and detect conflict if there are few
or no cues alerting them. The least consensual items are where conflict detection is most
likely to occur because this is where the cues to confidence conspire to create the most
uncertainty. Depending on the distribution of conflict and no-conflict items in terms of
consensuality within a task, smaller or larger conflict detection effects will appear. If all no-
conflict items are highly consensual and produce the associated high confidence ratings, and
all conflict items have very low consensuality and the associated low confidence ratings,
larger and reliable conflict detection effects will be observed. If either no-conflict or conflict
items, or both, are more variable in terms of consensuality, conflict detection effects will
appear to be weak or absent. This could explain why conflict detection effects may vary
substantially from study to study or problem to problem, and is an obstacle to gaining an
accurate picture of how well people reason or notice their errors.
1.3. Cue integration
The uncertainty monitoring account proposes, similarly to SCM, that many
components contribute to the formation of confidence judgements (uncertainty). Identifying
these components can help understand what determines whether people will notice their
erroneous responses and engage in reflective thinking. Further, prior metacognition research
identified both task-based and performance-based cues as potentially relevant to forming
confidence judgements (Ackerman, 2019). A more direct analysis of these cues might reveal
additional insights about the relationship between confidence and accuracy.
Bird’s-Eye View of Cue Integration (BEVoCI) is a recently developed method which
allows researchers to compare which task and performance features influence accuracy and
confidence judgements, and which particular cues to confidence are more or less aligned with
accuracy (Ackerman, 2023). It uses hierarchical models (also known as mixed effects models)
to compare the effect of multiple cues on confidence and accuracy, unlike previous
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
approaches that can only compare one or two cues at a time (e.g., Bajšanski et al., 2019;
Markovits et al., 2015). Incorporating multiple cues into the analyses at the same time allows
us to observe the possible simultaneous effects of different cues on confidence and accuracy,
and to also assess whether cues from different sources (e.g., task features versus
performance features) have more or less of an effect on different types of tasks. This is a more
extensive version of the approach taken in earlier work by Thompson and colleagues (2011;
2013). It also allows an evaluation of the cues that might produce metacognitive illusions,
when a particular cue pushes accuracy and confidence in opposite directions and participants'
metacognition is unable to accurately gauge their performance through confidence
judgements. Considering the role of multiple cues to confidence is the first step towards
developing a more nuanced understanding of the cues are relevant to uncertainty monitoring
as outlined in De Neys’ account (2023).
1.4. Present study
In a previous paper (Kosourikhina & Handley, 2024b), we applied SCM to test the idea
that it is self-consistency and a wide range of cues that contribute to the formation of
confidence judgements and conflict detection. Looking at syllogisms and the base-rate task,
we found that belief-logic conflict is not always the main, or even a significant, cue to
confidence. However, confidence judgements are also known to evolve over time (Ackerman,
2014; Navajas et al., 2016). This may be underpinned by differences in cue availability, and
some aspects of the problem or performance influencing confidence judgements more
immediately than others. The single-response paradigm used in the previous study does not
allow us to evaluate what cues impact intuitive, as opposed to more engaged reflective
responding.
This paper considers the dynamics of confidence judgements using the 2-response
paradigm. The 2-response paradigm separates out intuitive processing during the initial
response stage, where participants are asked to answer the question under a time limit, or
an additional task, to load working memory. They are then asked the same question again,
without any constraints. First, we evaluate whether cues to confidence change between the
intuitive and reflective response stages. Second, we look at whether item consensuality
predicts confidence and conflict detection in syllogisms, comparing whether this relationship
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
differs between intuitive and reflective response stages. Finally, we test whether item
consensuality predicts response changes, expecting lower consensuality to be associated with
lower confidence and lead to more response changes.
We use cue integration analyses to assess the differential impact of a range of task-
and performance-based cues on accuracy and confidence. The primary issue of interest is
whether participants show sensitivity to belief-logic conflict in their confidence judgements,
when other task features and performance cues are accounted for. If this is not the case, this
challenges the interpretation that a difference score in confidence between incorrect conflict
and correct no-conflict items demonstrates conflict detection. It also challenges the standard
approach to conflict detection more generally, emphasising the role of many factors, rather
than belief-logic conflict exclusively. We used four different kinds of syllogisms that
systematically vary on a number of dimensions: belief-logic conflict, validity, believability of
the conclusion, polarity (if an item uses negation), content, and reaction time as a
performance-based cue that is a proxy for answer fluency.
We evaluate the relationships between item consensuality, confidence, and a typical
conflict detection measure to confirm that the general predictions of SCM hold for syllogisms
at both intuitive and reflective response stages. We expect confidence to be low on the least
consensual items and increase with consensuality. Similarly, we expect larger conflict
detection effects on the least consensual conflict items, and to become smaller on more
highly consensual conflict items.
We expect response changes to vary depending on item consensuality, initial response
consensuality, and initial confidence. These are related as follows. If response changes are a
result of experienced uncertainty, these should be associated with lower initial confidence
ratings, which is what was found in the literature previously (Bago & De Neys, 2017;
Thompson et al., 2013). The self-consistency model claims that lower confidence judgements
are generated on items with less consistent cues to confidence, with different cues pointing
towards different responses. Cue consistency is considered to be reflected in item
consensuality, so that more consistent responding by participants in the sample is indicative
of higher cue consistency. It then follows that response changes should be more common on
less consensual items, and decrease as item consensuality increases, because of the
consistent cues to confidence.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Further, if a person initially gives a less common, minority response to a given item,
they are expected to be more likely to change their answer once they have time to process
all the cues, which are generally aligned to push most participants in a different direction on
that item (Bajšanski & Žauhar, 2019). Having the opportunity to consider the problem more
carefully without time pressure should then lead to a better integration of cues to confidence
at the reflective stage, and a larger number of participants reaching the majority response,
which is registered as response change (but not necessarily the correct response, in line with
findings of Thompson and colleagues above).
Bajšanski and Žauhar (2019) examined response changes in syllogisms depending on
whether the participant gave the majority or the minority response at the intuitive stage.
However, they did not manipulate belief-logic conflict, so we do not know if there are
differences between conflict and no-conflict items in terms of how initial response
consensuality affects response changes. Our previous results (Kosourikhina & Handley,
2024b) suggest that consensuality may play a greater role than belief-logic conflict in
syllogisms, so we expect that response changes will depend on the consensuality of the item
and the consensuality of the response.
We expect that rates of response change will vary by initial response consensuality as
Bajšanski and Žauhar describe, but this relationship would be moderated by how strong the
consensuality of the item is, measured as a proportion of participants that gave the majority
response. Items with higher consensuality should have fewer response changes, and items
with lowest consensuality should have the most response changes.
2. Experiment 1
2.1. Methods
Participants. We recruited 103 participants (75% female, mean age = 24.9) from
Macquarie University first-year psychology student pool. Full or partial data from 97
participants remained after applying the exclusion criteria. Participants received course
credit, and the study received ethics approval. The study was hosted on Pavlovia.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
2.1.1. Materials and procedure
Standard and neutral conditions. Participants solved two types of categorical
syllogisms, which included more or less abstract content. Standard syllogisms used more
familiar, real-world content (e.g., "All whales are mammals”). In neutral items, we replaced
one of the terms with a non-word to make premises belief-neutral, but keep the conclusion
the same as in a matching standard item. Familiarity of the content is one known cue to
confidence (Ackerman, 2019), and neutral items are intended to be less familiar.
There were two parallel forms of items and participants were assigned a form
randomly by Pavlovia. The forms were created such that they had no two standard and
neutral items with the same conclusion. Parallel form reliability was excellent for both
intuitive (r = .97) and reflective responses (r = .98). All analyses were conducted within-
subject, irrespective of the item set assigned to a participant.
Conflict No conflict
Standard Neutral Standard Neutral
MP VU All mammals can walk. All hirks can walk. VB All plants need water. All smolns need water.
Whales are mammals. Whales are hirks. Roses are plants. Roses are smolns.
Whales can walk. Whales can walk. Roses need water. Roses need water.
MT VU All mammals can walk. All mammals can chid. VB All plants need water. All plants need vak.
Whales can’t walk. Whales can’t chid. Rocks don’t need water. Rocks don’t need vak.
Whales aren’t mammals. Whales aren’t mammals. Rocks are not plants. Rocks are not plants.
AC IB All plants need water. All plants need vak. IU All whales are mammals. All whales are hirks.
Roses need water. Roses need vak. Mammals can walk. Hirks can walk.
Roses are plants. Roses are plants. Whales can walk. Whales can walk.
DA IB All plants need water. All smolns need water. IU All whales are mammals. All broans are mammals.
Rocks aren’t plants. Rocks aren’t smolns. Whales can’t walk. Broans can’t walk.
Rocks don’t need water. Rocks don’t need water. Mammals can’t walk. Mammals can’t walk.
Syllogistic reasoning task. Participants were asked to evaluate the logical validity of
the conclusion to 64 categorical syllogisms of four different types (MP, MT, AC, DA). Examples
of the two conflict levels). MP and MT items are valid, and AC and DA items are invalid. Half
of all items had believable conclusions, and half were unbelievable, which were crossed with
validity to create conflict (valid-unbelievable, invalid-believable) and no-conflict items. There
were four practice trials, the same for both forms, with simple feedback on each telling
whether the response was correct or not.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Two-response paradigm. We used the 2-response paradigm, with a time limit but no
cognitive load. The time limit was calculated based on average response times in the previous
study and time limits in other similar studies (e.g., Voudouri et al., 2022), giving participants
approximately 3 seconds of reading time and 4 seconds to think, with a total time limit of 7
seconds. We did not use an additional task to load on working memory because we were
basing the design of the 2-response task on earlier studies by Thompson and colleagues.
Previous studies have considered time limit alone to be sufficient to remove Type 2 processing
from the initial responses (Bago & De Neys, 2017).
Syllogisms were presented in a single step, without isolating reading time as we did in
the previous study. This was to ensure uninterrupted intuitive processing at the initial
response stage. Participants responded with a key press (‘v ’for valid responses, ‘n ’for
invalid). At the intuitive response stage, the screen background was pale yellow (#fff8ad) and
turned orange (#f5b17a) one second before the deadline. There was a short break after the
th th
20 and 40 items.
Participants were asked for confidence ratings after the initial and final response
stages. They were presented with a slider, titled “At the time I provided my answer I felt:”
with slider ranging from “0% – does not feel right at all” to “100% – certain I am right”. The
slider started at 50% at the beginning of every trial.
Response change categories. Following the established convention, we use the 00, 01,
10, and 11 notation to analyse the four different kinds of response change categories (Bago
& De Neys, 2017). Incorrect responses are marked as 0, and correct responses are marked as
1. The first number records response accuracy at the intuitive response stage, and the second
number records response accuracy at the reflective response stage. In analyses where we are
only interested in whether any response change has occurred, we simplify this further, and
code 00 and 11 trials as ‘no change’, and 10 and 01 trials as ‘change ’trials (which allows to
use response change as a dependent variable more easily, through a logistic regression).
Exclusion criteria. The exclusion process fully excluded 6 participants, and some trials
from the remaining participants, removing data from 14.7% of all trials partially or fully. The
final dataset had 97 participants. First, we excluded participants with <75% correct answers
(6/8 items) on no-conflict MP items at the reflective response stage. No-conflict MP items are
very easy to answer, and this served as an attention check. This step excluded 6 people, two
gave no correct responses, one had 50% accuracy, and 3 had 62.5% accuracy. Second, we
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
excluded reflective stage trials that were above or below 3SD from participants ’mean
reaction time. No trials were too fast, and 142 trials were excluded as too slow. We used log-
transformed reaction times, because the raw data was positively skewed (Baayen & Milin,
2010). 641 trials were removed because the intuitive stage response timed out.
Conflict detection indexes. The conflict detection (CD) index is used to gauge whether
a participant detected the belief-logic conflict on conflict trials where they were unable to
resolve it. It is typically calculated as a difference in confidence or reaction time between
correctly solved no-conflict items (baseline) and incorrectly solved conflict items (Pennycook
et al., 2015). Conflict detection indexes were calculated separately for intuitive and reflective
responses, using confidence judgments (CD-FOR).
Before calculating the CD-FOR index, we removed outliers from baseline values (i.e.,
correctly solved no-conflict items). We excluded trials with confidence under 25%, because
we considered them to be unrepresentative of truly no-conflict cases. Such low confidence
on no-conflict items is likely to be either accidental or represent doubts about the answer.
Exclusion criteria removed 101 intuitive stage confidence ratings, and 37 reflective confidence
ratings. We calculated conflict detection for all incorrect conflict trials, separately for each
syllogism type for each participant. It is expected that participants will be less confident on
conflict items, so negative CD-FOR values indicate conflict detection.
Consensuality index. Based on the self-consistency model, the average confidence on
an item is expected to vary depending on how consistent the cues to confidence are within
an item. This should also result in more participants responding in the same way to that item,
whether correct or incorrect. This allows us to use item consensuality as a proxy measure of
cue consistency. Instead of working with the proportion of participants who gave the more
common response, which varies from 0.5 to 1.0, we compute the consensuality index for
easier model interpretation. The consensuality index converts item consensuality to a
number that reflects how far this item is from 0.5, as a percentage: ((proportion of
participants giving the more common response to an item – 0.5) / 0.5) * 100. Values range
from 0 to 100%, and were calculated based on the intuitive stage responses.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
2.2. Results
4. To confirm the presence of the usual conflict effects, we modelled accuracy and confidence
as predicted by conflict, validity, and their interaction. We looked at intuitive and reflective
responses separately.
responses stage was higher on no-conflict than conflict items (OR = 3.15, 95CI = 2.82, 3.52, p
< .001), and lower on invalid than valid ones (OR = 0.62, 95CI = 2.82, 3.52, p < .001), but there
was no interaction effect (p = .69). Accuracy on reflective stage responses was again predicted
by conflict (OR = 4.16, 95CI = 3.69, 4.68, p < .001), validity (OR = 0.51, 95CI = 0.46, 0.58, p <
.001), and there was no interaction (p = .58). Overall, conflict items were solved less
accurately than no-conflict items, and valid items more accurately than invalid items, and this
did not change between response stages.
response was not predicted by conflict (p = .56), but confidence was significantly lower on
invalid than valid items (b = -1.41, 95CI = -1.93, -0.88, p < .001), and there was a significant
interaction effect (b = -2.64, 95CI = -3.17, -2.12, p < .001). Pairwise contrasts showed
significant differences between conflict and no-conflict items on both valid (b = 5.60, p < .001)
and invalid items (b = -4.97, p < .001). The results were similar at the reflective response stage:
there was no main effect of conflict (p = .08), but there was a main effect of validity (b = -0.88,
95CI = -1.30, -0.46, p < .001), and their interaction (b = -2.04, 95CI = -2.45, -1.62, p < .001).
Pairwise contrasts again showed that conflict and no-conflict items differed in confidence
both among valid syllogisms (b = 4.82, p < .001) and invalid ones (b = -3.33, p < .001).
The significant interaction indicates the reversed effect that we have observed and
discussed elsewhere (Kosourikhina & Handley, 2024a) – on valid items, no-conflict items were
solved with more confidence, but on invalid items, it is the conflict items that were solved
with greater confidence. In sum, confidence and accuracy behaved as we expected for this
item set, but without substantial changes between response stages.
used t-tests to confirm that conflict detection effects were present and significantly different
from zero. When responding intuitively (under time pressure), mean CD-FOR effects were
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
present on both valid and invalid items. However, while CD-FOR effects on valid items were
in the expected, negative, direction (t(717) = -13.07, p < .001), CD-FOR on invalid items was
reversed (t(992) = 6.78, p < 001).
At the reflective response stage, the same was observed: CD-FOR effects were present
on valid items (t(641) = -8.72, p < .001), and significant but reversed on invalid items (t(985)
= 4.75, p < .001). Conflict detection effects were smaller at the reflective response stage, but
overall present in both intuitive and reflective responses. 'Reverse' detection on invalid items
was observed in both response stages, in line with our previously proposed explanation that
these items are perceived as valid automatically, leading to a subjective reversal of conflict
and no-conflict items.
change category (00, 01, 10, 11). The first number indicates accuracy at the intuitive stage, the second
number indicates accuracy at the reflective stage. 0 = incorrect, 1= correct.
Accuracy (%) Confidence (SE) 00 01 10 11
Intuitive Valid No-conflict 77 75 (0.60) - - - -
Conflict 41 69 (0.64) - - - -
Invalid No-conflict 65 66 (0.67) - - - -
Conflict 26 71 (0.61) - - - -
Reflective Valid No-conflict 82 82 (0.47) 5 7 2 86
Conflict 46 78 (0.54) 41 10 4 45
Invalid No-conflict 69 76 (0.55) 14 10 5 71
Conflict 27 80 (0.50) 65 6 5 25
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
2.2.1. Cue integration
While earlier work could only compare a small number of cues (Bajšanski et al., 2019;
Markovits et al., 2015; Thompson et al., 2011, 2013), cue integration analyses allow us to
evaluate a larger set of cues simultaneously (Ackerman, 2023). In these analyses, we fit two
mixed effects models to compare the impact of the same analysed cues on accuracy and on
confidence. All variables are rescaled to make the coefficients from accuracy and confidence
models comparable. Cues are entered as fixed effects, and participant ID as a random effect.
2 2 2
The pseudo-R statistics report total explained variance (conditional R , R ), and variance
2 2
explained through only fixed effects (marginal R , R ; Nakagawa et al., 2017).
We analyse intuitive and reflective responses separately. In addition to the task-based
cues like conflict, validity, and others, we included reaction time for intuitive and reflective
trials, and response change (no, yes). Reaction time on intuitive responses is a closer
approximation of answer fluency than overall reaction time used in a previous study
(Kosourikhina & Handley, 2024b), and should be a stronger predictor of confidence ratings
(Thompson et al., 2011). Overall reaction time can be contaminated by additional evaluative
processes, while responses under time pressure are thought to be a closer estimate of how
long it took to come up with the answer itself. On the other hand, reaction time on reflective
responses is thought to indicate participants rethinking their initial answer and is expected to
be associated with lower confidence ratings at the intuitive response stage. Further, some
cues may not be as immediately available as others. If belief-logic conflict and validity are not
intuitively available to participants, they may have a greater effect on confidence at the
reflective, but not the intuitive response stage.
accuracy is mainly driven by belief-logic conflict, validity, and also whether participants
changed their response later (but final accuracy was not dependent on whether or not they
changed their mind). Belief-logic conflict had a relatively large negative effect on accuracy for
both intuitive (b = -0.45) and reflective responses (b = -0.48), but no significant effect on
confidence (ps > .06). Participants were more accurate on valid than invalid items in both
response stages (b = 0.16 and 0.20 respectively), but only slightly more confident (b = 0.04,
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
and 0.03). Participants were slightly less accurate when evaluating believable conclusions
than unbelievable ones at both stages, but more confident. Polarity had no effect on accuracy,
and only slightly increased confidence on items without negations. Standard and neutral
content items behaved similarly – there was no effect on accuracy, but participants were
somewhat more confident evaluating standard items with familiar premise content.
Only significant effects are shown.
Note that reaction time is not a strong predictor of accuracy at either stage (b = 0.04
for intuitive stage log-RT influencing accuracy on intuitive responses, and b = 0.05 for
reflective response times). However, reaction time is a relatively large contributor to
confidence. It appears that answer fluency contributes to metacognition by influencing
confidence judgments, but is not actually a useful cue to predicting accuracy in syllogisms.
This might explain why some studies find conflict detection effects on syllogisms through one
measure, but not the other (Bago & De Neys, 2017; Burič & Šrol, 2020; Frey et al., 2018; Šrol
& De Neys, 2020).
Response changes were associated with lower accuracy and confidence, which is in
line with previous work (Bago & De Neys, 2017; Bajšanski & Žauhar, 2019) which also found
confidence ratings to be lower when giving inconsistent responses, i.e., on trials with
response changes. However, this effect is primarily present for initial confidence and accuracy
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
change. The effect on confidence is also reduced.
Accuracy Confidence
Predictors b CI p b CI p
Trial number .02 -.00 – .04 .10 -.09 -.11 – -.07 <.001
Conflict -.45 -.47 – -.42 <.001 -.01 -.03 – .01 .24
Validity .16 .14 – .19 <.001 .04 .02 – .06 <.001
Believability -.05 -.07 – -.03 < .001 .06 .04 – .08 <.001
Polarity -.00 -.03 – .02 .70 .04 .02– .06 <.001
Content -.00 -.03 – .02 .73 .05 .03 – .07 <.001
Log-RT intuitive .04 .02 – .07 .002 -.14 -.16 – -.11 <.001
Log-RT reflective .02 -.01 – .05 .14 -.17 -.20 – .14 <.001
Response change -.21 -.24 – -.19 <.001 -.22 -.24 – -.20 <.001
R2 /R2 .28/.34 .16/.48
m c
Accuracy Confidence
Predictors b CI p b CI p
Trial number .03 .01 – .05 .004 -.07 -.09 – -.05 <.001
Conflict -.48 -.50 – -.45 <.001 -.02 -.04 – .00 .06
Validity .20 .18 – .22 <.001 .03 .01 – .05 .001
Believability -.05 -.08 – -.03 <.001 .08 .06 – .10 <.001
Polarity -.00 -.03 – .02 .73 .03 .01 – .05 .004
Content -.01 -.03 – .02 .62 .05 .03 – .07 <.001
Log-RT intuitive .03 -.00 – -.05 .05 -.10 -.13 – -.08 <.001
Log-RT reflective .05 -.02 – .08 .001 -.07 -.10 – -.04 <.001
Response change .01 -.01–.03 .35 -.13 -.15 – -.11 <.001
R2 /R2 .28/.37 .06/.46
m c
2.2.2. Consensuality analyses
The self-consistency model predicts that confidence judgements will be higher on
items where more participants give the same response, whether correct or not (Koriat, 2012).
We quantify this response consistency in the item consensuality index, modified to range
from 0% to 100% as outlined in the methods to make the models more interpretable. First,
we evaluate the differences in confidence between intuitive and reflective responses,
depending on item consensuality. If the least consensual items contain inconsistent cues to
confidence, additional reflection time may not necessarily be helpful in resolving this
inconsistency. However, on more consensual items, having time to properly process all the
cues may be sufficient to resolve the initial uncertainty. This would produce higher confidence
judgements at the reflective stage, but only on highly consensual items.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
To test this, we model confidence as predicted by response stage, item consensuality,
and conflict. Confidence was higher on more strongly consensual items (b = 0.13, 95CI = 0.11,
0.15, p < .001). Confidence was lower in the intuitive than the reflective stage (b = -5.61, 95CI
= -6.26, -4.96, p < .001), and on no-conflict than conflict items (b = -4.36, 95CI = -5.34, -3.39,
p < .001). There were significant interactions between item consensuality and response stage
(b = 0.02, 95CI = 0.01, 0.04, p < .001), item consensuality and conflict (b = 0.05, 95CI = 0.03,
0.07, p < .001), and response stage and conflict (b = -1.04, 95CI = -1.69, -0.39, p = .002). These
To investigate this further, we ran pairwise contrasts to compare confidence on most
and least consensual items (0% and 100% consensuality index), and if there were differences
between conflict and no-conflict items. When giving initial responses to least consensual
items, participants were less confident on no-conflict than conflict items (b = -10.81, p < .001).
On most consensual items, initial confidence judgements did not differ by the level of conflict
(p = .11). At the reflective response stage, the same pattern held: on least consensual items
participants were less certain when solving no-conflict items (b = -6.64, p < .001), and there
was no difference among most consensual items (p = .27).
In sum, initial confidence judgements increased with item consensuality, and
confidence was higher at the reflective response stage overall, as expected. However,
differences between conflict and no-conflict items were unusual, as only the least consensual
items showed a difference between conflict and no-conflict items, and participants were
initially less confident on no-conflict items, rather than conflict ones. This is likely driven by
invalid items, as we found the same reversal in our earlier analyses (“Conflict detection
effects” section). The fact that the distribution of confidence ratings stays largely the same at
the reflective stage suggests that overall, there is little additional processing after the initial
judgments were made, or if this processing occurs, it is not reflected in confidence
judgements.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
conflict items; (b) CD-FOR index as predicted by item consensuality and response stage in Experiment 1.
Conflict detection effects and item consensuality. Here we test whether the standard
CD-FOR index varies by item consensuality. This analysis includes only conflict items, because
the standard CD-FOR index is an estimate of how different confidence judgements are on
conflict items relative to no-conflict items. If confidence varies depending on item
consensuality, we would expect detection effects to vary as well, regardless of the fact that
all of the analysed items technically contain belief-logic conflict. Greater detection effects are
expected to occur on items with the most elicited uncertainty, which means that as item
consensuality increases, conflict detection effects will be weaker. Since previous analyses
show confidence to be higher at the reflective stage overall, then conflict detection effects
are also expected to be weaker (more positive) at the reflective than the intuitive stage.
consensuality, there was an increase in CD-FOR values (b = 0.15, 95CI = 0.12, 0.18, p < .001),
and CD-FOR effects were more negative (larger) at the intuitive than the reflective stage (b =
-1.93, 95CI = -2.56, -1.29, p < .001). There was also a significant interaction effect (b = 0.03,
95CI = 0.01, 0.05, p < .001), which we analyse further with pairwise contrasts.
On least consensual items (0% consensuality index), detection effects were larger
(more negative) in the intuitive response stage (b = -3.85, p < .001). On most consensual items
(70% consensuality here), there was no difference between response stages (p = .73). These
analyses show considerable variability within nominally conflict items, and little difference in
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
conflict detection between response stages. In line with the uncertainty monitoring account,
items that elicit the most uncertainty (non-consensual items), also show the most evidence
for conflict detection effects. Conversely, items where responding is consistent and cues to
confidence can also be assumed to be consistent, less uncertainty is elicited. This results in
conflict detection effects disappearing on highly consensual conflict items.
2.2.3. Response changes and consensuality
Generally, participants chose to keep their intuitive response, regardless of belief-
logic conflict. Conflict items have a higher percentage of 00 cases, and all items show a low
correct responses on conflict items are achieved either accidentally or through intuitively
logical responses. Self-corrections, represented by 01 cases, are the most likely to represent
successful conflict detection and resolution under the current views – yet they only happen
on 6-10% of trials.
First, we model whether initial lower confidence predicted a higher rate of response
changes. We coded whether or not participants changed their mind as binary variable (0 - no
change, 1 – a change, either 01 or 10 type). For every point increase in confidence,
participants were 4% less likely to change their mind (OR = 0.96, 95CI = 0.96, 0.96, p < .001).
There was no main effect of conflict (p = .34), and no interaction between initial confidence
lowest level of confidence, response changes are not very probable, at just over 60%, and
that participants were equally likely to change their mind on either conflict or no-conflict
items.
Next, we elaborate on our earlier analyses, and look at whether response changes are
driven by item consensuality and the status of the initial response, rather than the presence
of belief-logic conflict per se. Previous analysis indicates that response changes do not differ
by conflict. Instead, we propose that participants are more likely to change their mind when
their initial response is the less common response for items where there is strong consensus
in responding overall. More consensual items are thought to contain more consistent cues to
confidence, resulting in both consistent responding across participants and high confidence.
If the 2-response paradigm disrupts problem processing in the intuitive stage, some
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
participants may initially give a less common response, but later switch to the more common
response, because they are sensitive to all the same cues to confidence that everyone else is.
They would be a lot less likely to give a more common response to an item (e.g., the incorrect
response to a conflict item) and then switch to a less common response (e.g., the correct
response to a conflict item). However, on least consensual items, cues to confidence are
already inconsistent, so having additional time in the reflective stage to think on them is
unlikely to elicit systematic response changes, regardless of whether the initial response was
the more common, majority response, or the less common, minority response.
To obtain the consensuality of the initial response, we calculated what is the most
common response to each item at the intuitive response stage (the correct or the incorrect
one), and recorded whether each participant gave the majority or the minority response to a
given item. There were two items that were solved with exactly 50% accuracy – we recorded
the correct answer as the majority response. We used a logistic mixed effects model, with
response change as the dependent variable, and belief-logic conflict, item consensuality, and
initial response consensuality as fixed effects. Item number and participant ID were used as
random effects.
status (p = .75), conflict (p = .06), or item consensuality (p = 0.96). There were significant
interactions between initial response status and conflict (OR = 1.51, 95CI = 1.23, 1.87, p <
.001), and initial response status and item consensuality (OR = 1.02, 95CI = 1.01, 1.02, p <
.001). There was no significant interaction between conflict and item consensuality (p = .79).
Overall, participants were more likely to change their mind when their initial response
was the less common, minority response to that item (0.28 vs 0.07). Pairwise contrasts
showed that when item consensuality was lowest (0%), participants who gave an initial
minority response were more likely to change their mind on no-conflict than conflict items
(OR = 3.57, p = .001). When item consensuality was highest (100%) and participants gave an
initial minority response, they were also more likely to change their mind when solving no-
conflict items (OR = 3.66, p = .005). There was no difference in the rate of response changes
between conflict and no-conflict items when the initial response was the more common,
majority response, regardless of whether item consensuality was lowest (p = .23), or highest
(p = .07).
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
When participants initially gave the less common, minority response, probability of
response change was higher for items with higher consensuality. In other words, when
participants gave the less common response to an easier item, they changed their mind more
often, especially on no-conflict items. These analyses show that the probability of response
change is determined by the consensuality status of the item and the initial response more
so than belief-logic conflict.
change, given item conflict, whether participant’s intuitive response was more or less common (majority,
minority) choice for that item, and how strongly consensual that item was.
2.3. Discussion
When solving syllogisms with the 2-response paradigm with a time limit, participants
showed an overall low rate of self-corrections (6-10%), and similar performance when giving
intuitive and reflective responses across a range of metrics. This is consistent with previous
findings reporting mixed success in improving accuracy upon rethinking, and generally low
rates of self-corrections (Boissin et al., 2021; Raoelison & De Neys, 2019; Thompson &
Johnson, 2014). Cue integration analyses showed similar results to our previous study
(Kosourikhina & Handley, 2024b, Experiment 3). Participants were less accurate on conflict
items at both response stages, but this was not matched by changes in confidence ratings.
Instead, they were broadly influenced by most of the other cues that we included, particularly
reaction time and response change. The relationship between response change and
confidence may be somewhat spurious, because both confidence and response changes
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
reflect uncertainty, and if confidence is a functional element in driving conflict detection,
response change is likely to be a consequence of low confidence, not the cause.
In consensuality analyses, we examined the relationship between initial confidence,
response changes, and consensuality. We found that while overall confidence increases from
intuitive to the reflective response stage, the pattern is the same within both: the least
consensual items elicit the most uncertainty, and as consensuality increases, so does
confidence. Further, among the least consensual items, it is the conflict items that are
answered with more confidence, and as consensuality increases, both conflict and no-conflict
items are answered with similarly high confidence.
This implies that on conflict items with very low accuracy and no-conflict items with
very high accuracy, people are equally confident, due to the underlying cue consistency. The
presence of belief-logic conflict itself is not enough to elicit conflict detection – item
consensuality (and the underlying cue consistency) has to be sufficiently low to elicit a critical
amount of uncertainty. We can see this in the analysis of conflict detection effects, which
diminishes on more consensual conflict items. Conflict detection effects are also weaker at
the reflective than the intuitive stage among the least consensual items for the same reason
– generally confidence on reflective responses was higher, indicative of less uncertainty, and
suggesting less conflict detection is possible.
Analyses of response changes agree with previous findings in the literature that lower
initial confidence predicts a higher probability of response change (Thompson et al., 2013;
Bago & De Neys, 2017). However, there were few response changes, and even when initial
confidence was at its lowest, the probability of response change did not exceed 60% (see
response to a highly consensual item, i.e., choosing a response to an item that most people
choose the other response option for. This was more common on no-conflict than conflict
items. Putting together consensuality and response change analyses, we can conclude that
lower confidence does increase the probability of response change, but these are primarily
self-corrections on easy no-conflict items, rather than a result of participants noticing belief-
logic conflict and deliberating on it. This agrees with cue integration analyses, which also show
no effect of belief-logic conflict on confidence.
Despite some cues having a greater impact on confidence and accuracy at the intuitive
response stage compared to the reflective stage, overall, the differences between the two
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
response stages are minimal. Responding under time pressure impacts metacognition, which
is as expected, since the 2-response paradigm is meant to interfere with conflict detection,
which we posit is a facet of metacognition. However, the rate of response changes is low and
confidence at the reflective response change appears to simply increase, without any cues
making a stronger contribution to confidence judgements in the cue integration analyses
relative to the intuitive response stage. One possible reason for this is the procedure itself
– being asked to solve the same item again immediately might make participants more likely
to simply repeat their answer, with more certainty overall, but similar distribution of
confidence between different types of responses. While the 2-response paradigm attempts
to separate intuitive and reflective processing, it is possible that the contiguity of the intuitive
and reflective response stages limits the extent to which reasoners actually engage in
conscious deliberation.
3. Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed a low rate of response changes, similarly to many other studies
reporting low response changes and little to no improvement in normative responding
(Shynkaruk & Thompson, 2006; Thompson et al., 2011; Thompson, Evans, et al., 2013;
Thompson, Prowse Turner, et al., 2013). If confidence judgements are formed from the same
set of cues that do not change between initial and reflective response stages and are available
to the same or similar degree, then confidence would remain the same in both stages. If
confidence is a functional element driving the switch between automatic and reflective
processing, and both the set of cues and the overall level of confidence remains the same in
both stages, that would explain the low rate of response changes. Alternatively, participants
might choose to keep the same response to save effort. To rule out the effects of this potential
effort-saving strategy, we repeated the same experiment and analyses, but with intuitive and
reflective responses separated into two blocks of trials, to make it harder for participants to
remember their intuitive response and encourage more effortful responding.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
3.1. Methods
Participants. We recruited 92 participants for this study from Macquarie University
first year psychology student pool, 77% female, age ranging from 17 to 52 (M = 21.0). The
study was hosted on Pavlovia. 89 participants remained after exclusion criteria were applied.
3.1.1. Materials and procedure
Participants were given the same syllogisms as in Experiment 1. Participants solved
first all the items under intuitive response instructions a time limit, and then they were given
the same items again with reflective response instructions and free response time. Item order
was randomised in both blocks. Response change categories were coded the same way as
before.
Exclusion criteria. We applied the same exclusion criteria as in Experiment 1, removing
data from 8.4% of all trials partially or fully. We removed 3 participants who had <75%
accuracy on no-conflict MP problems at the reflective response stage, as an attention check.
There were no reflective trials that were too fast, and 112 were removed as too slow. We also
excluded data from the 196 trials where the intuitive response timed out.
Conflict detection indexes. These were calculated the same as in Experiment 1. We
removed 12 reaction time data point from the reflective stage, 88 intuitive stage confidence
data points, and 42 reflective confidence data points.
Consensuality index. Calculated the same as in Experiment 1. Values ranging from 0 to
100%, indicating the size of the proportion of participants who gave the more common
response to a given item.
3.2. Results
5. We again model confidence and accuracy at intuitive and reflective response stages, as
predicted by conflict, validity, and their interaction.
Accuracy. Accuracy at the intuitive stage was higher on no-conflict than conflict items
(OR = 2.90, 95CI = 2.58, 3.26, p < .001), higher on valid than invalid items (OR = 0.58, 95CI =
0.52, 0.66, p < .001), but there was no interaction effect between conflict and validity (p =
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
.62). Accuracy at the reflective stage followed the same pattern, with higher accuracy on no-
conflict items (OR = 3.69, 95CI = 3.25, 4.20, p < .001), higher accuracy on valid than invalid
items (OR = 0.55, 95CI =0.49, 0.63, p < .001), and no interaction effect (p = .89).
Confidence. At the intuitive response stage, there was no main effect of conflict on
confidence (p = .15). Invalid items were answered with less confidence than valid items (b = -
1.47, 95CI = -2.08, -0.85, p < .001). There was an interaction effect between conflict and
validity (b = -3.65, 95CI = -4.27, -3.03, p < .001), so that among valid items, confidence was
higher on no-conflict items, and on invalid items confidence was higher on conflict items. The
pattern was the same for reflective responses, with higher confidence on no-conflict than
conflict items (b = 0.50, 95CI = 0.03, 0.97, p < .04), on valid than invalid items (b = -1.84, 95CI
= -2.31, -1.37, p < .001), and a significant interaction effect (b = -2.63, 95CI = -3.10, -2.16, p <
.001), following the same pattern as the intuitive stage confidence judgements.
Accuracy and confidence generally behaved the same as in Experiment 1, with no
major differences between intuitive and reflective response stages and again showing reverse
detection effects on invalid syllogisms.
evaluated whether conflict detection effects were present and significantly different from
zero, with the same results as in Experiment 1. At the intuitive response stage, participants
showed significant CD-FOR effects on valid items (t(678) = -13.41, p < .001), and significant
but reversed effects on invalid items (t(940) = 6.69, p < .001). The same pattern was found at
the reflective response stage, on both valid (t(581) = -10.65, p < .001) and invalid items (t(848)
= 8.16, p < .001). Conflict detection effects were present at both response stages.
each response change category. The first number indicates accuracy at the intuitive stage, the second number
indicates accuracy at the reflective stage. 0 = incorrect, 1= correct.
Accuracy (%) Confidence (SE) 00 01 10 11
Intuitive Valid No-conflict 82 79 (0.62) - - - -
Conflict 48 70 (0.72) - - - -
Invalid No-conflict 67 68 (0.72) - - - -
Conflict 25 75 (0.68) - - - -
Reflective Valid No-conflict 87 85 (0.49) 3 10 4 83
Conflict 54 79 (0.62) 33 16 9 42
Invalid No-conflict 76 76 (0.65) 10 17 8 64
Conflict 34 81 (0.54) 56 17 7 20
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
and no-conflict items, in Experiment 2.
3.2.1. Cue integration
We repeated cue integration analyses in the same way as in Experiment 1, and the
that accuracy is strongly predicted by a small number of key variables, and confidence is
weakly predicted by almost all of them. As before, the main finding is that belief-logic conflict
has no significant impact on confidence. Accuracy was mainly predicted by conflict, validity,
and trial number, so that participants were more accurate on no-conflict and on valid items,
as well as on later items, which suggests a general practice effect. Response change status
only predicted accuracy at the intuitive response stage, such that participants who changed
their mind later were less likely to be right initially, i.e., they correct initially incorrect
responses.
Accuracy Confidence
Predictors b CI p b CI p
Trial number .44 .26 – .62 <.001 -.03 -.20 – .15 .77
Conflict -.40 -.42 – -.38 <.001 -.01 -.03 – .02 .55
Validity .56 .41 – .72 <.001 .01 -.15 – .16 .91
Believability .04 -.01 – .08 .12 .10 .05 – .14 <.001
Polarity .17 .09 – .25 <.001 .02 -.06 – .10 .69
Content .01 -.01 – .03 .32 .07 .05– .09 <.001
RT intuitive .05 .02 – .08 <.001 -.18 -.21 – -.15 <.001
RT reflective .01 -.01 – .04 .32 -.10 -.13 – -.07 <.001
Response change -.27 -.30 – -.25 <.001 -.19 -.22 – -.17 <.001
R2 /R2 .29/.34 .13/.36
m c
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Accuracy Confidence
Predictors b CI p b CI p
Trial number .31 .13 – .49 .001 .17 .00 – .34 .04
Conflict -.43 -.45– -.40 <.001 -.01 -.04 – .01 .17
Validity .45 .29 – .60 <.001 .22 .07 – .37 .004
Believability .02 -.02 – .07 .34 .13 .09 – .18 <.001
Polarity .15 .07 – .23 <.001 .10 .02 – .17 .01
Content .00 -.02 – .02 .83 .01 -.01 – .03 .24
Log-RT intuitive .02 -.01 – .04 .25 -.06 -.09 – -.04 <.001
Log-RT reflective .07 .04 – .10 <.001 -.09 -.11 – -.06 <.001
Response change .01 -.01–.04 .25 -.15 -.17 – -.13 <.001
R2 /R2 .22/.33 .07/.41
m c
effects are shown.
Confidence was relatively strongly affected by response change status and intuitive
reaction time at the initial response change, and by trial number and validity at the reflective
response stage. Participants were less confident initially if their intuitive response was less
fluent, and was associated with changing their mind later, which is consistent with previous
results (Thompson et al., 2011). Contrary to our expectations, potentially more complex and
informative cues like conflict or validity did not make a greater impact on reflective than
intuitive responses. Participants were also more confident in their responses on standard
than on neutral items in line with Experiment 1, but not any more accurate. Unlike Experiment
1, where this metacognitive illusion was present at both response stages, here we only see it
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
at intuitive response stages. When the intuitive and reflective stages were separated into
separate blocks, we can more clearly see that some metacognitive illusions disappear when
participants have opportunity to reflect on the problem (but not all, e.g., believability).
3.2.2. Consensuality analyses
Consensuality analyses were carried out the same way as in Experiment 1. We
modelled confidence by item consensuality, response stage, and conflict, with the same
consensuality increased (b = 0.18, 95CI = 0.16, 0.19, p < .001). Responses were given with
more confidence at the reflective than the intuitive stage overall (b = -5.13, 95CI = -5.96, -
4.30, p <.001), and confidence was higher on conflict than no-conflict items (b = -3.54, 95CI =
-4.46, -2.61, p < .001). There were significant interactions between consensuality and
response stage (b = 0.04, 95CI = 0.02, 0.05, p < .001), consensuality and conflict (b = 0.04, 95CI
= 0.02, 0.06, p < .001), but not response stage and conflict (p = .06). The three-way interaction
was also significant (b = -0.03, 95CI = -0.04, -0.01 p = .001).
To analyse the interactions further we ran pairwise contrasts, looking at the
differences in confidence between conflict and no-conflict items at extreme points of the
consensuality index (0% and 100% consensuality). At the intuitive response stage, no-conflict
items were answered with less confidence than conflict items both on least consensual items
(b = -5.48, p < .001), and most consensual items (b = -2.92, p = .05). At the reflective response
stage, no-conflict items were also answered with less confidence than conflict items on least
consensual items (b = -8.66, p < .001). On most consensual items, no-conflict items were
answered with more confidence than conflict items (b = 4.72, p = .001). When cue consistency
was lowest, participants were less certain about their responses to no-conflict than conflict
items at both response stages. On items with the most consistent cues confidence,
participants became more confident when answering no-conflict than conflict items, but only
at the reflective response stage.
Separating intuitive and reflective responses into separate blocks only influenced the
relationship between confidence and item consensuality at the intuitive response stage. Here
we saw higher confidence on conflict than no-conflict items across the full range of item
consensuality, although this difference still decreases on more consensual items. The
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
difference between intuitive and reflective stages is also smaller here, but still showing
significantly higher confidence in the reflective block.
conflict items; (b) CD-FOR index as predicted by item consensuality and response stage in Experiment 2.
Conflict detection effects and item consensuality. Here we again expect to see greater
conflict detection effects on less consensual items. The results are similar to Experiment 1,
positive) as item consensuality increased (b = 0.26, 95CI = 0.23, 0.29, p < .001), and on
reflective responses relative to the intuitive ones (b = -3.77, 95CI = -4.80, -2.74, p < .001). The
interaction effect was significant (b = 0.07, 95CI = 0.04, 0.09, p < .001). On least consensual
items (0% consensuality index), intuitive responses are given with less confidence than
reflective (b = -7.54, p < .001), but on most consensual items (85% consensuality index),
intuitive responses are given with more confidence than reflective responses (b = 3.99, p =
.005). Separating intuitive and reflective responses increase the magnitude of conflict
detection effects, but the relationship with item consensuality and between response stages
remains generally the same. Participants show weaker conflict detection effects on highly
consensual items, where the self-consistency model claims cues to confidence are highly
consistent and do not elicit uncertainty.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
3.2.3. Response changes and consensuality
intuitive and reflective responses into separate blocks increased the rate of self-corrections
(01 responses), from 6-10% in Experiment 1, to 10-18% here. Otherwise, the pattern of
response changes is similar, with most participants giving the same response at both stages
(00, 11).
First, we again look at whether response changes are predicted by initial confidence
more confident (OR = 0.98, 95CI = 0.97, 0.98, p < .001). There was no difference between
conflict and no-conflict items (p = .11), but there was a significant interaction between initial
confidence and conflict (OR = 1.00, 95CI = 0.99, 1.00, p < .001). Pairwise contrasts showed
that when confidence is at zero, there were no differences between conflict and no-conflict
items (p = .11), but when confidence was at 100, participants were less likely to change their
mind on no-conflict than conflict items (OR = 0.55, p < .001).
Next, we examined the relationship between the conflict status of the item,
consensuality of the initial response (whether a participant’s response was the more or less
common one for that item), and item consensuality (proportion of participants who gave the
more common response to a given item). We expected items with higher consensuality to
contain more consistent cues to confidence, which should reduce uncertainty and lead to
fewer response changes. When a participant gave a less common, minority response, we
expected them to be more likely to change their mind later, because the self-consistency
model expects participants to have access to the same or similar cues to confidence, leading
more people to respond in the same way. Experiment 2 was designed to make intuitive and
reflective responding more independent, with a greater number of response changes. If the
absent conflict effect in these analyses in Experiment 1 was due to overall low rates of
response change, these should become present here if belief-logic conflict is relevant to
response change.
Participants were more likely to change their mind when their initial response was
different from the one given by most other participants (OR = 1.22, 95CI = 1.04, 1.44, p = .01).
Participants were also more likely to change their mind on no-conflict than conflict items (OR
= 1.26, 95CI = 1.04, 1.52, p = .02), but were slightly more likely to change their mind as item
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
consensuality increased (OR = 1.00, 95CI = 0.99, 1.00, p = .03). There were significant two-way
and 3-way interactions (ps < .05) which we further unpacked with pairwise contrasts.
Among least consensual items (0% consensuality index), when participants first gave
the less common, minority response, they were more likely to change their mind on no-
conflict than conflict items (OR = 3.07, p < .001). This was even more strongly the case on the
most highly consensual items (OR = 10.61, p < .001, 100% consensuality index). When
participants initially gave the more common, majority response, they were equally unlikely to
change their mind when solving the least consensual conflict and no-conflict items (p = .38).
On highly consensual items, participants were more likely to change their mind when solving
In sum, when participants initially gave the less common minority response, they were
more likely to change their mind on no-conflict than conflict items and also on items with
more consistent responses (i.e., easier items). When participants gave the more common,
majority response, the rate of response changes was very low regardless of item
consensuality or belief-logic conflict. Generally, the pattern of results is the same here as in
Experiment 1 (see Figures 8 and 5) – participants were most likely to correct errors they made
on no-conflict items, while the rate of corrections on conflict items remained low. Response
changes on conflict items were also similarly likely whether the initial response was correct
or incorrect.
These analyses suggest that response changes were primarily driven by the
metacognitive properties of the item, reflected in the consensuality status of the item and of
the initial response, but the effect of item-level properties such as belief-logic conflict is less
reliably present. Differences between conflict and no-conflict items are best detected by the
modified 2-response paradigm used in Experiment 2, where intuitive and reflective responses
to an item are more separated in time and participants cannot easily recall their previous
answer.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
change, given item conflict, whether participant’s intuitive response was more or less common (majority,
minority) choice for that item, and how strongly consensual that item was.
3.3. Discussion
In Experiment 2, intuitive and reflective responses were presented in separate blocks.
We observed a relatively higher proportion of self-corrections – 10-18% here, as opposed to
6-10% in the standard 2-response paradigm where intuitive and reflective response stages
are done sequentially for each trial (Experiment 1). The traditional 2-response paradigm
appears to under-estimate reflective responding, because it is easy for participants to repeat
the same response to save time and effort.
As before, confidence ratings were not predicted by conflict. Instead, they were
weakly predicted by a large collection of cues, which varied slightly between response stages.
Participants who changed their mind at the reflective response stage, had lower confidence
in their intuitive responses, which aligns with previous work with the 2-response paradigm
(Thompson et al., 2011, 2013). Accuracy, on the other hand, was strongly predicted by a
smaller set of cues – trial number (indicating a possible practice effect), conflict, validity, and
response change.
Consensuality analyses show similar results to Experiment 1, except for intuitive stage
responses. Here, both conflict and no-conflict items show uniformly higher confidence on
more consensual items, in contrast to reflective stage responses and the previous
experiment, where participants became less confident on conflict than no-conflict items on
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
most consensual items. Conflict detection effects also follow a similar pattern, becoming
weaker on more consensual items, although the magnitude of the effects is larger here. These
results are in line with predictions of the self-consistency model.
Response change analyses were again similar to what we found in Experiment 1, with
somewhat better differentiation between conflict and no-conflict items. This was the case
both in predicting response changes from initial confidence, and predicting response changes
from item consensuality and initial response consensuality. However, it is these factors and
not belief-logic conflict that remain the stronger predictors of response change, particularly
when considering the relationship between initial confidence and response change, or initial
response consensuality and response change.
Participants were more likely to change their mind when initial confidence was low,
and on highly consensual no-conflict items when their initial response was the less common
one for that item. Because no-conflict items are typically solved with high accuracy, the
minority response would most likely be the incorrect one. The self-consistency model predicts
that majority responses are given with higher confidence than the minority responses, which
ties together the findings from these analyses – low initial confidence predicts response
change, but this is limited to participants correcting themselves on easy, no-conflict items.
Participants were more likely to change their mind and give a response that was consistent
with most other people, rather than in favour of the correct response in particular. This
suggests the response changes may be driven by cue consistency, rather than finding the
normative response through deliberation.
4. General discussion
The recently proposed uncertainty monitoring account of conflict detection (De Neys,
2023) shifts focus from the specific belief-logic conflict being manipulated in typical conflict
reasoning tasks to the overall sense of uncertainty generated by various intuitive responses
as the key factor determining whether people are likely to engage deliberative, reflective
thinking on the problem. We note the similarity between the ideas of conflict detection and
uncertainty monitoring, and metacognition. All of these are concerned with the mechanisms
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
that evaluate first-order cognitive processes to determine what further processing will take
place.
There is a growing body of work applying existing knowledge of metacognition to the
study of reasoning (Ackerman & Thompson, 2017). The self-consistency model is a useful
framework which has allowed us to make a series of predictions about the level of confidence
based on mean accuracy on a given item – this allows us to predict where participants are
more likely to deliberate without relying on belief-logic conflict as an indicator. It also
underpins the cue integration analyses, which demonstrates the simultaneous involvement
of many cues in forming confidence judgments. This weighs in favour of the uncertainty
monitoring account, rather than the earlier view focused on belief-based and logic-based
dimensions exclusively.
In this paper, we applied the self-consistency model and cue integration analyses to
investigate which aspects of the task are most influential in forming confidence judgements
and if differences in confidence between items can be explained through consensuality,
rather than belief-logic conflict. We also used the self-consistency model to make predictions
about items where response changes are most likely. The key finding across both experiments
is that belief-logic conflict is not the main or the only factor that makes people doubt their
answers or change their mind. Confidence is formed from an assorted collection of cues, such
as validity, believability, polarity, reaction time, and response change, but not belief-logic
conflict. We found confidence to generally conform to the predictions of the self-consistency
model, so that overall level of confidence is closely related to the consensuality of the item.
4.1. Cues to confidence and accuracy
Cue integration analyses in both experiments showed that participants ’confidence
ratings did not vary with the presence or absence of belief-logic conflict. While accuracy was
strongly determined by a few key problem features (primarily conflict and validity),
confidence was weakly predicted by all or most of the analysed cues, but never by conflict.
This challenges the idea that differences in confidence ratings between incorrect conflict and
correct no-conflict items reflect sensitivity to belief-logic conflict.
Furthermore, some of the analysed cues elicit a metacognitive bias. Believability and
reaction time push accuracy and confidence in opposite directions, meaning that
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
participants ’metacognition cannot adequately gauge their actual accuracy. For example,
believable items reduce accuracy, but make participants overly confident (a typical example
of belief bias). Thinking longer about the problem makes participants more accurate, but less
confident. This agrees with the position of the self-consistency model that confidence
judgements are inferential and the metacognitive system does not have direct access to the
cognitive processes that drive accuracy (Koriat, 2012).
Varying sensitivity to different task-specific cues, and presence of misleading cues that
induce metacognitive bias may explain the differences in rates of conflict detection between
tasks (e.g., Frey et al., 2018; Swan et al., 2018). Different sets of cues available on different
tasks may be more or less reliable for differentiating conflict and no-conflict items even if
participants cannot determine the correct response. This can be investigated in the future by
applying the present analyses to a broader set of tasks and evaluating which tasks are more
metacognitively difficult in general, and on which tasks participants might be more or less
sensitive to belief-logic conflict.
Expanding the set of analysed cues is another important step for future research. In
this paper, the set of analysed cues accounted for ~5-15% of the variance in confidence
judgements (R = .06-.16). There is a lot of room for other factors to influence confidence
judgements than the current list of task and performance features. These could include
availability of training and feedback, domain knowledge, trait confidence, confidence about
this type of task, social context, and others (Ackerman, 2019; Dujmović & Valerjev, 2018;
Koriat, 2015). Unlike confidence, accuracy was heavily impacted by the expected task features
(conflict, validity). This disparity between accuracy and confidence demonstrates a gap
between primary and second-order cognitive processing being driven by different elements
of the test situation. Assuming that confidence plays a functional role in determining whether
participants engage in more reflective thinking instead of relying only on automatic
responses, and given how little sensitivity to belief-logic conflict we see here, we suggest that
finding factors that determine confidence judgements more strongly might be more helpful
to understanding when and why the switch from automatic to reflective thinking occurs.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
4.2. Consensuality as a cue to confidence
Confidence judgements are known to diverge from accuracy in reasoning tasks
(Prowse Turner & Thompson, 2009; Shynkaruk & Thompson, 2006). This means that people
cannot perfectly monitor their intuitive inferences, which agrees with the current view that
conflict detection is flawed (Pennycook et al., 2012; 2015). Sometimes people do not notice
the conflict, because their capacity to notice it is limited. We also know from metacognition
research that the degree of the miscalibration of confidence judgements relative to accuracy
often varies between easy and hard items, as well as for other reasons (Moore & Healy, 2008).
The self-consistency model posits that confidence judgements are formed from a collection
of heuristic cues (Koriat, 2012). If the cues all point towards a single response, then
confidence will be high. Because more participants are thought to be sensitive to the same
pool of cues, when cues all agree on a single response, most participants answer the same
way, i.e., there is consensus about the response, which can be gauged by mean accuracy on
the item or the proportion of participants who gave the majority response. If the cues are
inconsistent, different people will give different responses (there is no consensus), and
confidence judgements will be lower.
This leads to the prediction that confidence will be higher on the more common
response than the less common responses to a given item, and will be higher on items where
more people give the same response. As predicted, confidence increased as item
consensuality increased in both experiments. As a consequence of this relationship, conflict
detection effects were also found to be larger (more negative) on less consensual items, and
became smaller on more consensual conflict items. This aligns with the uncertainty
monitoring account (De Neys, 2023), but not the standard approach to conflict detection.
From a standard conflict detection perspective, all conflict items are identical, in the sense
that they are all designed to elicit a belief-based and a logic-based response which are
incompatible with each other. Our results demonstrate that this is clearly not the case for
syllogisms, and that the consistency of all the cues to confidence plays a role.
Cue integration analyses can help us infer which types of items are more likely to be
perceived as non-consensual. Lower consensuality is associated with lower confidence, and
cue integration analyses tell us what types of items tend to have lower confidence. Items with
lower consensuality are more likely to be invalid, unbelievable, conflict items, those with
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
negations (MT and DA), and those that were solved slower. However, note that in our
analyses, these cues were relatively weak predictors of confidence. Further research is
needed to determine if other factors are more relevant to determining item consensuality.
Consensuality analyses reveal a gap in our understanding of where conflict can be
expected to occur. An item can have or not have belief-logic conflict, be easy or difficult to
solve from a normative point of view – but items within the same category can still vary in
how metacognitively difficult they are. Some no-conflict items are harder than others, and
some conflict items are more amenable to conflict detection. However, this difference is not
captured by traditional conflict detection analyses, which are based solely on the normative
status of an item, not how participants perceive it in practice. This misalignment between
normative status and subjective perception can lead to substantial distortions, as evidenced
by the case of 'reverse' detection effects in AC and DA syllogisms (Brisson et al., 2018;
Kosourikhina & Handley, 2024a). In the case of conditional syllogisms in particular, belief-logic
conflict is not a relevant cue to informing confidence judgments. Applying the self-consistency
model offers a more general way of categorising items that does not rely on this distinction.
4.3. Consensuality and response changes
Confidence judgments are known to evolve over time (Ackerman, 2014; Navajas et al.,
2016), and the 2-response paradigm has been instrumental in differentiating initial feeling of
rightness judgements about intuitive responses and final confidence judgements elicited after
giving people an opportunity to reflect on the problem. We found that participants generally
did not change their mind: 74-91% of responses remained the same in Experiments 1 and 2,
depending on the condition. Response changes were more common in Experiment 2, when
intuitive and reflective responses were separated into blocks, so that participants could not
easily repeat their initial response. Participants showed lower confidence before changing
their mind, but whether or not they changed their response did not influence final confidence
judgments (see cue integration analyses).
Extending the self-consistency model to the 2-response paradigm, it can be predicted
that response changes should be more frequent on less consensual items. If response change
occurs due to low confidence of the initial response (Thompson et al., 2011; Thompson,
Prowse Turner et al., 2013), then it follows that the more ambiguous items with low
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
confidence should show more response changes. We found a more complex picture, so that
lower initial confidence did predict response change, but this was primarily happening on the
less common, minority, responses to highly consensual items, particularly no-conflict ones.
Participants were more likely to change their mind if they initially gave a less common
response to an item where most people choose a different response.
High rates of response change after giving an initial minority response is in line with
previous findings (Bajšanski & Žauhar, 2019). An uncommon initial response should be
associated with lower initial confidence, which should prompt re-thinking once more time
and resources are available at the reflective stage. We checked whether response changes
were predicted by the consensuality status of the initial response and the degree of
consensuality of the item, and whether this relationship differs between conflict and no-
conflict items. Belief-logic conflict only predicted probability of response change in
Experiment 2, but even then response changes were strongly predicted by response
consensuality, and varied by item consensuality. In both experiments, response changes
primarily reflected easy self-corrections, rather than the result of conflict detection and
deliberation on conflict items.
Consensuality of the response and the item are thought to be indirect indicators of
the coherence of the cues that inform both responses and confidence judgements. These
analyses undermine the idea that participants are uniquely sensitive to belief-logic conflict,
as conflict is not always a relevant factor in driving response changes. The fact that
participants change their response from minority to the majority, and change more often on
items with stronger consensuality means that responses at the intuitive response stage are
given based on somewhat more limited information (or responses are given as a guess, or
accidentally), and at the reflective response stage participants tend to integrate the available
information more fully and respond more strongly like everybody else. If they were sensitive
to belief-logic conflict, response changes could reflect greater conflict detection and show
more switches towards the correct response – but given that participants are not sensitive to
it, they still integrate whatever cues that are available to them.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
4.4. Future directions
Analysing accuracy and confidence in reasoning tasks from the metacognitive
perspective provides both the theory and the methods to analyse reasoning tasks without
necessarily relying on the partitioning of items into conflict and no-conflict categories, and
allows us to consider multiple sources of influences on the formation of automatic responses
and confidence judgments associated with them. This way we can establish what drives
uncertainty in responses and the subsequent switch to deliberative, reflective thinking more
directly than through the concept of belief-logic conflict alone.
Selecting items with particular degrees of consensuality might be a practical way to
isolate items that have known expectations about where confidence ratings would go (see
Bajšanski and Žauhar (2019), and Koriat (2012) for examples). This may be a starting point for
further experimental and individual differences work, looking at how individuals or tasks with
different properties deviate from these expectations.
Our results support the earlier findings of Bajšanski et al., (2019), and show that both
the believable syllogisms used by them, and the belief-logic conflicting syllogisms used in this
paper, generally produce confidence judgements the same way as simpler cognitive and
perceptual tasks that were the basis of the self-consistency model (Koriat, 2008, 2011, 2013;
Koriat & Adiv, 2011, 2012). We suggest that metacognition in reasoning operates on the same
general principles as in these other cognitive domains, and will be subject to the same
strength and pitfalls. On the upside, this means that interventions that improve
metacognition in one domain might be effective in other domains as well. On the other hand,
if metacognitive biases are highly dependent on availability and sensitivity to valid cues, it
might be difficult to create effective interventions for improving metacognition across
domains (Fiedler et al., 2023).
Another avenue to explore is other metacognitive feelings, and their role in engaging
reflective thinking. In their meta-reasoning framework, Ackerman and Thompson (2015,
2017) highlight a range of other metacognitive feelings that have been studied before,
primarily in relation to meta-memory. These include judgements of solvability, feelings of
error, and others. To develop the meta-reasoning framework further, it is necessary to clarify
whether these metacognitive feelings are indeed distinct mechanisms that might
independently contribute to the switching between automatic and reflective thinking, or if
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
they are different facets of the same general metacognitive mechanism. However, this
multiplicity of potentially relevant metacognitive feelings also highlights the fact that
metacognition operates continuously, not only as a final confidence judgment, and studying
the function of metacognition at different stages of processing the problem can reveal more
about the switching mechanism. For example, initial estimates of problem difficulty may
plausibly determine effort allocation, and therefore the likelihood of engaging in more
effortful reflection on the problem (Shenhav et al., 2017). Studying how these metacognitive
feelings operate in reasoning could give us a fuller picture of both the common reasoning
mechanisms, and factors that drive individual differences between biased and less-biased
reasoners.
5. Conclusion
Conflict detection can be considered to be an aspect of metacognition, and
understood through existing theories of metacognition. We demonstrate that the self-
consistency model can describe the relationship between accuracy and confidence in
syllogisms. Confidence judgements in syllogisms are influenced by several factors, such as
validity, believability, and reaction time. Belief-logic conflict is not a relevant factor to forming
confidence judgements and plays only a minor role in whether participants change their mind.
Instead, confidence and conflict detection are related to how strongly consensual a given item
is, that is, how consistent are the underlying cues to confidence. Participants are most likely
to change their mind when they give incorrect responses to no-conflict items. Probability of
response change is best described by how strongly consensual a given item, and whether their
initial response was the same as the most common response to that item. Our findings align
well with the uncertainty monitoring account of conflict detection, but not earlier accounts.
6. Declaration of interests
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
7. References
Ackerman, R. (2014). The diminishing criterion model for metacognitive regulation of time
investment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 1349–1368.
Ackerman, R. (2019). Heuristic cues for meta-reasoning judgments. Psychological Topics, 28,
Ackerman, R. (2023). Bird’s-Eye View of Cue Integration: Exposing instructional and task
design factors which bias problem solvers. In Educational Psychology Review (Issue
Ackerman, R., & Thompson, V. A. (2015). Meta-reasoning: What can we learn from meta-
memory. In A. Feeney & V. A. Thompson (Eds.), Reasoning as memory (pp. 164–182).
Taylor & Francis.
Ackerman, R., & Thompson, V. A. (2017). Meta-reasoning: Monitoring and control of
thinking and reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21, 607–617.
Baayen, H. R., & Milin, P. (2010). Analyzing reaction times. International Journal of
Bago, B., & De Neys, W. (2017). Fast logic?: Examining the time course assumption of dual
process theory. Cognition, 158, 90–109.
Bago, B., & De Neys, W. (2019). The Smart System 1: Evidence for the intuitive nature of
correct responding on the bat-and-ball problem. Thinking and Reasoning, 25, 257–
Bajšanski, I., & Žauhar, V. (2019). The relationship between consistency and consensuality in
syllogistic reasoning. Psychological Topics, 28, 73–91.
Bajšanski, I., Žauhar, V., & Valerjev, P. (2019). Confidence judgments in syllogistic reasoning:
the role of consistency and response cardinality. Thinking and Reasoning, 25, 14–47.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Boissin, E., Caparos, S., Raoelison, M., & De Neys, W. (2021). From bias to sound intuiting:
Boosting correct intuitive reasoning. Cognition, 211(February), 104645.
Brisson, J., Schaeken, W., Markovits, H., & Neys, W. De. (2018). Conflict detection and logical
Burič, R., & Šrol, J. (2020). Individual differences in logical intuitions on reasoning problems
presented under two-response paradigm. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 32, 460–
De Neys, W. (2023). Advancing theorizing about fast-and-slow thinking. Behavioral and
De Neys, W., Cromheeke, S., & Osman, M. (2011). Biased but in doubt: Conflict and decision
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in dual process theories of thinking.
Dujmović, M., & Valerjev, P. (2018). The influence of conflict monitoring on meta-reasoning
and response times in a base rate task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
Fiedler, K., Prager, J., & McCaughey, L. (2023). Metacognitive Myopia: A Major Obstacle on
the Way to Rationality. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 32(1), 49–56.
Fleming, S. M. (2024). Metacognition and confidence: A review and synthesis. Annual
Frey, D., Johnson, E. D., & De Neys, W. (2018). Individual differences in conflict detection
during reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology (2006), 71, 1188–
Ghasemi, O., Handley, S., Howarth, S., Newman, I. R., & Thompson, V. A. (2022). Logical
intuition Is not really about logic. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 151,
Johnson, E. D., Tubau, E., & De Neys, W. (2016). The doubting system 1: Evidence for
automatic substitution sensitivity. Acta Psychologica, 164, 56–64.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Koriat, A. (1997). Monitoring one’s own knowledge during study: A cue-utilization approach
to judgments of learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 126, 349–370.
Koriat, A. (2008). Subjective confidence in one’s answers: The consensuality principle.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 34, 945–959.
Koriat, A. (2011). Subjective confidence in perceptual judgments: A test of the self-
consistency model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 140, 117–139.
Koriat, A. (2012). The self-consistency model of subjective confidence. Psychological Review,
Koriat, A. (2013). Confidence in personal preferences. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Koriat, A. (2015). When two heads are better than one and when they can be worse: The
amplification hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144, 934–950.
Koriat, A., & Adiv, S. (2011). The construction of attitudinal judgments: Evidence from
attitude certainty and response latency. Social Cognition, 29, 577–611.
Koriat, A., & Adiv, S. (2012). Confidence in one’s social beliefs: Implications for belief
justification. Consciousness and Cognition, 21, 1599–1616.
Koriat, A., Bjork, R. A., Sheffer, L., & Bar, S. K. (2004). Predicting one’s own forgetting: The
role of experience-based and theory-based processes. Journal of Experimental
Kosourikhina, V., & Handley, S. J. (2024a). Conflict detection with invalid inferences: All
Kosourikhina, V. & Handley, S. J. (2024b). Uncertainty monitoring in reasoning: cue
consistency is more important than belief-logic conflict. Pre-print.
Markovits, H., Thompson, V. A., & Brisson, J. (2015). Metacognition and abstract reasoning.
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Mevel, K., Poirel, N., Rossi, S., Cassotti, M., Simon, G., Houdé, O., & De Neys, W. (2015). Bias
detection: Response confidence evidence for conflict sensitivity in the ratio bias task.
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 27, 227–237.
Moore, D. A., & Healy, P. J. (2008). The Trouble With Overconfidence. Psychological Review,
Nakagawa, S., Johnson, P. C. D., Schielzeth, H., Building, G. K., & Glasgow, G. (2017). The
coefficient of determination R2 and intra-class correlation coefficient from generalized
linear mixed-effects models revisited and expanded. Journal of the Royal Society
Navajas, J., Bahrami, B., & Latham, P. E. (2016). Post-decisional accounts of biases in
confidence. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 11, 55–60.
Newman, I. R., Gibb, M., & Thompson, V. A. (2017). Rule-based reasoning is fast and belief-
based reasoning can be slow: Challenging current explanations of belief-bias and base-
rate neglect. Journal of experimental psychology: learning, memory, and cognition, 43,
Pennycook, G., Fugelsang, J. A., & Koehler, D. J. (2012). Are we good at detecting conflict
during reasoning? Cognition, 124, 101–106.
Pennycook, G., Fugelsang, J. A., & Koehler, D. J. (2015). What makes us think? A three-stage
dual-process model of analytic engagement. Cognitive Psychology, 80, 34–72.
Prowse Turner, J. A., & Thompson, V. A. (2009). The role of training, alternative models, and
logical necessity in determining confidence in syllogistic reasoning reasoning. Thinking
Raoelison, M., & De Neys, W. (2019). Do we de-bias ourselves?: The impact of repeated
presentation on the bat-and-ball problem. Judgment and Decision Making, 14, 170–
178.
Shenhav, A., Musslick, S., Lieder, F., Kool, W., Griffiths, T. L., Cohen, J. D., & Botvinick, M. M.
(2017). Toward a rational and mechanistic account of mental effort. Annual Review of
METACOGNITIVE CUES FOR RESPONSE CHANGE
Shynkaruk, J. M., & Thompson, V. A. (2006). Confidence and accuracy in deductive
Son, L. K., & Metcalfe, J. (2005). Judgments of learning: Evidence for a two-stage process.
Šrol, J., & De Neys, W. (2020). Predicting individual differences in conflict detection and bias
susceptibility during reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 27, 38–68.
Swan, A. B., Calvillo, D. P., & Revlin, R. (2018). To detect or not to detect : A replication and
extension of the three-stage model. Acta Psychologica, 187, 54–65.
Thompson, V. A. (2009). Dual-process theories: A metacognitive perspective. In J. St. B. T.
Evans & K. Frankish (Eds.), In two minds: Dual processes and beyond. Oxford University
Thompson, V. A., Evans, J. S. B. T., & Campbell, J. I. D. (2013). Matching bias on the selection
task: It’s fast and feels good. Thinking and Reasoning, 19, 431–452.
Thompson, V. A., & Johnson, S. C. (2014). Conflict, metacognition, and analytic thinking.
Thinking and Reasoning, 20, 215–244.
Thompson, V. A., Prowse Turner, J. A., & Pennycook, G. (2011). Intuition, reason, and
metacognition. Cognitive Psychology, 63, 107–140.
Thompson, V. A., Prowse Turner, J. A., Pennycook, G., Ball, L. J., Brack, H., Ophir, Y., &
Ackerman, R. (2013). The role of answer fluency and perceptual fluency as
metacognitive cues for initiating analytic thinking. Cognition, 128, 237–251.
Voudouri, A., Białek, M., Domurat, A., Kowal, M., & De Neys, W. (2023). Conflict detection
predicts the temporal stability of intuitive and deliberate reasoning. Thinking &
Yeung, N., & Summerfield, C. (2012). Metacognition in human decision-making: Confidence
and error monitoring. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological