NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 1
***Stage 1 Registered Report accepted on 13 June 2024 at the
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology:
Personality Processes and Individual Differences***
Associations among Well-being Components and Big Five Personality Domains:
Nomothetic and Idiographic Perspectives
Gabrielle N. Pfund, PhD1, Tabea Springstein, PhD2, & Emily C. Willroth, PhD2
1Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
2Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Washington University, St. Louis, MO
Author Note
The authors declared no conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship or the
publication of this article.
The study design, research questions, and analytic plan will be pre-registered prior to data
collection, and de-identified data and analysis scripts will be shared publicly on the Open
Science Framework.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gabrielle N. Pfund,
Northwestern University, 625 N. Michigan Ave., 22nd Floor, Chicago, IL 60611, United States.
Email: gabrielle.pfund@northwestern.edu.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 2
Abstract
Well-being is a multi-faceted construct, comprised of conceptualy distinct affective experiences,
cognitive evaluations, and social processes. The current research investigates the extent to which
these conceptually distinct well-being components are related to one another between and within
individuals, as well as whether and how individuals differ from one another in the interrelations
among their well-being experiences. With a community sample that reflects the diversity of St.
Louis (N=400), we will assess trait and state experiences of well-being (i.e., positive affect,
negative affect, life satisfaction, sense of purpose, psychological richness, social connectedness,
self-esteem) and Big Five personality domains (i.e., openness, conscientiousness, extraversion,
agreeableness, neuroticism). After an initial baseline questionnaire, participants will complete 9
experience sampling surveys per day for 14 consecutive days (126 observations per person). In
Aim 1a, we will evaluate associations among well-being components at three levels: between-
person associations among trait measures, between-person associations among aggregated state
measures, and within-person associations among fluctuations in state measures. In Aim 1b, we
will use group iterative multiple model estimation (GIMME) to investigate how different well-
being components covary within individuals concurrently and prospectively, and whether these
pathways are consistent across people (i.e., nomothetic) or if they differ between people (i.e.,
idiographic). In Aim 2a and 2b, we will apply the same methods to understand how Big Five
personality domains relate to each well-being component. Findings will help establish the
interrelations among well-being components, the consistency of state-level associations across
people, and the role the Big Five personality domains play in promoting well-being.
Keywords: well-being; Big Five; trait versus state; nomothetic approaches; idiographic
approaches; group iterative multiple model estimation (GIMME)
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 3
Associations among Well-being Components and Big Five Personality Domains:
Nomothetic and Idiographic Perspectives
The desire for and pursuit of well-being is fairly ubiquitous. However, defining what
well-being is and how its various components are related to one another has been a controversial
theoretical and empirical pursuit. Historically, psychological science initially focused on higher
positive affect, relatively less negative affect, and greater satisfaction with one’s life, often called
subjective or hedonic well-being (Diener et al., 1985). Over time, the conceptualization of well-
being extended beyond simply feeling good to include living in a manner that is consistent with
one’s full potential, typically deemed eudaimonic or psychological well-being (Ryff, 1989; Ryff
& Keyes, 1995). These two dominant well-being traditions stem from philosophical conceptions
of what it means to live a good life, and have led many to posit that well-being has a dual-factor
structure (Keyes et al., 2002). However, others have argued that these conceptualizations of well-
being represent a false dichotomy (e.g., Disabato et al., 2019), or that they are incomplete (e.g.,
Oishi & Westgate, 2022). For example, some have argued that social constructs are under-
represented in these prominent models of well-being (e.g., Keyes, 1988; Seligman, 2011), and
recent research has recommended the inclusion of additional novel constructs such as
psychological richness to the well-being literature (i.e., variety and depth of interesting and
perspective-changing experiences) (Oishi & Westgate, 2022; Oishi et al., 2019). Thus, a non-
exhaustive definition of well-being would include living a pleasant, satisfying, purposeful,
socially-connected, and psychologically rich life.
Though the list of characteristics and experiences posited to make up well-being grows,
the relationships among these different well-being components remain poorly understood. Most
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 4
empirical research on this question has focused on between-person associations among trait
measures of well-being. This approach has led to mixed conclusions (e.g., Disabato et al., 2016,
2019; Goodman et al., 2018; Joshanloo, 2016; Joshanloo et al., 2017; Kashdan et al., 2008;
Willroth et al., 2023) and leaves crucial open questions how well-being components are
associated with one another within individuals. This is in part tied to a disproportionate focus on
traits, or how people think, feel, and behave in general (Roberts et al., 2009), relative to states, or
how someone thinks, feels, or behaves in a given moment (Fleeson, 2001; Fleeson & Noftle,
2009).
Within the relatively smaller literature on within-person associations among well-being
states, the vast majority of prior research has focused on general associations found across
people (i.e., nomothetic relationships), and has not considered the extent to which those
relaitonships are true within specific individuals (i.e., idiographic relationships1) (Barenbaum &
Winter, 1999). Stated differently, even if increases in positive emotions are related to increases
in life satisfaction in general, some individuals’ positive emotions may be unrelated to their life
satisfaction (i.e., idiographic relationship). For further examples of between-person versus
1 Notably, idiographic research does not inherently have to be within-person. For example, previous research has
found that the items that are used to assess the Big Five personality traits more neatly separate into the Big Five
traits in older adults relative to younger adults (Beck et al., 2022), suggesting that there is likely an idiosyncratic
component to the measurement of personality traits between individuals.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 5
Examples of Between- and Within-Person Associations at the Nomothetic and Idiographic Levels
Nomothetic Idiographic
Between- On average, people who have a higher The items that comprise a sense of purpose
person sense of purpose tend to experience measure may be more strongly related for
more positive emotions than people some individuals and more loosely related in
with a lower sense of purpose. others.
Within- In moments in which someone’s sense For a given individual, in moments when their
person of purpose is higher than usual, they sense of purpose is higher than usual, they tend
tend to experience more positive to experience more positive emotions than
emotions than usual. usual. For a different individual, their sense of
purpose in a given moment is not related to
their positive emotions in that moment.
Note. Between-person nomothetic relationships (upper-left quadrant) can be assessed with trait measures
or aggregated state measures. Between-person nomothetic relationships (upper-right quadrant) can be
assessed with item-level or composite trait measures; this could be represented across different groups,
cultures, ages, etc. Within-person relationships (bottom) require repeated measures of states or traits.
How are Conceptually Distinct Well-being Components Related?
As definitions of well-being have broadened (e.g., Ryff & Boylan, 2016), frameworks
have been proposed to organize the various characteristics and experiences theorized to comprise
well-being. For example, one framework considers specific well-being components (e.g.,
positive affect, sense of purpose, social connection) to be well-being characteristics organized
under broader well-being lenses (e.g., subjective well-being, psychological well-being, social
well-being) (Disabato et al., 2019). Conceptual models like this one are useful for mapping the
theoretical space of well-being constructs (Willroth, 2023), but it remains an open empirical
question whether these theoretical distinctions reflect how individuals actually experience well-
being. In fact, empirical endeavors have illustrated that distinctions between subjective,
psychological, and social well-being lenses may be theoretical rather than experiential in nature
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 6
(e.g., Goodman et al., 2018). Evidence suggests that the magnitude of associations among well-
being components vary independent of their respective theoretical categorizations. For example,
though theories of subjective well-being would suggest that positive affect, negative affect, and
life satisfaction map onto the same higher order factor (Diener et al., 1985), research suggests
that these three well-being components may be equally or more strongly related to other well-
being components than they are with one another. One daily diary study found that positive
affect and sense of purpose were more strongly associated with each other than negative affect at
the between- and within-person levels (Pfund et al., 2024). This association does not seem to be
driven solely by positive affect and sense of purpose sharing the same positive valence, as
another study found that life satisfaction and positive affect were no more strongly associated
with another than life satisfaction and positive affect with sense of purpose (Ratner et al., 2023).
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of cross-sectional well-being correlations found that life
satisfaction, a component of subjective well-being, has a correlation of .16 with autonomy, .55
with sense of purpose, and .74 with self-acceptance (Anglim et al., 2020), all of which are
components of psychological well-being (Ryff, 1989). Meanwhile, the associations of life
satisfaction with positive and negative affect, other subjective well-being indicators, were .52
and -.44, respectively, highlighting that the magnitudes of these relationships transcend the
bounds of classical subjective-psychological categorizations. Thus, while well-being may be
better represented with a multifaceted approach, distinctions between common theoretical higher
order factors may not best capture how well-being functions within individuals.
Moreover, research on the interrelations among well-being components has primarily
focused on between-person associations among trait measures, with less consideration of how
well-being components are experienced within individuals across time (e.g., Ryff, 1989;
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 7
Disabato, Goodman, et al., 2016; Disabato, Goodman, & Kashdan, 2019). This distinction is
important because people draw on different sources of information when making trait versus
state reports. For example, when people are asked to report over a long period of time (i.e., trait
level), their responses capture more dispositional experiences (Robinson & Clore, 2002). These
dispositional experiences are not simple aggregates of state experiences; Instead, they also
capture more general beliefs, attitudes, and judgment styles. By contrast, when people report on
their momentary (i.e., state level) experiences, they are more likely to rely on experiential
knowledge (e.g., what they are currently doing, feeling). Consistent with this view, past research
has generally found that trait-level measures often do not map on as strongly as one might expect
to daily life experiences (e.g., Koval et al., 2023).
Even when focusing on state-level measures, between-person associations do not always
mirror within-person associations (Fisher et al., 2018). Indeed, the limited research on within-
person associations among well-being components has found that these associations do not
always map onto between-person associations among the same well-being components. For
example, in the short-term, high levels of state positive affect typically co-occur with low levels
of state negative affect; however, at the trait-level, positive affect and negative affect tend to be
less strongly correlated (Brose et al., 2020; Brose et al., 2015; Diener & Emmons, 1984; Lucas et
al., 1996; Rush & Hofer, 2014). More research is needed to compare between- and within-person
interrelations among a broader range of well-being components. Most of the limited research
conducted at the within-person level has assessed only two or three components of well-being at
a time (e.g., Diener & Emmons, 1984; Hill, Klaiber, et al., 2021; Neubauer, Scott, et al., 2021;
Rush & Hofer, 2014), and this work has highlighted how within-person associations often differ
from those at the between-person level. In sum, though research is limited, there is initial
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 8
evidence to suggest that the interrelations among well-being components could differ at the
between-person trait-level, between-person state-level, and within-person state-level.
Additionally, the research to this point would suggest that these patterns likely differ from the
theoretical divisions put forth in past conceptualizations of well-being, like subjective and
euidaimonic well-being.
When considering within-person associations among well-being components, another key
open question is whether one pattern of associations holds true for most people, or if people
differ from one another in how their well-being experiences are related. In other words,
assocations among well-being components may be idiographic in nature, meaning that different
well-being components are not associated in the same ways for all individuals. For example,
some research finds that people differ in the extent to which their state-level life satisfaction is
related to their state-level positive and negative affect (Willroth et al., 2020; Willroth et al.,
2021). Moreover, longitudinal work has highlighted that there are individual differences in the
extent to which life satisfaction and psychological well-being covary across time (Cowan, 2019).
In sum, although well-being research has begun to recognize many elements in broader
conceptualizations of well-being, empirical research is needed to evaluate how these diverse
well-being experiences co-occur between- and within-individuals, and whether the nature of
these within-person associations differ across people.
Big Five Personality Domains and Well-being
To further complicate the already challenging endeavor of understanding how well-being
functions between and within indiviudals, it is also important to consider the role of personality
in the potential formation, promotion, and experience of well-being. Personality traits can be
broadly defined as consistency in thoughts, feelings, and behaviors across similar situations over
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 9
time (Roberts, 2009). Inherent in this definition is the idea that there is an affective component to
personality traits, with some Big Five personality traits being more strongly linked to affect than
others (Wilt & Revelle, 2015). Accordingly, extraversion and neuroticism have been consistently
tied to the affective components of subjective well-being (Costa & McCrae, 1980; Rusting &
Larsen, 1997; Watson & Clark, 1997), with higher neuroticism mapping onto higher negative
affect and higher extraversion mapping onto higher positive affect. Other well-being components
have historically been considered subfactors of personality traits. For example, sense of purpose
has been considered a subfactor of conscientiousness (Goldberg, 1999), or the combination of
high levels of extraversion and conscientiousness (Hofstee et al., 1992). Notably, over time,
research has helped distinguish these components of well-being as correlates, not components, of
personality (Anglim et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2018).
In fact, well-being theorists have suggested that Big Five personality traits can be
conceptualized as one of the primary exogenous variables that influence well-being
(Jayawickreme et al., 2012). Meta-analytic work based on cross-sectional data clearly shows that
personality traits, especially neuroticism, extraversion, and conscientiousness, are tied to various
components of both subjective and psychological well-being (Anglim et al., 2020), though the
processes behind these associations are not entirely clear. Generally, people who are higher on
extraversion and lower on neuroticism at the trait-level are also more satisfied with their lives,
more purposeful, report experiencing more positive emotions and fewer negative emotions, have
better social well-being, and have higher self-esteem at the trait-level (Anglim et al., 2020; Hill
et al., 2012; Joshanloo, 2022; Sun et al., 2018; Watson et al., 2002). These well-being
components are also typically tied to higher agreeableness and conscientiousness, and, to a lesser
extent, openness to experience. Meanwhile, higher psychological richness is associated with
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 10
higher levels of openness to experience, and, to a lesser extent, higher levels of extraversion and
lower levels of neuroticism (Oishi & Westgate, 2022). However, though it is often assumed that
the Big Five traits lead to differences in experiences of well-being (e.g., Jayawickreme et al.,
2012), it is relatively unclear whether these assumptions play out at the state-level. Stated
differently, work is still needed to better understand the extent to which changes in the Big Five
states precede fluctuations in well-being, and how consistent these findings are across
individuals.
The extent to which these between-person, trait-level findings replicate at the within-
person state-level is limited. For example, in moments of high state-level neuroticism, do people
feel less satisfied with their lives, less purposeful, experience fewer positive emotions, more
negative emotions, lower social well-being, and lower self-esteem? Big Five personality states
and well-being states have both been shown to vary within individuals across time (Pfund et al.,
2022; Ringwald et al., 2022; Scott et al., 2020), but the relations between fluctuations in
personality states and fluctuations in well-being states is unclear. The limited prior research that
has addressed this question has produced mixed results. For some personality domain-well-being
pairings, within-person associations among state measures differed from patterns observed
previously in between-person asociations among trait measures. Though higher trait-level
conscientiousness is typically associated with greater trait-level positive affect and less negative
affect at the between-person level (Anglim et al., 2020), state-level conscientiousness was
generally not associated with state-level affect across studies (Ringwald et al., 2022). For other
personality domain-well-being pairings, within-person associations aligned with what has been
observed at the between-person level. For example, higher state-level extraversion and lower
state-level neuroticism were generally associated with higher state-level positive affect and lower
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 11
state-level negative affect.
Finally, beyond nomothetic state-level associations being distinct from nomothetic trait-
level associations, personality states and well-being states may be associated in different ways
for different people (i.e., idiographic associations). Consistent with this idea, prior research has
found that acting extraverted may promote positive affect in the short-term, but these state-level
peaks in extraversion are only associated with higher positive affect for some people (Jacques-
Hamilton, Sun, & Smillie, 2019). One potential explanation for different patterns of within-
person associations across people is individual differences in motives and values. The cybernetic
value fulfillment theory suggests that personality traits alone do not capture the why behind
pursuits of well-being (DeYoung & Tiberius, 2022). Instead, this theory suggests that
individuals’ values could supersede their natural personality trait tendencies in the promotion, or
circumvention, of well-being. In other words, people with the same levels of a given trait may
have different values or motives in a given moment, leading to differences in the extent to which
a short-term state expression of a personality trait relates to their well-being. However, while
theoretical efforts may explain mechanistic possibilities behind the unique relationships between
personality domains and well-being between people, empirical work has yet to establish whether
these idiographic interrelations exist.
To this point, the associations between personality states and well-being states remain unclear.
State-level research on personality and well-being has almost exclusively focused on affect,
highlighting the gap in how personality states might connect to other components of well-being,
such as sense of purpose or psychological richness. Furthermore, the limited research to this
point has been conducted in daily diary samples (e.g., Ringwald et al., 2023), or on a narrower
conception of well-being (Kuper et al. 2022), limiting our understanding of in the moment
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 12
associations between the state-level associations for the Big Five personality domains and a
variety of well-being components. Finally, the literature has often focused on how the Big Five
may lead to differences in well-being, rather than the reverse. However, it could be the case that
changes in well-being states may precede changes in personality states. For example, someone
who is feeling more purposeful in a given moment may engage in more responsible behaviors
that align with their long-term goal pursuit in the next moment, highlighting how well-being
could also lead to personality state changes. More fine-grained momentary assessments would
allow for both the evaluation of how personality and well-being states co-occur, as well as
further exploration into whether personality states in one moment influence later well-being
states, and whether patterns of within-person associations differ between people.
The Current Study
The proposed research will investigate how conceptually distinct well-being components
are related to one another at the trait- and state-levels and between- and within-persons. We will
address these questions using nomothetic and idiographic approaches to understand whether the
relationships among well-being components are consistent across individuals, or if they are
person-specific. Finally, to understand the role that personality plays in the formation and
promotion of well-being, we will test these same questions regarding associations between well-
being components and Big Five personality traits and states. First, participants will complete trait
measures of different well-being components, as well as Big Five personality traits. Then, they
will complete an intensive experience sampling protocol, in which they will report state
experiences of each well-being component and personality state.
Aim 1 focuses on interrelations among conceptually distinct well-being components. In
Aim 1a, we will examine between-person correlations among the trait measures of well-being as
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 13
well as between- and within-person correlations among the state measures of well-being. This
will produce three correlation matrices that map onto: the between-person, trait-level
associations; the nomothetic, between-person, state-level associations; and the nomothetic,
well-being components are more strongly associated with each other than others (e.g., positive
affect and life satisfaction versus positive affect and psychological richness), and whether the
magnitude of these associations differs at the trait versus state and between versus within-person
levels.
For Aim 1b, we will employ group iterative multiple model estimation (GIMME) (Gates
& Molenaar, 2012; Wright et al., 2019) to the experience sampling data to further investigate the
nomothetic and idiographic state-level associations among well-being components. GIMME
identifies for whom a relationship exists, and can be used to compute the average direction and
magnitude of that relationship, and the amount of variability in that relationship across people.
For example, this approach will allow us to test for how many people sense of purpose and
positive affect are associated at the momentary level (i.e., N individuals out of 400), the average
direction and magnitude of that association (i.e., M of the effect size), and the amount of
variability in the magnitude of that association (i.e., SD of the effect size). Specifically, this
approach will allow us to answer the questions: to what extent do different components of well-
being covary within individuals (i.e., concurrent associations)?; to what extent do different
components of well-being predict each other at later times (i.e., cross-lagged associations)?;
which of these pathways are consistent across people (i.e., nomothetic), and which of these
pathways vary across people (i.e., idiographic)? We will interpret patterns in line with competing
theoretical models of well-being (e.g., are life satisfaction, positive affect, and negative affect
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 14
more strongly tied together as subjective well-being would suggest?). We will also explore
whether certain well-being components are more salient predictors of changes in well-being than
others (e.g., are changes in sense of purpose more likely to precede changes in other well-being
components relative to psychological richness?).
Aim 2 will follow the same pattern as Aim 1 but will also include the Big Five
personality domains. In Aim 2a, we will examine between-person correlations among trait
measures of well-being and trait meausures of the Big Five as well between- and within-person
correlations among state measures of well-being and state measures of the Big Five. This will
produce the correlation matrices that map onto: the between-person trait-level; the nomothetic,
between-person, state-level; and the nomothetic, within-person, state-level associations. This
sub-aim will help clarify whether some Big Five personality domains and well-being
components are more strongly associated with each other than others (e.g., positive affect and
extraversion versus positive affect and openness), and whether the magnitude of these
associations differs at the trait versus state and between- versus within-person levels.
Additionally, this sub-aim will provide evidence on whether Big Five domains and well-being
components are as statistically distinct as theory would suggest (i.e., are correlations among
well-being components stronger than correlations between well-being components and
personality domains?).
Finally, in Aim 2b, we will investigate nomothetic and idiographic associations between
personality states and well-being states. Specifically, to what extent do momentary well-being
states and personality states covary (i.e., concurrent associations)?; to what extent do momentary
well-being states and personality states predict each other at later times (i.e., cross-lagged
associations)?; and which of these pathways are consistent across people (i.e., nomothetic), and
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 15
which of these pathways vary across people (i.e., idiographic)? We will be able to explore
whether certain Big Five states are more salient predictors of changes in well-being than others
(e.g., are changes in extraversion more likely to precede changes in positive affect than changes
in openness?). Additionally, we will be able to explore whether changes in well-being are also
predictors of changes in the Big Five states (e.g., do changes in sense of purpose precede
changes in openness?). We will ALSO be able to evaluate the extent to which these patterns are
consistent across individuals, or whether the processes tying changes in well-being components
and the Big Five domains are idiosyncratic in nature. If the latter, more personalized
interventions would be necessary to promote change within people in a way that corresponds to
their idiosyncratic processes (Piccirillo & Rodebaugh, 2019).
We selected a broad range of well-being components to map onto diverse
conceptualizations of well-being (e.g., see Disabato et al., 2019; Willroth, 2023). Well-being
components were selected based on what could be assessed at both the trait and state levels:
positive and negative affect (e.g., Rush & Hofer, 2014), life satisfaction (e.g., Willroth et al.,
2020), sense of purpose (e.g., Pfund et al., 2022), psychological richness (e.g., Oishi et al., 2021),
social connectedness (e.g., Lok & Dun, 2022), and self-esteem (e.g., Crowe et al., 2019). By
understanding how these conceptually distinct aspects of well-being connect, the role personality
domains play in potentially promoting them, and how consistent these patterns are across people,
we will have a better scientific foundation to enhance people’s experiences of well-being.
Methods
Transparency and Openness
This is a registered report. Thus, the study design, research questions, and analytic plan
were peer-reviewed and pre-registered prior to data collection. De-identified data and analysis
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 16
scripts will be shared publicly on the Open Science Framework (OSF). All items, prompts, and
survey scales for the momentary surveys and the baseline measures relevant to the current study
report how we determined our sample size, all data exclusions, and all measures in the study, and
we will follow Journal Article Reporting Style (JARS) (Kazak, 2018). There will be no
manipulations. The study protocol will be approved by [redacted] IRB (# [redacted]) before data
collection begins. If the protocol is updated during the revision process, necessary updates will
be made to the protocol submission and will be reevaluated by the IRB prior to the onset of data
collection.
Participants
We will recruit and enroll a community sample of adults living in the Greater St. Louis,
MO area. Participants will be recruited through community flyering and Washington
University’s participant registries. To be included in the sample, participants must be at least 18
years old, live in the Greater St. Louis area, be able to respond to surveys in English, have a
smartphone, and consent to receiving links to the momentary surveys via text message. We plan
to enroll a sample that reflects the racial and ethnic diversity of St. Louis. The Greater St. Louis
Metropolitan area is 77% White, 18% Black/African American, 5% other races, and 3%
Hispanic or Latino (U.S. Census Bureau, 2022). The city itself is 46% White, 45% Black/African
American, 9% other races, and 4% Hispanic or Latino (U.S. Census Bureau, 2022). We will
leverage our proximity to the city to oversample from the largest minoritized racial group in the
Greater St. Louis area (i.e., Black/African Americans), such that the final sample will be between
40-65% White, 25-50% Black/African American, 0-15% other races. We will also aim to recruit
relatively equal numbers of younger adults (i.e., 18-40 years old) and midlife to older adults (i.e.,
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 17
40 years and older) and relatively equal numbers of men and women, as well as individuals who
identify as non-binary.
Our planned sample size of N = 400 participants will provide 98% statistical power to
detect between-person correlations of r = .20. This effect size is equivalent to the average effect
size in psychological research (Funder & Ozer, 2019). It is reasonable to assume that correlations
among different well-being components and between well-being and personality will be larger
than this average effect size, given the high degree of theoretical and conceptual overlap between
these constructs. At the within-person level, the planned sample size of k = 126 measurement
occasions and N = 400 participants exceeds both the number of measurement occasions and the
number of participants used in prior psychological research using GIMME (e.g., Beck &
Jackson, 2022; Wright et al., 2019), as well as recent recommendations to include at least 100
measurement occasions to detect effect sizes between .20 to .40 using GIMME (Nestler &
Humberg, 2021).
To be included in the current analyses, participants must have passed the baseline
attention checks. Past measurement work has recommended that, for every 50-100 items in a
survey, there are up to three bogus item attention checks (Meade & Craig, 2012). Thus, every 75
items in our baseline survey, we will include an item such as “Please select strongly disagree,” to
check whether participants are carefully reading the items. Participants who fail multiple
attention checks will be excluded from analyses and will not be invited to complete the
experience sampling protocol. Additionally, in the well-being block of each momentary survey,
we will include one attention check item that states e.g., “Please select slightly agree to this
item.” All items within a given block are randomized, and the blocks themselves are randomized,
so this item will generally be in a new location each survey to minimize practice effects and
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 18
ensure we are accurately capturing attentive responding. If an individual does not pass the
attention check at a given survey, we will exclude that specific survey. Moreover, prior research
recommends at least 60 measurement occasions per person for GIMME (Lane et al., 2019;
Wright et al., 2019); as such, participants will have to complete at least 60 of the 126
measurement occasions to be included in the current analyses.
Finally, because within-person variability is necessary for GIMME to estimate
covariances among variables, participants with no variance on a given measure must be excluded
in order to conduct the proposed models. However, if this approach ends up leading to more than
10% of the sample being excluded, to aid model convergence, we will add random jitter to
variables that had no variance for individual participants by replacing two random values with
two randomly chosen values out of the possible values on the response scale (e.g., a value from
1-7). This approach will allow us to retain more participants while adding minimal variance so as
not to produce spurious associations.
Procedure
Participants will attend an orientation led by a paid research assistant. Participants can
choose to complete the orientation session in-person or over Zoom, to increase access to
participants who do not have access to Zoom or who cannot to travel to the university. During
this orientation session, participants will complete trait-level surveys of well-being and
personality (e.g., Satisfaction with Life Scale, Diener et al., 1985) and will receive instructions
for the experience sampling protocol. Participants will also select the 12-hour period in which
they would like to receive experience sampling surveys (e.g., 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. each day). To
ensure that participants understand the experience sampling items, the research assistant will
provide each participant with an information sheet that includes definitions of the terms of
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 19
interest from the experience sampling surveys. The research assistant will discuss this
information sheet with participants, answer any questions they may have, and the participants
will be able to take home these sheets for reference throughout the experience sampling period.
For all the state well-being and personality items, participants will be instructed to respond based
on their current thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. For more global items such as “I am satisfied
with my life,” participants will be instructed to respond based on their current satisfaction with
their life as a whole.
The day after the orientation session, participants will begin receiving experience
sampling surveys. Surveys will be administed via Qualtrics. Qualtrics links will be texted to
participants via SMS using Survey Signal. We chose to use Qualtrics and SMS so that
participants did not have to download, install, or learn a specialized experience sampling
application, increasing the accessibility of the study to participants who may be less comfortable
with technology. Participants will receive surveys nine times per day during their personally
selected 12-hour time window for 14 consecutive days (126 total surveys per participant).
Experience sampling surveys will be texted on a fixed schedule during this 12-hour window
(every 90 minutes), as GIMME requires equal spacing between measurement occasions.
Participants will fill out the same momentary survey nine times a day. Participants will have a 30
minute window after receiving a text with the survey link to be able to complete the survey.
Participants will receive a reminder text to fill out the survey 10 minutes prior to the survey
window closing to reduce the likelihood that they forget to complete a survey or to remind them
in the case that they were previously unable to complete it during the initial text.
Compensation was calculated based on the time it would take to participate in the current
study. Participants will receive $25 USD for completing the baseline survey given the time it will
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 20
take to train participants as well as to account for travel costs for those selecting to complete this
session on campus. Additionally, for each momentary survey a participant fills out, they will
receive $1 USD in compensation. To encourage participants to complete the majority of surveys
in a given day, participants will receive bonuses of $5 USD for each day that they complete at
least seven of the nine momentary surveys. Thus, participants can receive up to $221 USD if
they complete the baseline survey and all momentary surveys.
Finally, to encourage complete cases within a survey, if a participant does not respond to
a question, they will be notified that their response is missing prior to moving to the next section
of the survey. After acknowledging this skipped item, they will be able to progress to the next
block of the survey without responding if they choose to do so. A paid research assistant will be
checking on responses for participants each day. If it is noticed that the same item is consistently
skipped (e.g., “This moment feels psychologically rich”), the research assistant will follow up
with the participant to ensure that they did not skip this item due to not understanding its
meaning.
Measures
This study was designed primarily to address the current research questions. However,
additional measures were included to address research questions outside of the scope of the
project described here. The measures used in the current project are described below. The
baseline survey items relevant to the current research questions as well as the complete list of
items in the momentary and daily surveys can be found on OSF:
The items in each experience sampling survey will be identical, with the exception of the
first and last survey of each day. For the first survey of each day, participants will answer
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 21
additional questions about sleep after they have completed the standard survey items. For the last
survey of each day, participants will answer additional questions about their day as a whole after
they have completed the standard survey items. These additional items are outside the scope of
the present research, and have been included for use in other research projects. They will be
placed after the standard survey items to minimize the possibility that their inclusion will affect
responses to earlier items.
Well-being and personality states will be separated into different blocks based on
measurement scale used for responses. Within a given block, items will be randomized.
Furthermore, block order will be randomized. The exception to this randomization is for the first
and final surveys of the day, where the items that do not pertain to the current study will always
be asked in the final block. The randomization of items and blocks at the survey level can help
combat initial elevation bias (i.e., higher average scores during initial assessments) that often
occurs in response to the first item of a survey (Arslan et al., 2021). In each survey, participants
will report on their current levels of positive affect, negative affect, life satisfaction, sense of
purpose, psychological richness, social connectedness, self-esteem, and the Big Five personality
states. Two items will be used to assess positive affect and two items will be used to assess
negative affect. All other constructs will be assessed using three items. A momentary average
will be taken of the individual items for each construct. To avoid potential valence-based method
effects for the well-being items, all well-being constructs will use true-keyed items that have
been previously used to assess a given construct. To assess internal consistency at the between-
and within-person level, omega coefficients will be calculated. If the within-person omega for a
given construct is less than .30, the item with the weakest association with the other items will be
dropped. If the omega coefficient remains below .30, that construct will be dropped from the
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 22
analyses.
For trait-level measures, we will use the response scale that corresponds to the published
measure. For each state-level measure, participants will report how well each item describes their
current experience. For greater consistency across measures, all response options for the state
measures will be on a 7-point scale. Scale anchors will differ as necessary for consistency with
shows the state personality items and their response scales.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 23
Prompt, Items, and Unipolar Response Scale for Well-being Components.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 24
Prompt, Items, and Bipolar Response Scale for Big Five Personality States.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 25
Affect. At the trait level, participants will respond to the 60-item Positive and Negative
Affect Schedule - Exanded (Watson & Clark, 1994). Participants will report how frequently they
have experienced different kinds of emotions over the past few weeks on a 5-point Likert scale
of 1 (very slightly or not at all) to 5 (extremely). Example emotion items include sad, calm,
afraid, and happy. A separate average will be made for positive and negative affect, with higher
scores representing more frequent experiences of that type of affect.
At the state level, participants will respond to two positive affect items and two negative
affect items (Russell, 2003; Watson & Clark, 1994). Participants will respond to the following
prompt: “Please rate how well each of these statements describes your currently on a scale of 1
(strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).” Positive affect will be assed with “I feel pleasant” and
“I feel positively.” Negative affect will be assessed with “I feel unpleasant” and “I feel
negatively.” Higher scores on a given item represent higher levels of that type of momentary
affect.
Life Satisfaction. At the trait level, participants will respond to the five-item Satisfaction
with Life Scale (Diener et al., 1985). Participants will respond with their levels of agreement to
items like “In most ways, my life is close to my ideal,” and “The conditions of my life are
excellent” on a 7-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Items will be
averaged together, and higher scores will represent greater trait-level life satisfaction.
At the state level, life satisfaction will be assessed using three items that have previously
been used in daily diary assessments (Willroth et al., 2020). Participants will respond to the
prompt of, “Please rate how well each of these statements describes your currently on a scale of
1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).” Life satisfaction will be assessed using three items:
“I am satisfied with my life,” “In most ways, my life is close to ideal,” and “The conditions of
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 26
my life are excellent.” Higher scores on all items represents greater momentary life satisfaction.
Sense of Purpose. At the trait level, participants will respond to the seven-item Purpose
in Life subscale from the Psychological Well-being (Ryff, 1989). Participants will respond with
their levels of agreement to items like “I have a sense of direction and purpose in life” and “My
daily activities seem trivial and unimportant to me” (reverse scored) on a 7-point Likert scale
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Reverse-keyed items will be reverse scored, then
all items will be averaged together, so higher scores will represent higher trait-level sense of
purpose.
At the state level, sense of purpose will be assessed using three items that have previously
been used in daily and weekly assessments (Hill et al., 2021; Lohani et al., 2022; Pfund et al.,
2022; Pfund et al., 2024). Participants will respond to the prompt of, “Please rate how well each
of these statements describes your currently on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree).” Sense of purpose will be assessed using three items: “I feel purposeful,” “I am making
progress toward my life goals,” and “I am engaged in something worthwhile.” Higher scores on
all items represents feeling a higher momentary sense of purpose.
Psychological Richness. At the initial orientation for the study, participants will be
trained on what psychological richness means based on prompts used in previous research: “We
define a psychologically rich life as a life characterized by variety, depth, and interest. A life
could be psychologically rich if a person experiences a variety of interesting things, feels and
appreciates a variety of deep emotions via first-hand experiences or vicarious experiences such
as novels, films, and sports on TV,” (Oishi et al., 2021, p. 756). Then, participants will respond
to the 12-item Psychologically Rich Life Questionnaire (Oishi et al., 2019). Participants will
respond with their levels of agreement to items like “My life has been psychologically rich” and
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 27
“I often feel bored with my life” (reverse scored) on a 7-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Reverse-keyed items will be reverse scored, then all items will be
averaged together, so higher scores will represent higher levels of psychological richness.
At the state level, three items were used to assess psychological richness: “This moment
feels psychologically rich” (Oishi et al., 2021), “I feel interested” (S. Oishi, personal
communication, March 15, 2023), and “This moment is perspective-changing,” (adapted from
Oishi et al., 2019). Participants will respond to the prompt of, “Please rate how well each of
these statemes describes your currently,” on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
Higher scores on all items represents higher levels of momentary psychological richness.
Social Connectedness. At the trait level, participants will respond to the 20-item Social
Connectedness Scale-Revised (Lee et al., 2001). Participants will respond with their levels of
agreement to items like “I feel close to people” and “I am unable to connect with other people”
(reverse-scored) on a 6-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly agree).
Reverse-keyed items will be reverse scored, then all items will be averaged together, so higher
scores will represent better social connectedness.
At the state level, social connectedness will be assessed using three items from the UBC
State Social Connection Scale (Lok & Dun, 2022). Participants will respond to the prompt of,
“Please rate how well each of these statements describes your currently on a scale of 1 (strongly
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).” Social connectedness be assessed using three items: “I feel close
to people,” “I feel a sense of belongingness,” and “I feel socially connected.” Higher scores on
all items represents better momentary social connectedness.
Self-Esteem. At the trait level, participants will respond to the 10-item Rosenberg Self-
Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965). Participants will respond with their levels of agreement to
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 28
items like “On the whole, I am satisfied with myself” and “At time, I think I am no good at all”
(reverse scored) on a 4-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree).
Reverse-keyed items will be reverse scored, then all items will be averaged together, so higher
scores will represent higher self-esteem.
At the state level, self-esteem will be assessed using three items that have previously
been used in ecological momentary assessments (Crowe et al., 2019; Robins et al., 2001;
Thewissen et al., 2008). Participants will respond to the prompt of, “Please rate how well each of
these statements describes your currently on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree).” Self-esteem will be assessed using three items: “I like myself,” “I am a good person,”
and “I have high self-esteem.” Higher scores on all items represents higher momentary self-
esteem.
Big Five personality. At the trait level, participants will respond to the 60-item Big Five
Inventory-2 (BFI-2) (Soto & John, 2017). Participants will respond with their levels of
agreement to 12 items per trait on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (disagree strongy) to 5 (agree
strongly). Example items for extraversion are “is outgoing, sociable” and “rarely feels excited or
eager,” (reverse scored). Example items for neuroticism are “is moody, has up and down mood
swings” and “is relaxed, handles stress well,” (reverse scored). Example items for openness are
“is outgoing, sociable” and “has an assertive personality,” (reverse scored). Example items for
conscientiousness are “is fascinated by art, music, or literature” and “avoids intellectual,
philosophical discussions,” (reverse scored). Example items for agreeableness are “is
compassionate, has a soft heart” and “tends to find fault with others,” (reverse scored). Reverse-
keyed items will be reverse scored, then all items for a given trait will be averaged together, so
higher scores will represent higher scores on a extraversion, neuroticism, etc.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 29
At the state level, the Big Five personality states will be assessed based on a validated
approach for intensive longitudinal designs (Fleeson, 2002; Fleeson & Law, 2015; Ringwald et
al., 2022). Three items were selected from these past measures, with the goal of representing
each of the three facets for a given trait in the BFI-2 (Soto & John, 2017) at the state-level. Based
on Funder and Ozer’s (2019) effect size standards for psychological sciences, Big Five
personality trait measures have illustrated strong to very strong correlations with average levels
of their respective personality state items (Ringwald et al., 2022). Additionally, approximately
33-43% of the variability in these personality states occurred at the within-person level in this
previous work.
In the current study, item language will be adapted from “In the past 24 hours, how well
does [this word] describe you?” to “In this moment, how well does this currently describe you?”.
Participants will respond to a 7-point bipolar scale: for extraversion, these poles will be lethargic
versus energetic (i.e., energy level), talkative versus silent (i.e., sociability), and unassertive
versus assertive (i.e., assertiveness); for neuroticism, these poles will be insecure versus secure
(i.e., depression), relaxed versus tense (i.e., anxiety), and nervous versus at ease (i.e., emotional
volatility); for agreeableness, these poles will be stingy versus generous (i.e., compassion),
distrustful versus trustful (i.e., trust), and rude versus polite (i.e., respectfulness); for
conscientiousness, these poles will be careless versus thorough (i.e., organized), hardworking
versus lazy (i.e., productiveness), and inefficient versus efficient (i.e., responsibility); for
openness, these poles will be unimaginative versus imaginative (i.e., creative imagination),
uninquisitive versus inquisitive (i.e., intellectual curiosity), and conventional versus creative (i.e.,
aesthetic sensitivity). Items will be reverse scored when necessary to ensure higher scores
represent higher state-levels of that personality domain.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 30
Analytic Plan
All data wrangling and analyses will be conducted in R using the IDE RStudio (R Core
Team, 2022; Rstudio Team, 2022). 95% Confidence Intervals will be reported alongside
estimates as relevant. When discussing effect sizes, we will call upon the standardized effect size
criteria set forth by Funder and Ozer (2019) based on effect size norms in psychological
sciences.
Preliminary Analyses
Before testing our study aims, we will calculate descriptive statistics for each trait (i.e.,
Cronbach’s alpha and omega reliabilities, M, SD, range) and state measure (i.e., between- and
within-person omega reliabilities, individual and group Ms, individual and group SDs, range).
For each state measure, we will also compute intraclass correlation coefficients based on the
variance decomposition using intercept only multilevel models using the lme4 package (Bates et
al., 2015). Assessment will be the Level 1 variable nested within the Level 2 variable of person
with no predictors and a random intercept. This step will allow us to understand the extent to
which each of these variables vary within individuals, and whether some of these variables are
more or less stable across assessments.
Aim 1a
To address Aim 1a, we will calculate between-person correlations among the trait-
measures of well-being, and we will compute the between- and within-person correlations
among the state-measures of well-being using the statsBy function from the psych package
(Revelle, 2022). To be included in the calculation of the correlations, participants must meet the
same inclusion criteria as the GIMME analyses (i.e., 60+ measurement occasions, at least some
variability in state-level responses on a given measure) to ensure the same people are included in
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 31
the same analyses2. For the state measures, between-person correlations are calculated based on
participants’ average scores across assessments. Then, within-person correlations are computed
based on the average association across participants for deviations from one’s personal mean in a
given variable relative to the deviation from their personal mean in the other variable. These
results will provide the nomothetic zero-order correlations among concurrent measures of well-
being. The resulting correlation matrix will include 21 total correlations among 7 well-being
constructs. We will use Fisher r-to-z transformations to statistically compare the size of
correlations.
We will compute (a) the average strength of all 21 trait-level correlations, and compare it
to (b) the average strength of all 21 between-person state-level correlations, and to (c) the
average strength of all 21 within-person state level correlations. This will enable us to answer
questions such as: Are well-being components more strongly related at the between-person level
or at the within-person level? Finally, we will compare the strength of the 21 correlations among
different well-being components. This will allow us to answer questions such as: Is positive
affect more strongly related to other components of subjective well-being (i.e., negative affect,
life satisfaction) relative to other types of well-being (i.e., sense of purpose, psychological
richness, social connectedness, self-esteem)?
Our focus will be on evaluating and comparing effect sizes rather than on statistical
significance; however, we will use an alpha level of .05 (i.e., non-overlapping 95% confidence
intervals) to determine whether two effect sizes statistically differ from one another. Due to the
large number of correlations that we will calculate, we will report whether correlations remain
2 As a sensitivity analysis, we will also calculate all of the aforementioned correlations with the entire sample to
provide context for how participants who do not meet the inclusion criteria for GIMME influence the nature of the
magnitude and/or direction of the nomothetic associations for the well-being components at the between-person trait
level, between-person average state level, and within-person state-level.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 32
statistically significant when applying False Discovery Rate correction.
Aim 1b
To address Aim 1b, we will conduct a series of group iterative multiple model estimation
(GIMME) using the the gimmeSEM function in the gimme package (Lane, Gates, & Molenaar).
This analytic approach will aid in the evaluation of for whom, how, and to what extent various
well-being components are associated with each other concurrently and over time. In the first set
of GIMME models, state-level positive affect, negative affect, life satisfaction, sense of purpose,
psychological richness, social connectedness, and self-esteem will be included. We will examine
all possible autoregressive, concurrent, and cross-lagged associations among all well-being
components at both the nomothetic and idiographic levels.
Concurrent associations represent the extent to which a variable at one time point is
associated with a different variable at that same time point. In the current models, we will
estimate the concurrent associations using undirected contemporaneous paths based on the
assumption that experiences of state-level well-being components may have shared influence.
Undirected cotemporaneous paths will allow us to better model the potential shared influence of
external factors on the well-being components (Luo et al., 2023). Autoregressive associations
represent the extent to which a variable at one time point predicts itself at the next timepoint.
Accounting for autoregressive pathways ensures that the cross-lagged effects are not simply
masked estimates explained by a variable’s relationship with itself. Cross-lagged effects
represent the extent to which a variable at one time point predicts a different variable at the next
time point. To detrend potential mean-level changes in a given construct across the study that
could be due to method effects, time will be included as an exogenous variable based on survey
number. A missing time point will be artificially added after the final scheduled survey of the
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 33
day to ensure that the models do not estimate autoregressive and cross-lagged effects extending
from the final survey of one day to the first survey of the next day.
At the nomothetic level, GIMME will identify pairs of variables for which there is a
statistically significant within-person relationship for 75% or more of the sample based on
previously established standards (Wright et al., 2019). For example, if sense of purpose is
significantly associated with positive affect for 75% of individuals or more, we will conclude
that sense of purpose and positive affect are concurrently related to one another at the within-
person level. This process will also be used to establish cross-lagged effects. As a sensivity
analysis, these models will also be conducted using a 51% cutoff to evaluate how these
nomothetic pathways change when using a cutoff that represents the literal majority rather than
this previously established cutoff.
Finally, to understand the consistency of these pathways (i.e., idiographic level), we will
compile the output provided for each individual through the GIMME analyses to summarize (a)
the total number of people who have a significant relationship between each pair of variables, (b)
the average of the raw and absolute values of the significant effects for the relationship between
each pair of variables, and (c) the variability in the effects for a given relationship. We will
calculate these summary statistics for the concurrent, autoregressive, and cross-lagged effects.
Additionally, to evaluate how the magnitude of these concurrent effects compare to the
nomothetic within-person correlations after accounting for the autoregressive effects, we will
compare the average standardized estimates obtained from GIMME to the zero-order within-
person correlations. Lastly, as an exploratory analysis, we will use S-GIMME (Lane et al., 2019)
to identify potential subgroups of the estimated well-being systems.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 34
systems. The presence of a line represents a significant relationship between the given constucts
for that individual; the color of the line represents the direction of the effect (lighter blue =
positive, darker red = negative); the type of line represents the time-lag of the effect (solid =
concurrent, dashed = prospective). Magnitudes are represented by line thickness; all lines for
these hypothetical systems were kept consistent for simplicity. Finally, these figures serve as an
illustration of different processes that could play out, not a formal hypothesis of what could be
expected.
well-being components both concurrently and prospectively. For this individual, all well-being
components predict themselves at the next timepoint, higher levels of one well-being component
are associated with higher levels of all other well-being components concurrently, and higher
levels of one well-being component predicts higher levels of all other well-being compoments at
interrelationships among all well-being components only concurrently, but not prospectively. For
this individual, higher levels of one well-being component is associated with higher levels on all
does not have any associations among well-being components concurrently or prospectively,
only autoregressively. For this individual, high levels of any well-being component are not
associated with higher levels on any of the other components at a given moment or in the future.
Only levels of a given variable at one time point predict levels of that same variable at the next
positive affect) in their well-being system, where high levels of positive affect are associated
with higher levels of all other well-being constructs at a given moment and in the future, but high
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 35
levels on any of the other well-being components are not associated with each other concurrently
or prospectively.
Well-being Systems for Four Hypothetical Individuals
Note. Line presence represents a significant relationship between constucts (i.e., no line = no significant
association). Line color represents the direction of the effect (lighter blue = positive, darker red =
negative). Line type represents the time-lag of the effect (solid = concurrent, dashed = prospective, curved
= autoregressive).
different values for each variable pairing. First, we will calculate the number of participants who
have a significant association between the two variables. This number will provide evidence for
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 36
how common it is for there to be a contemporaneous and cross-lagged effect across all variable
pairings. Second, we will calculate a mean for a given pathway for all individuals for whom the
pathway was statistically significant. This value will clarify the average magnitude for the
contemporaneous and cross-lagged effects for each of the variable pairings. Third, we will
calculate a standard deviation for a given pathway for all individuals for whom a pathway was
statistically significant. This value will indicate the amount of variability in the magnitudes and
directions of these associations across people. This final step will tell us, for example, whether
the association between sense of purpose and positive affect is generally consistent or fairly
distinct across people. We will interpret nomothetic and idiographic results with respect to
theoretical models of well-being.
Aim 2a
To address Aim 2a, we will follow the same process as in Aim 1a but we will include the
Big Five personality domains. We will calculate between-person correlations among the trait-
measures, and we will compute the between- and within-person correlations among the state-
measures. These results will provide the nomothetic zero-order correlations among concurrent
measures of well-being and personality. The resulting correlation matrices will include 66 total
correlations among 7 well-being constructs and 5 personality constructs. We will use Fisher r-to-
z transformations to statistically compare the size of correlations.
First, we will compute (a) the average strength of all 66 trait-level correlations, and
compare it to (b) the average strength of all 66 between-person state-level correlations, and to (c)
the average strength of all 66 within-person state level correlations. This will enable us to answer
questions such as: Are the Big Five personality states and well-being components more strongly
related at the between-person level or at the within-person level? Are traits such as extraversion
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 37
and neuroticism more strongly associated with well-being components than traits like openness
at the between-person and within-person level? Are some personality domains more strongly
associated with some well-being components relative to other well-being components, and do
these patterns differ at the trait versus state-level? For example, we might expect extraversion to
be more strongly related to positive affect compared to other well-being components.
Second, we will also take the average of the vector correlations for each variable at the
between-person trait-level, between-person state-level, and within-person state-level (e.g.,
Ringwald et al., 2022; Rauthmann et al., 2019). This approach will allow us to establish whether
certain well-being components or Big Five domains are simply more strongly associated to other
variables in general and whether these patterns differ at the trait and state and between- and
within-person levels (e.g., neuroticism might have the strongest association across variables at
the between-person trait level, life satisfaction at the between-person state level, and positive
affect at the within-person trait level).
Aim 2b
To address Aim 2b, we will repeat the process described for Aim 1b with the inclusion of
the Big Five personality states. Once again, GIMME will be used to identify pairs of variables
with significant contemporaneous and cross-lagged effects using a 75% cutoff and then a 51%
cutoff as a sensitivity analysis. These additional analyses will allow us to examine (1) how
personality states precede, co-occur with, and potentially follow different experiences of well-
being, and (2) how the contemperanous and cross-lagged effects between the well-being
variables shift when accounting for personality states. As a contingency plan in the case that
GIMME has trouble converging due to the number of variables being estimated relative to the
number of participants and observations, we plan to run the proposed models one at a time for
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 38
each Big Five state with all well-being components.
Implications
The current project will have crucial implications for understanding how conceptually
distinct well-being components are related at the between- and within-person levels, whether
some well-being components are generally more likely to precede or follow others, as well as the
role of personality states in promoting or responding to experiences of well-being. Most research
on the nature of well-being to this point has taken a top-down approach by relying on broader
philosophical notions of the good life, then isolating narrower components that fit into that
predetermined definition of that type of well-being. Instead, the current study combines
nomothetic and idiographic approaches to evaluate well-being elements that have evidenced
short-term fluctuations within individuals. Though the current research focuses on a wide range
of well-being components that have previously been investigated in the literature, we will take a
bottom-up approach to understanding the nature of well-being. In particular, this project will
elucidate whether there is a consistent pattern of associations among well-being components
across people (i.e., nomothetic) or whether the within-person associations among well-being
components differ between people (i.e., idiographic). These findings will build the foundation for
future mechanistic research examining the why behind these processes by answering the question
of whether, when, and for whom.
Aim 1a will provide insight into the nomothetic associations of the well-being
components at the between-person trait-level, between-person state-level, and within-person
state-level. This sub-aim will help clarify whether some well-being components are more
strongly associated with each other than others (e.g., positive affect and life satisfaction versus
positive affect and psychological richness), and whether the magnitude of these associations
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 39
differ at the trait versus state and between-versus within-person levels.
Aim 1b will provide insight into the idiographic concurrent, autoregressive, and cross-
lagged associations of the well-being components at the state-level. Similarly to what is shown in
components, such as whether some well-being components are more likely to be experienced
simultaneously, or whether some well-being components are more likely to occur prior to
changes in other well-being components. For example, it could be the case that positive affect
often co-occurs with other well-being components, but life satisfaction may be more likely to
precede changes in other well-being components.
Aim 2a will provide insight into the nomothetic associations of the well-being
components and Big Five personality domains at the between-person trait-level, between-person
state-level and within-person state-level. This sub-aim will help clarify whether some Big Five
personality domains and well-being components are more strongly associated with each other
than others (e.g., positive affect and extraversion versus positive affect and openness), and
whether the patterns of the magnitude of these associations differ at the trait versus state and
between- versus within-person levels. Additionally, this sub-aim will provide evidence on
whether Big Five domains and well-being components are as statistically distinct as theory
would suggest (i.e., are correlations among well-being components stronger than correlations
between well-being components and personality domains?), as well as whether some of the well-
being and Big Five constructs are more consistently associated with other constructs.
Aim 2b will provide insight into the idiographic concurrent, autoregressive, and cross-
lagged associations of the well-being components and Big Five domains at the state-level.
Researchers often assume that the Big Five traits drive individuals’ experiences of well-being.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 40
GIMME will allow us to explore to what extent the Big Five states precede changes in well-
being states, or whether certain well-being components may actually predict later changes in the
Big Five states, after accounting for their concurrent associations and within-person effects.
Finally, we will be able to see the idiosyncratic nature of these associations by exploring for how
many people these pathways are significant and the average levels and variability in the
magnitude of these findings across individuals.
Beyond the inherent value of well-being, a wide range of well-being components have
been connected to healthier and longer lives (e.g., Diener & Chan, 2011; Pfund & Lewis, 2020;
Ryff & Boylan, 2016). Thus, people often seek higher levels of well-being, and many researchers
are dedicated to helping individuals maintain or develop it. Though there have been calls and
efforts across disciplines to intervene upon well-being more broadly or on various well-being
components more narrowly (Boumparis et al., 2016; Freidman et al., 2019; Hill et al., 2023), to
this point, it has remained unclear the extent to which momentary experiences of different types
of well-being occur together versus separately.
The current study is vital in establishing the extent to which (1) these conceptually
distinct components of well-being are experientially distinct, and (2) how consistent or unique
these relationships are across individuals. Stated differently, these findings will highlight
whether a one-size fits all approach to increasing well-being is likely to be effective—or, in some
cases—potentially ineffective for some individuals. Recent efforts have focused on promoting
sense of purpose in daily life to encourage its long-term development over time (Hill et al.,
2023), in part because higher sense of purpose is tied to more experiences of positive emotion
and fewer experiences of negative emotions (Hill et al., 2018). Moreover, longitudinal research
has found that declines in sense of purpose are more likely to precede declines in life satisfaction
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 41
and positive affect, rather than the other way around (Gundmundsdottir et al., 2023). However,
the extent to which to focusing on a single component of well-being when hoping to improve an
individual’s well-being more broadly would be helpful may be unique to an individual’s own
well-being system.
If someone’s well-being experiences are highly interrelated, intervening on one
component (such as sense of purpose) could change the entire well-being system (e.g., Panels A
components in an individual, then recommending a purpose intervention will not serve their
well-being more broadly. For example, someone’s well-being experiences could fluctuate
relatively independently of one another, so it may take a more multi-pronged intervention to
may have a central node of their well-being system serving as a driving force for changes and
on positive affect for this person could help shift the rest of their well-being aspects, though
intervening on sense of purpose would not.
Finally, with some personality domains being supportive or, at times, detrimental to
individuals’ well-being (Jayawickreme et al., 2012), the current study will aid in determining
whether state-level experiences of a given personality domain also promote or harm various
aspects of well-being in the short-term. Research has highlighted that the Big Five personality
states are not consistently associated within individuals (Beck & Jackson, 2020), and that
experiences of a given state are not reliable predictors of experiences of affect in all people
(Jacques-Hamilton et al., 2019). Furthermore, as more nuanced theoretical efforts in the
personality and well-being literature suggest that the relationship between personality and well-
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 42
being may be overestimated for some (DeYoung & Tiberius, 2022), it is crucial to evaluate
whether these potentially idiographic relationships in well-being extend to associations with
personality states, whether personality is more strongly connected to certain aspects of well-
being than others, and the limits of personality traits and states as predictors of well-being. This
project will be foundational in clarifying how well-being functions between- and within-
individuals, as well as the role people’s personality domains plays in shaping the unique aspects
that compose individuals’ personal well-being.
NOMOTHETIC AND IDIOGRAPHIC WELL-BEING 43