PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 1
Preadolescents and Their Online World: Activities, Opportunities, and Challenges
1 1 2 1
H. Ying Chuck , Chiara de Jong , Serena Daalmans , and Esther Rozendaal
Erasmus School of Social and Behavioural Sciences, Erasmus University Rotterdam
Communication & Media – Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to H. Ying Chuck,
Erasmus School of Social and Behavioural Sciences, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, 3062 PA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Phone: (+31)107545983.
Email: chuck@essb.eur.nl.
This is a preprint version of the manuscript, which has been submitted to a journal. It has not
been peer-reviewed yet.
Last updated: 28-10-2024
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 2
Abstract
To thrive in today’s digital media society, preadolescents (8–12-year-olds) should adaptively
navigate online opportunities and challenges. Supporting them in this requires a clear
understanding of how they experience their online world. Therefore, this study examined
preadolescents’ online activities and their perceptions of online opportunities and challenges
using qualitative methods. In a participatory project, 129 preadolescents explored their online
world with interactive activities. An inductive thematic analysis was conducted on the
verbatim transcripts of the audio-recorded sessions and photographs of the work created
during sessions. The results provided nuanced and in-depth insights into preadolescents’
online activities, opportunities, and challenges, illustrating the complex and ever-evolving
nature of their online world. Furthermore, the findings highlighted the importance of
preadolescents’ social environment in shaping their perceptions of the online world. This
study underscores the need for additional research involving preadolescents to better
understand what they need to thrive in today’s digital media society.
Keywords: children, thematic analysis, behaviour, risks, opportunities, digital media
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 3
Preadolescents and Their Online World: Activities, Opportunities, and Challenges
Children are growing up in an interactive digital media society and are avid users of
digital devices and applications (Beresford et al., 2023; Rideout et al., 2022). While digital
media may provide children with various opportunities (e.g., entertainment, education, and
communication), it may also present risks (e.g., privacy violations, misinformation, and
hostile communication; Livingstone et al., 2019; Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021; Reid
Chassiakos et al., 2016). For children to adaptively handle online opportunities and risks in
the current digital media society, it is important to foster their digital resilience.
Digital resilience refers to a dynamic process where digital media users adaptively use
strategies to navigate online opportunities and risks, enabling them to thrive in the digital
media society (Hammond et al., 2023; Lee & Hancock, 2023; Masten et al., 2021;
Stavropoulos et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022). Research shows that not all children perform
these strategies to the same degree (e.g., Vandoninck et al., 2013), leaving some more
vulnerable to online risks and less able to benefit from online opportunities. To effectively
foster children’s digital resilience, it is vital to gain a clear understanding of how they
experience the online world and the opportunities and risks they encounter (Anselma et al.,
2018; Minkler, 2005). Achieving this understanding requires a comprehensive view of
children’s online world from their own perspective, making qualitative methods essential as
they provide more in-depth insights (Anselma et al., 2018; Jansz et al., 2015) compared to the
primarily quantitative approaches used in existing research (e.g., Beresford et al., 2023;
Bucknell Bossen & Kottasz, 2020; Dias & Duarte, 2022; Rideout et al., 2022). Therefore,
using qualitative methods and an inductive approach, this study aims to gain insights into
how the online world is experienced among children between 8 and 12 years of age, also
referred to as preadolescents.
Preadolescents as Media Users During Their Transition to Adolescence
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 4
Preadolescents (8–12-year-olds) are important media users to understand as they
experience several developmental changes during their transition into adolescence, which
create specific risks and opportunities for their digital media use (Magis-Weinberg et al.,
2021). First, as preadolescents transition into adolescence, they undergo neurobiological and
socio-emotional changes, which causes them to experience an increased sensitivity to peers,
rewards, and sensation seeking (Dahl et al., 2018; Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021; Valkenburg
& Piotrowski, 2017). The interplay between preadolescents’ heightened sensitivity to peers,
rewards, and sensation seeking and their engagement with digital media may create specific
opportunities and risks. For example, social media platforms may provide opportunities to
enhance social connection but may also expose preadolescents to features that amplify their
feelings of social evaluation (e.g., receiving likes; Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021).
Second, preadolescents have an increased tendency for social exploration and self-
expression, which contribute to their identity development (Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021).
Digital media may, for example, provide preadolescents with opportunities to express
themselves, such as disclosing personal information to their friends through instant
messaging (Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021; Valkenburg et al., 2011). At the same time,
preadolescents’ tendency for social exploration and self-expression through digital media
may expose them to risks, such as hate speech and cyberbullying (Magis-Weinberg et al.,
2021).
Last, during this transition, preadolescents strive for independence and autonomy
(Dahl et al., 2018; Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021). Importantly, this is also the period when
preadolescents are increasingly online (Rideout et al., 2022) and begin to own smartphones
(Beresford et al., 2023; Ofcom, 2023). This allows preadolescents to explore their emerging
identity and peer relationships, all relatively independent from adult supervision (Dahl et al.,
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 5
2018; Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021). However, this also implies unsupervised digital media
use which may increase their exposure to harmful content (Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021).
Taken together, the interplay between preadolescents’ developmental changes and
their increased online access and autonomy may create specific risks and opportunities for
their digital media use (Magis-Weinberg et al., 2021). Although preadolescents are thus an
important group to study, previous research on how the online world is experienced has
mainly focused on older children (i.e., above twelve years old; e.g., Dunne et al., 2010) or
broader age ranges (e.g., Dias & Duarte, 2022; Jansz et al., 2015) which often only partly
cover preadolescents (e.g., 11–12 years). Qualitative research, specifically focusing on
preadolescents and how they experience their online world, is still relatively scarce. Given
this gap, a deeper understanding of preadolescents as digital media users is essential, which is
the main goal of this study.
Exploring Preadolescents’ Online World: Activities, Opportunities, and Risks
Online Activities
To explore the online world of preadolescents, Shao’s (2009) analytical framework is
beneficial as a starting point since it categorizes online activities into three categories:
consuming, participating, and producing. Consuming refers to relatively passive consumption
of online content, such as watching, reading, and viewing. Participating refers to user-to-user
and user-to-content interaction, such as posting comments and instant messaging. Producing
refers to creating and sharing content online, such as pictures and vlogs. Subsequent research
has interpreted these three categories along a dimension of effort investment, with consuming
representing minimal investment, producing representing maximal investment, and
participating falling in between (Jansz et al., 2015).
To our knowledge, only three studies have investigated online activities among older
preadolescents (i.e., 11–12 years; Bucknell Bossen & Kottasz, 2020; Jansz et al., 2015) and a
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 6
broader age range (10–16 years; Dias & Duarte, 2022) using this framework. These studies
revealed that children engage in all three types of activities. Consuming (e.g., watching
videos) was the most common, followed by participating, with Dutch preadolescents
reporting communicating activities so often that Jansz and colleagues (2015) introduced
“communication with others” as a separate category to Shao’s (2009) framework. While these
studies provide useful insights into children’s online activities, updated research among
preadolescents is crucial. Due to the fast-paced development of digital media, preadolescents’
engagement with digital media is continuously changing, necessitating more current insights.
The present study aims to provide such updated insights.
Opportunities of the Online World
One way to look at the online world from an opportunity perspective is by identifying
the needs it may fulfil, as outlined by the Uses and Gratifications (U&G) theory. This theory
states that individuals use media with specific motives to gratify certain needs (Katz et al.,
1974; Ruggiero, 2000). Studies have used the U&G theory to reveal why children perform
certain online activities (e.g., Bucknell Bossen & Kottasz, 2020; Dias & Duarte, 2022; Dunne
et al., 2010; Jansz et al., 2015; Scott et al., 2023). Across these studies, some of the most
frequently reported uses and gratifications of children’s (0–17 years) online activities
included entertainment, escapism, information, self-expression, and socialization.
Although these studies offer valuable insights into online opportunities for children,
they predominantly focused on specific platforms (e.g., YouTube, Bebo; Dunne et al., 2010;
Scott et al., 2023), except for one study from almost a decade ago which focused on the
internet (Jansz et al., 2015). Considering that preadolescents are avid users of various digital
devices and applications (Beresford et al., 2023; Rideout et al., 2022), research that is not
limited to specific platforms is necessary to gain comprehensive insights into their online
experiences. In addition, this broader perspective is crucial in enabling preadolescents to
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 7
share their online experiences without the restrictions of platform-specific research, ensuring
their voices are better represented and understood. To address this, the current study examines
preadolescents’ online experiences from a broader perspective (i.e., online world).
Risks of the Online World
While digital media provides preadolescents with opportunities to fulfil the previously
mentioned needs, the use of digital media also comes with risks. These are often categorized
into four types of risks (i.e., 4C's classification; Livingstone & Stoilova, 2021) and have been
reported among research with preadolescents: content (e.g., nudity, gore; Smahel & Wright,
2014), contact (e.g., stalking; Smahel & Wright, 2014), conduct (e.g., bullying, aggressive
communication; Beresford et al., 2023; Ofcom, 2023; Smahel & Wright, 2014), and contract
risks (e.g., hacking, blackmail; Smahel & Wright, 2014). Risks that relate to more than one of
the four types of risks are referred to as cross-cutting risks (e.g., privacy violations, addiction;
Livingstone & Stoilova, 2021; Smahel & Wright, 2014).
Although the 4C’s classification provides a practical framework for understanding
online risks (Livingstone & Stoilova, 2021), the concept of risk may be perceived differently
by children compared to adults (Smahel & Wright, 2014). Research from a decade ago by
Smahel and colleagues (2014) addressed this by avoiding the term “risk” and instead
examined problematic online situations to capture a broader range of disruptive experiences.
Their findings revealed challenges that were not captured by the 4C’s classification, such as
technical problems (e.g., slow internet) and commercials (e.g., cannot be closed). Thus, to
gain a more comprehensive understanding of preadolescents’ online experiences beyond
“risks” and from their own perspective, we will explore their online challenges from a
broader perspective by examining what they dislike or find annoying, irritating, dangerous, or
difficult in their online world.
The Present Study
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 8
The current study aims to expand and extend research on preadolescents’ online world
in three ways. First, we investigate preadolescents as young as eight years old (up until 12
years). By doing so, we contribute to research by examining an important group of media
users that has been largely overlooked by prior studies. Second, we use qualitative methods
and a broader perspective to explore preadolescents’ online experiences, focusing on their
online activities and perceptions of online opportunities and challenges. In doing so, we
advance existing research by providing comprehensive insights beyond specific platforms
and adult-focused conceptualizations of risk, ensuring that the findings are representative of
preadolescents’ actual experiences. Third, this study aims to provide updated insights into
preadolescents’ online world. Given that the two most relevant qualitative studies on
preadolescents’ online activities and their perceptions of its opportunities and challenges are
nearly a decade old (Jansz et al., 2015; Smahel & Wright, 2014) and that the digital media
environment is rapidly evolving, updated insights are imperative. Importantly, these insights
are the initial steps toward enhancing our understanding of preadolescents’ digital resilience,
which can contribute to the development of effective intervention initiatives tailored to
address the needs and concerns of the current generation preadolescents. Altogether, we aim
to gain in-depth insights in preadolescents’ online world by exploring what online activities
they perform on digital media (RQ1) and what online opportunities and challenges they
perceive in their online world (RQ2).
Method
The current study was embedded within a larger participatory project which enabled
preadolescents to explore their online world as co-researchers through interactive activities
and discussions (De Jong et al., 2024). The larger project took place between January 2023
and January 2024. The study was approved by the Research Ethics Review Committee
Department of Psychology, Education and Child Studies of the Erasmus University
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 9
Rotterdam (ETH2223-0221 and ETH2223-0421). To answer the study’s research questions,
we focused on data from the first two sessions of the larger project (see Data Collection
Procedure).
Participant Recruitment
Three primary schools (year 6, 7, and 8) were recruited from average to high
socioeconomic status neighbourhoods in one of the largest cities of the Netherlands (CBS,
2023). Schools, caregivers, and preadolescents were informed about the project (i.e., topic
and duration), the study (i.e., study aim, data collection consisting of audio-recordings and
creations), and their rights and children’s rights as participants (i.e., anonymity,
confidentiality, and consent procedure). The schools gave active written consent to participate
in the project and the study. Caregivers of preadolescents gave passive written consent for the
participation of their child, meaning that they could opt out of the study. Prior to the start of
the project, preadolescents were informed about the project, the study, and their rights as
participants through a short in-person presentation. Following this, preadolescents gave
passive verbal assent after being asked if they understood the information shared, if they had
any questions, and if they wanted to opt out of the study. Preadolescents with opt-outs still
took part in the project, as it was considered part of the school curriculum, but none of their
data were collected for the study.
Study Participants
A total of 157 preadolescents participated in the project. Preadolescents were divided
into small groups by their teacher(s), with a maximum of six classmates per group. There was
one exception of a group of seven, as one child joined the project after the groups were
formed. Two caregivers opted out of the study, meaning that their child’s audio recordings
and creations were not collected. Additionally, eight preadolescents opted out of audio
recordings. As data collection was (largely) at the group level and anonymous, all children in
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 10
the groups to which these opt-out preadolescents belonged to were excluded from data
collection. As a result, data were not collected from a total of 28 preadolescents.
The final sample consisted of 129 preadolescents (58.9% female) divided across 23
groups: seven groups in year 6 (41 preadolescents, 70.7% female), seven groups in year 7 (41
preadolescents, 58.5% female), and nine groups in year 8 (47 preadolescents, 48.9% female).
Generally, in The Netherlands, children in year 6 are 9 to 10 years old, in year 7, 10 to 11
years old, and in year 8, 11 to 12 years old.
For contextual background, we collected data on the online platforms preadolescents
reported to know of and/or used (see Data Collection Procedure). They engaged with or were
familiar with various online platforms, including social media and messaging (e.g., YouTube,
TikTok, WhatsApp, Snapchat), gaming (e.g., Roblox, Fortnite, Minecraft, FIFA), video-on-
demand (e.g., Netflix, Disney+), music (e.g., Spotify, YouTube Music), informational,
educational, and (e)book (e.g., Google, Duolingo), online shopping (e.g., Temu, AliExpress),
art and design (e.g., CapCut, Ibis Paint), and dating and sexuality (e.g., Tinder, Pornhub)
platforms (see Appendix A).
Data Collection Procedure and Research Team
The project was conducted in Dutch, took place at preadolescents’ schools during
school time, and consisted of five sessions, each lasting around 60 minutes. Each group of
preadolescents was guided by a researcher from the research team (i.e., adult facilitator)
which consisted of a professor, a post-doctoral researcher, a PhD candidate, a junior
researcher, and eight student assistants, all with a social sciences background. Eleven of them
identified as female and one as male. The professor (i.e., last author), post-doctoral researcher
(i.e., second author), and PhD candidate (i.e., first author) had prior knowledge and research
experience on the topic of children and media. The adult facilitators provided instructions in
child-friendly language, either in-person or through a short animation video, which focused
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 11
on the explanation of central concepts and steps of the activities. In addition, adult facilitators
asked facilitating questions to aid completion of the activities (e.g., rewording instructions)
and probing questions to get preadolescents to elaborate on their answers (e.g., asking for
examples). All sessions were audio-recorded and preadolescents’ creations (i.e., work
preadolescents created during the sessions) were photographed.
In session 1 of the project, preadolescents engaged in three activities that focused on
mind-mapping their online world. The first activity served as an icebreaker in which
preadolescents made their name tag and decorated it with something they enjoyed doing on
their digital media. In the second activity, preadolescents individually made a mind map of
their online world. In the centre, preadolescents placed the key theme “my online world” and
expanded it with primary branches showing online platforms they used on their digital media.
From these primary branches, secondary branches emerged to show the online activities they
performed on these online platforms. Lastly, tertiary branches were added to show why they
performed these online activities. In the last activity, preadolescents discussed their individual
mind maps with their group, while the adult facilitator made a group mind map with the key
theme “our online world” and asked facilitating and probing questions.
In session 2, preadolescents engaged in two activities that focused on visualizing and
evaluating the (dis)advantages of their online world. In the first activity, preadolescents were
split into subgroups (i.e., maximum of three preadolescents per subgroup) to identify and note
advantages of their online world on post-its (i.e., what they found fun, good, nice, and
useful). Thereafter, preadolescents were individually asked to share their most important
advantage with their group and adult facilitator. In the second activity, in subgroups,
preadolescents wrote challenges of their online world on post-its (i.e., what they disliked or
found annoying, irritating, dangerous, and difficult) and placed every identified challenge on
a scale that ranged from neutral to very important. Thereafter, a discussion took place with
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 12
their group and adult facilitator with a focus on challenges that were: (1) commonly
identified; (2) identified as very important; and (3) placed in contrasting positions on the
scale by the subgroups (e.g., neutral versus very important). For a full description of the
larger participatory project, see De Jong and colleagues (2024).
Analysis Procedure
The sessions were audio-recorded with a smartphone without internet connection and
transcribed verbatim. The audio-recordings were transcribed using Amberscript (i.e.,
transcription service that uses AI to convert audio into text). Erasmus University Rotterdam
has conducted relevant security and privacy checks and concluded required agreements with
Amberscript to ensure that the processing of data by Amberscript is done in accordance with
relevant laws and regulations. Due to the nature of the discussions (i.e., noisy environment
with preadolescents talking over each other), several adult facilitators manually corrected and
adjusted the transcripts. We then analysed these verbatim transcripts and creations (i.e., mind
maps and post-its) as data. Data from session 1 were analysed to address the first research
question, focusing on what preadolescents do online. Similarly, data from session 2 were
analysed to address the second research question, which examined preadolescents’ online
opportunities and challenges.
Based on both the verbatim transcripts and creations, we conducted an inductive
thematic analysis using ATLAS.ti (Version 23). The complete dataset (i.e., transcripts and
creations from sessions 1 and 2) was open-coded following Braun and Clarke’s (2013)
thematic analysis approach. For each group, we first open-coded the creations, followed by
the corresponding transcript, and repeated this process for all groups. In this coding process,
codes reflected the semantic content (i.e., stated experience and opinion) rather than implicit
meanings within the data (i.e., assumptions underlying the data) as only written data was
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 13
analysed. From these inductive codes, we constructed and defined themes through an iterative
process of reviewing, refining, and checking for fit with the dataset.
Quality Control: Validity, Reliability, and Reflexivity
Five techniques were used to secure the validity and reliability of the study. First,
adult facilitators were extensively trained prior to the start of the project and received
ongoing supervision throughout the project to ensure they asked facilitating and probing
questions, while avoiding suggestive questions. Second, member checking was employed by
instructing adult facilitators to paraphrase or summarize preadolescents’ responses and
checking whether their summaries were complete or if additions or nuances were necessary
(Braun & Clarke, 2013). Third, peer debriefing was enabled in data collection by constantly
reflecting on and discussing the sessions among adult facilitators. Similar practices were in
play during the analysis phase (Patton, 2002). Fourth, researcher triangulation was enabled in
both data collection and analysis, as several researchers took part in the study. More
specifically, the sessions were conducted by several adult facilitators which cancelled out
individual biases. As part of this researcher triangulation, several researchers were involved
in the data analysis, which compensated for potential single-researcher biases (Braun &
Clarke, 2013; Denzin, 1989). Fifth, a thick description was employed by providing quotes
from preadolescents to illustrate the constructed themes, providing a link between the
empirical material and the analytic constructs. This enables a comprehensive understanding
and judgement of the constructed themes and their relationship to the empirical data.
In addition, the research team critically reflected on and acknowledged the role of the
researcher positionality that may have shaped the data collection or analysis throughout the
study (i.e., reflexivity; Braun & Clarke, 2013). To facilitate this reflexiveness, the primary
researcher (i.e., the first author) kept an extensive research journal that recorded the research
teams’ thoughts, feelings, and reflections throughout the study. This included, but was not
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 14
limited to, adult facilitators’ reflections after each session and memo writing (i.e., noting
thoughts that emerged during the coding and analysis process; Braun & Clarke, 2013).
Results
What Do Preadolescents Do Online?
We constructed eleven themes to describe the preadolescents’ online activities.
Appendix B presents the themes and subthemes with illustrative quotes. Preadolescents
expressed that they performed a variety of online activities, with some being more central
than others. Consuming was one of the more central activities and refers to watching, reading,
or listening to online content. This included activities such as watching videos, films, and
series, listening to music and podcasts, scrolling, reading, and viewing photos. Some of these
activities (e.g., watching films, listening to music) were performed together with others, such
as family and friends.
Another online activity that was notably central was playing with digital media. It
primarily included activities such as gaming and using filters on Snapchat. Preadolescents
reported to play alone and with family, friends, and others, as illustrated by this preadolescent
“… Yeah, I play obbies a lot and those are just parkour. That’s just parkour. I play a lot with
friends that you can add there” (Child 38, female, year 6).
Preadolescents also often exchanged (i.e., receiving and/or sending) communication
through text, visuals, or (video)calls. Based on whether the preadolescent was the receiver
and/or sender of the communication, activities were categorized into three subthemes. The
first subtheme, interacting, refers to interacting with others through digital media (e.g.,
calling, apping, snapping, chatting) in which preadolescents were the receiver and sender of
communication. The second subtheme, sharing, refers to sending or (re)posting content or
creations (e.g., videos, photos, stories) in which preadolescents were the sender of
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 15
communication. The last subtheme, receiving, refers to receiving online content (e.g.,
messages, snaps, notifications) in which preadolescents were the receiver of communication.
Preadolescents often mentioned searching for information or online content, which
commonly included activities such as searching for inspiration, information, and photos. For
example, they shared to “look for inspiration” (Child 47, female, year 7) and “new
wallpapers” (Child 123, female, year 8) on Pinterest and “cheats for Fortnite” on Google
(Group 20, year 8).
Another activity expressed by preadolescents was labelled as managing, which
consisted of three subthemes, each referring to what was being managed by preadolescents.
The first subtheme, managing online content, refers to organizing online content and mainly
included activities such as downloading or deleting applications or games, making boards,
saving videos and photos, and making playlists. For example, preadolescents mentioned to
“have quite a lot of boards” on Pinterest where you can “put all the things you like on it”
(Child 64, female, year 7) or to make playlists alone or with family and friends on music
platforms. The second subtheme, managing online contacts or communities, generally
included activities such as making or having group(chats) with friends, making friends, and
joining Discord servers with fellow gamers. The last subtheme, managing online accounts,
mainly refers to making or having online accounts (e.g., channels, accounts, servers) on
social media and messaging and gaming platforms.
Preadolescents shared that they made and edited creations which we refer to as
creating. For example, they expressed to make videos and photos of their own cat for
Instagram or football videos of professional football players on TikTok. In addition,
preadolescents shared to sometimes create videos and photos with friends.
Furthermore, preadolescents monitored their (online) world, or in other words, stayed
updated on topics and people. More specifically, they expressed to mainly follow others and
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 16
the news through social media and messaging and news and information platforms. For
example, they would follow famous people and the news on Instagram and “stalk people
through locations” on Snapchat (Child 107, female, year 8).
Some preadolescents mentioned to react to online content, which often included
activities such as liking videos and posting comments. For example, they shared to like
videos or to post comments on social media and messaging platforms.
Several preadolescents also performed transacting activities, which we refer to as
spending or earning (in-game) money. Both activities were often related to gaming or online
shopping. For example, on gaming platforms, they mentioned spending Robux on Roblox
and earning money from winning tournaments on Fortnite. On online shopping platforms,
they shared examples like buying a phone case on Temu and selling virtual pets on Starpets.
Preadolescents also expressed to annoy, troll, prank call, scam, or spam others, which
we refer to as teasing. Teasing often took place in-game or on social media and messaging
platforms. For example, preadolescents detailed how they annoyed other players on Fortnite
by preventing them from being revived in-game or how they spammed others on social media
and messaging platforms.
Lastly, preadolescents mentioned to perform activities that we refer to as learning or
acquiring knowledge or skills. These activities included learning languages and other skills
such as drawing and diving.
What Opportunities and Challenges Do Preadolescents Perceive in Their Online World?
Online Opportunities
We constructed five themes to describe the opportunities experienced by
preadolescents in their online world: personal growth, hedonism, social contact, mood
management, and convenience. Appendix C presents the themes and subthemes with
illustrative quotes.
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 17
Personal Growth. This theme consisted of five subthemes, each illustrating specific
opportunities the online world provided to stimulate preadolescents’ personal development.
Primarily, preadolescents seemed to gain knowledge and skills from their online world, as it
provided opportunities for them to learn or discover something. For example, they shared that
playing games helped them learn English or how to play an instrument. Additionally, they
highlighted opportunities to discover information such as the results of football competitions
or the locations of their friends and parcels.
We also gathered that the online world offered preadolescents a sense of autonomy,
characterized by the ability to make choices. Preadolescents mentioned encountering
numerous possibilities while engaging with the online world. For example, they noted having
a wide range of game choices or the ability to play and do almost everything on gaming
platforms. They also highlighted the abundance of possibilities on social media and
messaging platforms, where they could watch unlimited videos, and on video-on-demand
platforms, where they could choose from plenty of series and films to watch non-stop at any
given moment.
Next, through their engagement with the online world, preadolescents expressed that
they gained ideas for creative processes, which we refer to as inspiration. For example, they
mentioned using informational, educational, and (e)book platforms and social media and
messaging platforms to gain fashion, crafting, or drawing inspiration.
Furthermore, from the discussions we also found that preadolescents gained a feeling
of success and popularity from their online world, which we labelled as competency and
status. Preadolescents expressed that they enjoyed the feeling of completing gaming levels
and winning (competitive) games. They also mentioned making and posting videos on social
media and messaging platforms to gain popularity.
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 18
Finally, the online world provided opportunities for preadolescents to receive material
gains. More specifically, preadolescents shared that they played games to receive in-game
items or to earn (in-game) money.
Hedonism. This theme consisted of two subthemes, each describing specific
opportunities the online world provided for preadolescents to experience pleasure. Primarily,
preadolescents seemed to seek entertainment from their online world, or in other words,
sought-out fun, excitement, or immersion. For example, they shared that it was fun to watch
videos, films, or series, play games, or listen to music. They also reported experiencing
excitement when watching scary films and immersion while playing games as they felt like
they were part of the game.
In addition, preadolescents expressed to enjoy irritating, laughing at, and bullying
others, which we refer to as malicious schadenfreude. For example, they expressed to gain
pleasure from “driving others crazy by constantly texting and calling” (Child 53, male, year
7) or from laughing at others on social media and messaging platforms.
Social Contact. This theme consisted of two subthemes, each describing specific
opportunities the online world provided to strengthen preadolescents’ connections with their
social world. During the discussions, preadolescents mentioned that gaming and social media
and messaging platforms provided them with opportunities to communicate with others
quickly and easily. This included telling their parents that they arrived home safely, chatting
with a friend who lives abroad, or reaching out in emergencies, such as when they were lost.
In addition, we derived that preadolescents’ online world provided them with
opportunities for social connection, which refers to bonding with and expanding one’s social
world. More specifically, preadolescents engaged with gaming and video-on-demand
platforms, which enabled them to do something together with their friends and family such as
playing games and watching films. Furthermore, they reported that through gaming and
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 19
social media and messaging platforms they could meet new people and make friends.
Moreover, social media and messaging platforms also provided opportunities for social
connection, as preadolescents expressed to experience support from their followers.
Mood Management. This theme consisted of three subthemes, each describing
specific opportunities the online world provided to shape preadolescents’ mood and mental
state. We found that the online world provided preadolescents with opportunities to pass time.
For example, they mentioned “wasting time on Netflix” (Group 4, year 6), calling or
messaging friends, watching videos, or “scrolling for hours” (Group 19, year 8) on social
media and messaging platforms when bored. Similarly, they noted playing games when they
were bored, had nothing better to do, or wanted to make time go faster.
In addition, preadolescents found relaxation through their engagement with their
online world. More specifically, they expressed that they could experience peace and
calmness while listening to music or drawing. They also mentioned playing games or
watching films when they were tired, wanted to recover from a previous activity, or wanted to
“chill” (Child 47, female, year 7).
Finally, from the discussions, we gathered that the online world provided
preadolescents with opportunities for regulation. When preadolescents wanted to regulate
their cognitive and emotional states, they engaged with their online world. For example,
when preadolescents wanted to distract themselves from people or thoughts, they danced to
music, played games, or scrolled and watched videos on social media and messaging
platforms “to forget everything” (Child 114, male, year 8) and “to not think” (Child 113,
male, year 8). Moreover, when preadolescents felt sad or angry, they expressed the desire to
watch happy videos, tell somebody what happened, or play on Roblox to make themselves
feel better. Finally, they mentioned listening to music for better concentration.
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 20
Convenience. This theme consisted of two subthemes, each describing specific
opportunities the online world provided to make preadolescents’ daily and online activities
more practical and convenient. Preadolescents appeared to experience utilitarian satisfaction
as they highlighted the usefulness of their online world, such as not needing to physically go
to the stores by using online shopping platforms or being able to get notifications about new
online content by subscribing to people on social media and messaging platforms.
Preadolescents also expressed their appreciation for free access to content on music,
social media and messaging, and video-on-demand platforms. More specifically,
preadolescents mentioned their appreciation for not having to pay for concerts, watching free
clips of movies, and watching free series.
Online Challenges
We constructed nine themes that describe preadolescents’ online challenges: online
security and privacy, social interactions, disturbances, addiction, content, expenditure,
restriction, failures, and physical health. These themes encompassed situations that
preadolescents disliked or perceived as annoying, irritating, dangerous, or difficult. These
challenges were either personally encountered by preadolescents or they were made aware of
them through their social environment (e.g., caregivers, news outlets). Appendix D presents
the themes and subthemes with illustrative quotes.
Online Security and Privacy. This theme consisted of six subthemes, each
illustrating specific challenges the online world presented for preadolescents online security
and privacy. Primarily, preadolescents shared to have personal experiences with being hacked
or to be aware of hackers through their social environment (e.g., caregivers). Preadolescents
considered hacking as dangerous, scary, enraging, shocking, and upsetting. They further
explained that hackers were an online challenge as hackers “can steal a lot of data from you”
(Child 49, female, year 7), “can hack your account and then withdraw money from your
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 21
bank” (Child 12, female, year 6), or that “you may lose your account” (Child 33, female, year
6). In addition, they highlighted that hackers affected their online experience as they “ruin the
whole game” (Child 55, male, year 7).
Furthermore, we derived from the discussions that privacy violation was an online
challenge. More specifically, preadolescents expressed annoyance and fear over their
personal experiences or awareness of people or online platforms collecting or having access
to their personal information, sometimes without their permission or knowledge. For
example, preadolescents highlighted that people or online platforms could “look through your
camera … eavesdrop on you” (Child 17, female, year 6), or collect or know your personal
details, location, and online activities, such as what video you have liked or watched.
Furthermore, preadolescents reported feeling sad, annoyed, and angry about people or online
platforms sharing their personal information without permission. This included parents
posting about them online and others sharing photos, screenshots, or personal details.
Next, preadolescents mentioned that scams and dangerous links were an online
challenge, which we refer to as scams and phishing. They shared that scams and phishing
were irritating, frustrating, and bothersome, based on their own experiences or those of their
social environment (e.g., grandma). They illustrated scams and phishing to be an online
challenge as you lose money or valuable in-game items or your expectations are not met,
such as not receiving an order or receiving defective items from online shopping platforms.
Preadolescents also voiced that viruses were a challenge of their online world and
considered them as irritating and weird. They elaborated that viruses were an online
challenge as it could collect and sell your information and effect your computer, such as
covering your screen with advertisements or weird things.
Moreover, preadolescents shared to be aware of blackmailing, which refers to being
forced to do things, such as sending nude photos. When discussing blackmailing,
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 22
preadolescents predominantly mentioned to be aware of this online challenge through their
social environment, for instance their teacher, news and information platforms, or social
media and messaging platforms (e.g., TikTok and YouTube).
Finally, preadolescents discussed the permanence of their online posts. They pointed
out that anything posted online cannot be removed which may lead to feelings of regret and
enabled opportunities for others to collect and repost this content.
Social Interactions. This theme consisted of five subthemes, each describing specific
challenging social interactions in preadolescents’ online world. Preadolescents described
various deceptive or exploitive online interactions which we refer to as predatory online
interactions. For example, they discussed situations such as older people pretending to be
young (i.e., catfishing), people following you everywhere and showing up at your house (i.e.,
stalking), strangers asking for personal information such as your photos (i.e., solicitation),
encountering child molesters online (i.e., paedophiles and grooming), and falling in love
online (i.e., online dating). These situations were often considered as scary, dangerous, or
weird by preadolescents. Additionally, some preadolescents reported not having personal
experiences with these situations but were aware of them through their social environment,
including TikTok, caregivers, and news outlets.
In addition, preadolescents described experiencing and being aware of various online
situations related to cyberbullying, hostile communication, and toxic behaviour, which we
collectively refer to as digital hostility. They often considered these situations to be mean,
weird, irritating, annoying or infuriating. More specifically, they shared that cyberbullying
was an online challenge as it could cause victims to suffer, become scared, or feel insecure.
Similarly, hostile communication, such as receiving hate and getting cursed at, could also
lead to pain and insecurity among victims. Furthermore, preadolescents reported experiencing
toxic behaviour, particularly in gaming contexts. This included situations such as being
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 23
insulted by other players and encountering players who do not follow the game rules thereby
ruining their gaming experience. Outside of the gaming context, preadolescents mentioned
getting “spammed” with excessive communication (e.g., messages, calls, mails, or in-game
invites) and prank calls (e.g., random calls by people, sometimes from another country or
anonymously).
While preadolescents described various predatory online interactions, they also found
general online contact with strangers to be strange, irritating, and dangerous. Examples
included playing games with strangers and receiving messages and calls from strangers.
Next, preadolescents described situations related to non-responsiveness of others.
They shared that it was annoying when others were non-responsive, such as not picking up
their phone, not reacting immediately to messages and questions, and not being online.
Finally, preadolescents illustrated situations related to miscommunication. They
shared that it is difficult to interpret another’s emotions online and that one can come across
differently than intended, which may lead to misunderstandings.
Disturbances. From the discussions with preadolescents, we gathered that they
encountered two types of disturbances which disrupted their online experience:
advertisements and technological disturbances. Preadolescents described how advertisements
would disrupt their online experience (e.g., watching a video, playing games), with these
advertisements often being abundant, long, and unskippable. They considered advertisements
as irritating, annoying, and stupid.
Similarly, preadolescents described various types of technological disturbances as
irritating, annoying, infuriating, or even dangerous. More specifically, they reported
encountering software disturbances, which included malfunctions (e.g., glitches and errors),
situations where the software did not work as intended (e.g., not showing search results they
wanted), or when functions were missing or difficult to use (e.g., not being able to set an age
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 24
restriction). Preadolescents also mentioned connection disturbances, such as when the Wi-Fi,
internet, or connection would not work. In addition, they discussed hardware-related
disturbances, such as issues with battery life, storage capacity, and controllers. For example,
they shared experiences of having no battery, having to charge their device, having no more
storage, or having a defective controller.
Addiction. During the discussions, preadolescents had extensive discussions about
game, smartphone, social media and messaging, and video-on-demand addiction, supported
by knowledge they gained from their social environment (e.g., TV programs). They often
described addiction as continuous and uncontrollable consumption. For example, “it’s hard to
stop” (Child 91, male, year 8), “when you play it too often (Child 1, male, year 6)”, and
“when you can’t live without it (Child 120, female, year 8)”. In addition, some preadolescents
discussed addiction in terms of frequency (e.g., times you play a game per day) or duration of
use (e.g., hours played), with the exact cut-off differing per preadolescent. Preadolescents
also mentioned consequences of addiction on their health, including worse eyesight and
memory, later bedtimes, and more sedentary behaviours. They also shared consequences for
their social relationships, such as difficulty with making and sustaining friendships.
Content. This theme consisted of three subthemes, each describing specific
challenges related to online content. Predominately, preadolescents mentioned encountering
content that we refer to as discomforting content, including video’s, photos, or advertisements
that they found weird, unpleasant, or scary. While preadolescents could not always elaborate
on what they meant with weird or unpleasant, they expressed that it was content they did not
want to see or found upsetting. Similarly, when discussing scary content, they shared that
they did not want to see it, were scared by it, had nightmares about it, or could not get it out
of their minds. Furthermore, preadolescents described specific examples of discomforting
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 25
content, including the murder of people and animals, weapons and threats, sexual content,
and hate content, such as videos where the pride flag is destroyed.
Next, during the discussions, preadolescents described situations where they had
consumed all content or could not choose what content to consume, which we refer to as
content saturation and overload. More specifically, preadolescents shared that it was
irritating and annoying when they had watched all the videos, had nothing left to watch, or
played a game too often or for too long, as it becomes boring, a waste of time, and they must
think of something else to do. In addition, preadolescents expressed difficulty in dealing with
the abundance of choices on video-on-demand and gaming platforms.
Finally, we derived that preadolescents encountered deceptive content, which we refer
to as mis- and disinformation. For example, preadolescents shared the difficulties of
recognizing deep fakes and discussed the consequences of fake news or content which may
result in unnecessary fear or being misinformed.
Expenditure. Preadolescents shared that it was irritating, annoying, stupid, and weird
to spend money on gaming, video-on-demand, social media and messaging, and music
platforms. More specifically, they mentioned that “you have to pay money” (Child 80, male,
year 7) and “it can cost you a lot of money” (Child 91, male, year 8) which they found
“unnecessary” (Child 19, male, year 6) and a “waste of your money” (Child 20, male, year 6).
Restriction. Preadolescents also encountered challenges related to restrictions from
parents and platforms. They described various parental mediation situations as annoying,
stupid, unfair, and restrictive. For example, they mentioned caregivers regulating their
screentime through rules and monitoring their screentime and content, such as checking their
screentime, messages, and games. Furthermore, preadolescents shared that it was annoying or
irritating when online platforms moderated their online experiences, which we refer to as
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 26
platform moderation. For example, they shared situations where online platforms would
delete or ban their account or require parental permission to use an online platform.
Failures. During the discussions, preadolescents shared various situations in which
they experienced defeat, particularly in gaming contexts, which we refer to as failures. For
example, they shared that it was annoying, stupid, and irritating, when you lose or can die in-
game, when you cannot complete a level, or when games are too difficult.
Physical Health. Preadolescents mentioned various challenges related to their
physical health. For example, they shared that it is “bad for your eyes” (Child 67, male year
7), “if you turn it up too loud, you will go deaf” (Child 91, male, year 8), and “sometimes I
get a headache from social media if I am on it for too long” (Child 115, female, year 8).
Discussion
Preadolescents (8–12-year-olds) are spending more and more time online. To help
them thrive in today’s digital media society, it is crucial to understand what they actually do
online and what opportunities and challenges they experience. Despite preadolescents being
an important age group to study, it has been largely neglected by prior research. Moreover,
previous research has predominantly focused on platform-specific research (e.g., YouTube,
Bebo; Dunne et al., 2010; Scott et al., 2023) and adult-focused conceptualizations of risk
(Smahel & Wright, 2014), hindering us from fully understanding preadolescents’ online
experiences from their own perspective. In addition, the qualitative research that does take
preadolescents’ own perspectives into account is (almost) a decade old (Jansz et al., 2015;
Smahel & Wright, 2014) and therefore may not reflect the online experiences of
preadolescents growing up in today’s digital media society. This study aimed to address these
research gaps by examining the online activities of the current generation of preadolescents
and their lived experiences with online opportunities and challenges using qualitative
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 27
methods and a broader perspective. Based on the findings, several key insights can be
highlighted.
First, the current generation of preadolescents is very active online. Our findings show
that they use a wide range of online platforms, including social media platforms, even though
they are actually too young for them, given the age guidelines of those platforms. Like older
preadolescents (Bucknell Bossen & Kottasz, 2020; Dias & Duarte, 2022; Jansz et al., 2015),
preadolescents engage in a broad range of online activities. Consistent with Shao's (2009)
analytical framework, these activities have different levels of effort investment and can be
roughly categorized as consuming, participating, and producing. Compared to older research
with preadolescents (Jansz et al., 2015), we see a wider range of online activities, reflecting
the vast array of uses the online world currently has to offer.
Interestingly, preadolescents also report engaging in activities related to managing
their online world. Managing does not fit neatly in the analytical framework by Shao (2009)
along the dimension of effort investment, but instead can be seen as a transcending online
activity, as it enables the performance of activities on the dimension. For example, playing
online games requires management of accounts and in-game friendships, while exchanging
on social media and messaging platforms requires management of group chats and content
such as videos, photos, and stickers. The emergence of managing as a distinct online activity
may be due to the continuously evolving digital landscape, which offers an increasingly
broad array of online platforms and activities, necessitating management.
Second, preadolescents experience various opportunities in their online world. While
engaging online, several needs are gratified, varying from personal growth to hedonism,
mood management, social contact, and convenience. These opportunities largely align with
the opportunities found in prior research among children (Bucknell Bossen & Kottasz, 2020;
Dias & Duarte, 2022; Dunne et al., 2010; Jansz et al., 2015; Scott et al., 2023). Remarkably,
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 28
our study reveals that preadolescents also gain pleasure from witnessing or causing someone
else’s misfortune (i.e., malicious schadenfreude) in an online context, a finding not yet
observed in previous studies among this age group and older adolescents.
Third, in addition to opportunities, preadolescents also experience a variety of
challenges related to their online activities. In line with the 4C's classification (Livingstone &
Stoilova, 2021), preadolescents experience risks related to content (e.g., discomforting
content), contact (e.g., predatory online interactions), conduct (e.g., digital hostility), and
contract (e.g., hacking), as well as cross-cutting risks (e.g., addiction). This shows that
preadolescents are aware of the existence of the online risks often cited in theory and research
that many adults also worry about. Interestingly, our findings also illustrate a broad range of
online challenges beyond these commonly identified risks (e.g., Livingstone & Stoilova,
2021). By using age-appropriate synonyms of “risks” during the activities and discussions,
preadolescents were enabled to share their dislikes and annoyances of their online world. This
enabled us to capture preadolescents’ lived experiences in which they were prevented from
having a satisfying online experience, or in other words, when their needs are not satisfied.
This broader interpretation of risks echoes findings from prior qualitative research, where
children reported similar situations (e.g., technical problems and advertisements; Smahel &
Wright, 2014). For future research, it would be valuable to explore whether these lived
experiences, where preadolescents’ needs are not satisfied, are a distinct category of
challenges compared to the commonly identified online risks.
Lastly, the findings reveal the significance of preadolescents’ social environment in
shaping their online experiences. More specifically, preadolescents in our study perform
online activities together with others, highlighting the social aspect of these activities.
Furthermore, preadolescents are aware of online challenges they have not personally
experienced, reflecting the influence of their social environment on the perceptions of their
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 29
online world. Moreover, our findings show how preadolescents’ online opportunities and
challenges are closely tied to their environment. Namely, preadolescents’ online world
provides them with opportunities for social contact and various challenges involve
interactions with their social environment (e.g., digital hostility).
Limitations and Implications
This study has two potential limitations that must be considered. First, in terms of
reflexivity it is important to note that the research team consisted of adult and primarily
female researchers which may have influenced the data collection (e.g., social desirability
bias) or analysis (e.g., adult interpretations of the data). To address this, we maintained an
extensive research journal, created an enabling environment for preadolescents to express
themselves, and made efforts to stay true to the preadolescents’ own words in our analysis
and reporting. Second, the audio-recordings were of moderate quality due to the noisy
environment and overlapping voices, which at times made parts inaudible and distinguishing
individual preadolescents challenging. Despite this, the use of both audio recordings and
creations allowed us to gather rich data, as evidenced by our extensive findings, and the large
number of participants ensured data saturation.
Despite these limitations, this study has several implications. First, the findings show
that preadolescents are very active online and experience various challenges, including
serious risks. This implies the need to include this age group in prevention initiatives to
ensure timely interventions. In doing so, we emphasize the importance of including the lived
experiences of preadolescents. These experiences can guide intervention initiatives to address
the actual online needs and concerns of preadolescents. Second, our findings illustrate that
the contemporary digital media landscape has led to an expansion of preadolescents' online
activities, the opportunities those activities offer them, and the challenges it poses. This
underscores the need to continuously update research on preadolescents’ online experiences
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 30
to ensure that the research agenda keeps pace with these rapid changes, enabling it to
accurately guide future research, policies, and intervention development. Finally, the findings
of this study emphasize the significant role the social environment plays in shaping
preadolescents’ online experiences. Therefore, future research and policy must account for
this influence in the development of research agenda and effective interventions aimed to
boost digital resilience.
Overall, our study deepens the understanding of preadolescents’ evolving needs and
concerns amid the rapidly changing digital landscape by examining their online activities,
opportunities, and challenges using qualitative methods and an inductive approach. The
diverse and nuanced insights reveal the need for ongoing research which involves
preadolescents themselves and their social environment. By doing so, we can better address
preadolescents’ online needs and concerns and enhance their digital resilience.
PREADOLESCENTS AND THEIR ONLINE WORLD 31