Running Head: SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
Transparency in Risk Communication of Trials with Time-to-event Outcomes in
Medicine: A Randomized Trial
Helge Giese1,2*, Wolfgang Gaissmaier2, Oliver Kuss#3,4, Odette Wegwarth#1,4
1 Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin
2 University of Konstanz
3 German Diabetes Center
4 Centre for Health and Society
5 Max Planck Institute for Human Development
# Contributed equally
Author Note
Helge Giese, Heisenberg Chair for Medical Risk Literacy and Evidence-based
Decisions, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of
Psychology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany. Wolfgang Gaissmaier, Department
of Psychology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany. Oliver Kuss, Institute for
Biometrics and Epidemiology, German Diabetes Center, Leibniz Institute for Diabetes
Research at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany; Centre for Health
and Society, Medical Faculty and University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. Odette Wegwarth, Heisenberg Chair for Medical Risk
Literacy and Evidence-based Decisions, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany; Center for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Berlin, Germany.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Helge Giese,
Heisenberg Chair for Medical Risk Literacy and Evidence-based Decisions, Charité –
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany; e-mail:
helge.giese@charite.de
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
Abstract
Background: Medical RCT effectiveness communication often does not fully acknowledge the
temporal dimension of the trial and its impact on RCT understanding in general practitioners is
unclear. The authors therefore tested how trial effectiveness information given as hazard ratio
(HR), prolongated failure times (PFT), restricted mean survival times (RMST), or absolute risk
reductions (ARR) affected the understanding and acceptance of the treatment effectiveness in
medical general practitioners.
Methods: In 2024, 250 German general practitioners completed an online experiment
comparing the four different effectiveness communication formats in a within design and
testing the role of an absolute reference between participants. Target outcomes were whether
the group could replicate the rank order of effect sizes presented to them in a between design
and their acceptance rating.
Results: General practitioners did not replicate the effect size order. The same effect in the
RMST format was judged less effective but more acceptable compared to the presentation in
the other formats. The reference did not play a role in the evaluation of the communication.
Conclusions: While general practitioners generally preferred the mean survival time format,
there was no intuitive representation of effect sizes in any of the formats. The provision of
further normative information in addition to the effect size on the absolute time scale may aid
them to rank the effectiveness of treatments.
Trial registration: This study was preregistered under
Key-words: survival analysis, absolute risk reduction, risk communication, hazard
ratio, fact box
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
Background
The Corona pandemic illustrated that the communication of benefits and harms of medical
treatments is a challenge in public health and academic medicine, as the public perception of
risk is often polarized, (1) and divergent from scientific evidence. (2) One reason why this
may be the case is how outcomes of clinical trials are communicated: In general, they are
described in terms of relative effect measures like odds ratios or relative risks, which are
hardly understandable and unrelatable. (3,4) Therefore, medical practitioners are encouraged
to communicate benefit and harm likelihoods as absolute, natural frequencies showing the
effects of both treatment and placebo groups. (3–6)
However, these kinds of risk displays neglect the temporal dimension inherent in most
clinical trials, as benefits and harms typically evolve. This is problematic because it renders
the standardized metric arbitrary to the selected time point. To alleviate this problem, other
statistical representations of trial risks exist, (7,8) but the most common forms of dealing with
dynamics statistically, the hazard ratio (HR), is notoriously hard to communicate and
understand–even for corresponding authors of clinical trials. (9) Hazards are rates of risk
events and should not be confused with probabilities. (10) To avoid these conceptual issues, a
promising alternative display are survival times, which generally need parametric
assumptions, (7) but provide effect measures that are potentially easier interpretable than
hazard ratios. They provide information on the time scale, which is both absolute and
relatable to everyday experience.(11) Their appropriateness for the understanding of treatment
effects in general practitioners, however, is still to be tested.
A second issue with the hazard representation is that the hazard ratio (HR) is a relative
measure. Like relative risk reduction and odds ratio, it is non-transparent if no reference
information is provided and—due to typically larger values—people perceive effects to be
larger than in absolute formats. (9,12,13) However, previous comparisons of hazards and
temporal measures (9,12,13) conflated this problematic aspect of hazard ratio with the
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
conceptual ambiguities of the hazard concept. Therefore, one should tease apart whether the
relative aspect of the hazard ratio and the temporal representation play distinctive roles and
whether adding a reference for fully transparent communication is generally acknowledged.
To separate effects of communicating effects on a time scale from the relative nature
of hazard ratio (HR), we propose three comparatives: the prolongated failure time (PFT)
describes the survival times in relative proportions, whereas the absolute risk reduction
(ARR) is an absolute measure with no temporal information. In contrast, the mean survival
time is both absolute and on a time scale and therefore should improve understanding
compared to the other formats. In order not to overgeneralize to time frames not assessed, the
current study uses the restricted mean survival time (RMST) version, that restricts the survival
time on a common observation period of 5 years.
The current study
In this study, we therefore tested how trial effectiveness information in relative hazard
ratios (HR), relative prolongated failure times (PFT), absolute restricted mean survival times
(RMST), and absolute risk reductions (ARR) with or without a reference affected the
understanding and acceptance of the trial information in medical general practitioners (see
group of general practitioners in a between design, while acceptance was assessed in line with
Giese et al. (4) We preregistered the hypotheses (10.17605/OSF.IO/U69YM) a) that effects
are estimated to be lower in absolute compared to relative formats (see (9,12,13)), but b) that
the order of effect sizes could be better reconstructed and c) acceptance would be higher in
absolute formats. In addition, we expected that the provision of a reference in the control
group would d) improve the reconstruction of effect sizes and e) increase the acceptance of
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
the communication. Finally, we explored the role of knowledge on these effects and how
recall was affected.
Methods
Participants
The study was conducted end of April 2024 by the panelist bilendi via an online
survey assessment. We aimed to recruit 250 German general practitioners identified by the
panelist. Power-analyses indicated that, with sphericity and equal distribution across cells, at
least 222 participants were required to detect a medium sized effect (f(V) = 0.25) with a
power of 0.8 and α = 0.05.
Design & Procedure
This online experiment followed a 4 within Effect format (HR/ PFT/ RMST/ ARR)  2
between Reference (present/ absent)  3 between Effect size (small/ medium/ high) design and
was approved by the IRB of the Charité (EA1/306/23). All original materials can be obtained
at osf.io/n5vy9.
After informed consent, participants rated the effectiveness and the acceptance of the
communication for one effect size across the four different effect formats in randomized
order. This was followed by the provision of demographic information and knowledge on risk
metrics. Finally, participants were asked to recall the presented effect sizes in each respective
format in the same order they were initially provided and debriefed.
phrasing was adapted from Heard et al. (12)
References were either provided or not provided and derived from the results for all-
cause mortality in the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial, a large, randomized trial on the effect of
empagliflozin, an inhibitor of sodium–glucose cotransporter 2, in patients with type 2 diabetes
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
at high cardiovascular risk. (14) The reference consisted of the risk of the control group in the
For Effect size, we assumed a HR of .9 as a small .7 as a medium and .5 as a large
other effect formats based on the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial. (14)
Randomization into experimental conditions and order were performed algorithmically
by the online survey tool with no human involvement. Participants were unaware of their
experimental condition. To ensure roughly equal cell-sizes, the randomization procedure was
drawing without replacement.
Measures
Perceived effectiveness
Participants indicated their perception of effectiveness on two 100-point semantic
differentials (“How effective is treatment X to prevent premature deaths?” very ineffective –
very effective; “Would you recommend treatment X to a patient?” certainly no – certainly).
While the first one is an adaptation of earlier research, (9) the second one is adjusted to the
prescribing context of the general practitioner sample. The answers to these questions were
closely associated for all effect size indicators (Cronbach α = .87–.95) and thus averaged to
build an effectiveness score for each effect size indicator.
Acceptance of effectiveness communication
Furthermore, we assessed the acceptance of the effectiveness communication on five
100-point semantic differentials (“I think the presented description of the treatment X is…”
very comprehensible – very incomprehensible, very transparent – very non-transparent, very
trustworthy – very untrustworthy, very honest – very dishonest, very informative – very
uninformative) adapted from earlier communication research. (4). The answers to these
questions were closely associated for all effect formats (Cronbach α = .95–.96) and thus
averaged to build an acceptance score for each effect format.
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
Understanding of risk
In replication of Weir et al.,(9) we assessed whether participants could correctly
interpret a hazard ratio of 0.8 in a single item. In addition, we checked with a single item
whether participants could convert a relative risk reduction into absolute numbers. (15)
Furthermore, we asked whether they conceptualized an increase of life expectancy as a delay
of the mean (average), the modal (most probable) or the median age of death.
Conflicts of interests
Potential conflicts of interests were inferred from the frequency of visits from
representatives of the pharma industry. (16)
Medical experience
We assessed the years of working in medicine (“How many years have you been
working in the field of medicine?”) as an indicator of medical experience.
Recall
At the end of the survey, participants were asked to recall the effect sizes presented to
them for each indicator separately. To make all indicators identifiable, all were marked with a
specific letter and the recall format matched the initial effect size format. Participants could
enter a number or opt-out by indicating that they do not remember the number.
Statistical methods and end points
We used 4 within Effect Format (HR/ PFT/ RMST/ ARR) x 3 Effect Size (small/
medium/ high) between x 2 Reference (present/ absent) between mixed ANOVAs to evaluate
its effects on perceived effectiveness and acceptance as preregistered according to the
hypothesis using the afex package in R. Significant effects were followed-up with Sidak-
corrected post hoc comparisons with the emmeans package. In addition, we used a GLM
logistic mixed model with random intercepts to explore the effects on recall. The significance
threshold was P < 0.05. All materials, data, analyses, and the respective code are published at
osf.io/n5vy9.
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
Results
Sample information
In total, 317 medical general practitioners were allocated to the study by the panelist of which
260 agreed to participate and verified their status as general practitioner. In the end, 250
completed the survey and 10 people were lost after randomization. In the final sample, 154
(61.4%) were male and had on average 10.1 years of professional medical experience, 165
(66.0%) indicated that they were visited by pharmaceutical representatives once per month or
more frequently, 32 (12.8%) were able to identify that a hazard ratio is neither an absolute
risk reduction nor describes a treatment effect on the time scale, and 70 (28.0%) could
correctly compute an absolute risk reduction from trial sizes and relative risks. When
prompted to conceptualize an increase in life expectancy, 121 (48.4%) chose the modal (most
probable) and 94 (37.6%) the mean (average) delay of age at death. Drop-out was roughly the
same for each between condition with the final sample size per condition ranging between 41
and 42.
Perceived effectiveness
Overall, the perceived effectiveness was independent of whether a Reference was
presented (all F ≤ 1.47, all P ≥ .198, all η2 ≤ .012) and the presented Effect size (all
partial
F ≤ 0.54, all P ≥ .658, all η2 ≤ .004). Solely, the Effect format impacted the effectiveness
partial
perception (F(2.5, 610.35) = 10.37, P < .001, η2 = .041): The effectiveness in the absolute
partial
restricted mean survival time (RMST) format was perceived less effective compared to the
detectably different from each other (all t(244) ≤ 0.40, all p ≥ .999, all d ≤ .02). These
findings were irrespective of knowledge on hazards (all F ≤ 2.61, all P ≥ .062, all
η2 ≤ .011) or relative probabilities (all F ≤ 2.58, all P ≥ .078, all η2 ≤ .021).
partial partial
Acceptance of Communication
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
Conversely, the restricted mean survival time format was considered more acceptable
compared to the other Effect formats (F(2.64, 643.63) = 10.44, all P < .001, η2 = .041; all
partial
all P ≥ .605, all η2 ≤ .006) and the presented Effect size (all F ≤ 1.77, all P ≥ .172, all
partial
η2 ≤ .014) played no considerable role in the evaluation of the acceptance of the
partial
information. Overall, the acceptance was judged to be more unacceptable than acceptable
(i.e., below the scale mean).
Recall
The recall performance was generally low. Because the participants failed to recall any
effect sizes in some combinations, no full model could be estimated. Given that the hazard
ratios were presented in round numbers, the recall performance was better compared to the
other Effect formats (χ2(3) = 28.24, P ≤ .001; 14% vs 7.2%/ 5.2%/ 4.4%).
Discussion
In contrast to our expectations, the general practitioner sample could not reliably judge
the effect size in any format and providing a reference did not help to put the effect sizes into
perspective. Interestingly, general practitioners preferred the restricted mean survival time
format to the other formats, while judging the effectiveness to be lower. This pattern provides
us with further information how effect sizes are inferred and should be communicated in
medical practice.
In particular, it is not an absolute format per se that leads to smaller effect size
estimates: While the absolute risk reduction in percentage points roughly compares to the
relative risk measures in effectiveness perceptions, only reporting the effect on the time scale
results in treatments to be regarded less effective.
The findings further demonstrate that there is no intuition for the practical relevance of
a treatment effect regardless of effectiveness communication format. This can be inferred
from the general inability to replicate a rank order of effect sizes, the lack of appreciation for
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
the provision of a reference group that should have enhanced transparency of the
communication, and generally low acceptance ratings. Given the preference in acceptance for
the absolute time format compared to the other formats and wide-spread conceptual problems
in understanding hazard ratios and relative risks, this could indicate that one should further
work to improve the transparency particular of this way of communicating treatment success.
This could be achieved by providing normative information on effect sizes in the same mean
survival time metric for various, well-known treatments. Furthermore, using mean survival
times instead of the restricted means may help practitioners to better understand the metric at
the potential cost of overgeneralization. In this vein, the open question on how people
understand an increase in life expectancy promotes modeling modal rather than the mean or
the median survival time as an even more intuitive alternative. Future research should
scrutinize how such models could be established and whether the suggestions improve the
classification of effect sizes in practitioners and patients.
This study has limitations. The sample was a convenience sample of general
practitioners, so that results should be generalized rather cautiously. Because Weir et al. (9)
demonstrated that even RCT study authors could interpret the HR correct correctly with only
47% probability, the 12.8% we saw here in general practitioners seems rather plausible,
pointing to the sample being representative. Furthermore, the criterion of recovering the effect
size differences between practitioners is a rather strict measure for the understanding of effect
sizes. Future studies may improve on these methods for assessing correct inferences from
effect communication and further extend on this approach.
Conclusions
In sum, we used a novel method to assess the understanding of treatment success in
various time-dependent communication formats among general medical practitioners.
Findings indicate that there is no intuition for the practical relevance of an effect in any of the
formats. There seems to be an advantage for the acceptance of trial effectiveness
SURVIVAL TRIAL RISK COMMUNICATION
communication in absolute survival time, but further context needs to be provided. Future
medical communication should prefer the communication of trials results in survivals times to
the standard hazard ratio format.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate and publication
This study was approved was approved by the IRB of the Charité (EA1/306/23).
Consent to participation and publication was obtained from participants online and prior to
participation.
Availability of data and materials
All data and materials can be accessed via osf at osf.io/n5vy9 with the doi:
10.17605/OSF.IO/n5vy9.
Competing interests
None declared.
Funding
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation [DFG] under Grant
441541975.
Authors’ contributions
All authors designed the study. HG analyzed and interpreted the data. HG drafted the
manuscript with critical input from OK, OW, and WG. HG and WG financed the study. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
None reported.