Revisiting Defensive Motivation and the Error-Related
Negativity: A Multi-Site Replication Study
Amy R. Bland1†, Daniel E. Bradford2, Angelica DeFalco3, Gary Dicks1, Nelson J. Trujillo Barreto1,4, Valerie
Bertaina-Anglade5, Philippe L’hostis5, Arzhelenn Guillo5, Gilles Pourtois6, Nan Wang6, Zhong-Xu Liu7,
Anna Fischer8, Francesco Grassi8, Anne Schacht8, Annika Ziereis8, Brandi Lee Drisdelle9, Alexis D. J.
Makin10, Elena Karakashevska10, Ned Buckley10, Ingmar E. J. de Vries11,12, Jasper J.F. van den Bosch13,
Greg Hajcak14, Dan Foti15, Faisal Mushtaq13, Yuri G. Pavlov16
1School of Psychology, Manchester Metropolitan University, UK, 2School of Psychological Science, Oregon State
University, USA, 3Department of Psychology, Colorado State University, USA, 4School of Health Sciences, University
of Manchester, UK, 5Biotrial, Core Lab, Rennes, France, 6Department of Experimental Clinical & Health Psychology,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 7Department of Behavioral Sciences, University of Michigan-Dearborn, Dearborn,
Michigan, USA, 8Department for Cognition, Emotion and Behavior, University of Goettingen, Germany, 9School of
Psychological Science, University of Bristol, UK, 10Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK,
11Centre for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento, Italy, 12Donders Institute, Radboud University, The
Netherlands, 13School of Psychology, University of Leeds, 14School of Education and Counseling Psychology, Santa
Clara University, USA, 15Purdue University, USA,16University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
*Correspondence to Amy R. Bland, Manchester Metropolitan University, a.bland@mmu.ac.uk
Competing Interests:
The authors disclose no conflicts of interest related to this manuscript.
Funding:
#EEGManyLabs is funded by the DFG (PA 4005/1-1) and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BB/X008428/1). The funders had no role in study design or the decision to submit the
work for publication.
Abstract
A large number of EEG studies have identified a distinct event related potential (ERP) component
during error processing known as the Error-Related Negativity (ERN). In an influential study,
Hajcak and Foti (2008) explored the idea that errors could trigger defensive motivational reactions
and that the ERN might forecast the intensity of defensive reactions following errors. Using a
flanker task, thirty-one college-aged participants responded to the direction of a central arrow with
acoustic startle probes administered pseudo-randomly throughout. Hajcak and Foti’s (2008)
findings indicated the ERN is indicative of individual variations in aversive reactions to errors. This
has influenced understanding of the ERN being more than a simple error detection mechanism
and sheds light on how people differ in their emotional responses to mistakes. As part of the
#EEGManyLabs project, an international network of laboratories, we will test the replicability of
the results from this influential study. The data will later be combined to compute global effect
sizes of the ERN, startle potentiation, and their interaction. Collectively, these replications will help
solidify the results from this highly-cited study. Given that the ERN is an integral part of a broader
neural system responding to potentially threatening stimuli, this replication will provide a more
solid foundation for our understanding of error processing and its relationship to defensive
reactivity.
Introduction
One of the most widely studied event-related potentials (ERP) is the Error-Related Negativity
(ERN). The ERN is characterized by a large deflection in the ERP waveform that peaks within
~100 milliseconds of an erroneous response (Gehring et al., 2018). Studies utilizing source
localization suggest that the ERN is generated in the medial frontal cortex, and more specifically
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC; Dehaene et al., 2003; Holroyd et al., 1998; Miltner et al., 1997)
although more recent studies suggest that the ERN may also arise from alternate brain regions
such as the supplementary motor area (SMA; Bonini et al., 2014) or the pre-supplementary motor
area (preSMA; Fu et al., 2019; Iannaccone et al., 2015). The ERN has been observed across
different stimuli and response modalities and is thought to reflect the activity of a generic response
monitoring system (Bernstein et al., 1995; Dehaene et al., 2003; Falkenstein et al., 2001),
signaling a need to increase cognitive control and make behavioral adjustments (Botvinick et al.,
2001). After 25 years of investigation, the ERN’s prominence is clear, with new theories about its
functional significance continuing to emerge. More recently, it has been listed as a core
physiological marker of Cognitive Control, Sustained Threat, and Reward Learning in the
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) that forms the basis of National Institute of Mental Health’s
(NIMH) efforts to understand symptoms relevant to psychopathology. The ERN may be positioned
within a broader nomological network, integrating with other biomarkers allowing for a more
comprehensive understanding of error processing, emotional regulation, and individual
differences. This has the potential to refine diagnostic strategies and move toward personalised
treatment approaches.
The ERN component is largely regarded as a neural index of response monitoring processes
(Bernstein et al., 1995; Holroyd et al., 2003; Luu et al., 2000). However, as affective and
motivational variables influence the magnitude of ERN, the ERN may relate to emotional and
motivational aspects of error detection. Indeed, individuals and groups characterized by excessive
concern over errors – for whom errors may be both more salient and more aversive – show
enhanced ERN amplitudes (Riesel et al., 2013). Specifically, the ERN has been implicated as a
biomarker of obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD; Gehring et al., 2000), worry (Hajcak et al.,
2003) and extreme negative affective experience (Hajcak et al., 2004; Luu et al., 2000).
Importantly, the enhanced ERN often observed, is rarely reflected in performance differences,
suggesting that the magnitude of the ERN varies as a function of motivational states independent
of behavioral measures (Weinberg et al., 2012). Therefore, rather than indexing error or conflict
detection per se, the ERN may be sensitive to dynamically established goal states, and reflect
the negative affective response to errors (Hajcak et al., 2005).
Following the idea that the ERN may reflect more than simple error detection, Hajcak and Foti
(2008) were the first to demonstrate a direct link between errors and defensive motivation. Arguing
that error detection should prompt defensive motivation and rapidly activate reflexes and
dispositions toward action that protect the organism, they sought to determine whether defensive
responding would similarly be increased following errors, compared with correct responses. The
authors used startle potentiation, a robust psychophysiological measure of defensive reactivity.
This refers to an increase in the intensity of the startle reflex in response to a sudden, intense
stimulus (typically a loud, sudden noise) under aversive or threatening conditions relative to
neutral conditions. Hajcak and Foti (2008) hypothesized that startle responses would be larger
(i.e., potentiated) after errors than after correct responses, given the aversive nature of error-
making. Furthermore, they hypothesized that if the ERN reflects a motivationally relevant correlate
of error processing, larger ERNs should predict greater startle potentiation following errors. To
test their hypotheses, Hajcak and Foti (2008) recorded ERNs using EEG and startle responses
using electromyographic (EMG) activity in thirty-one undergraduate students (26 male, 5 female).
Their experimental paradigm included both predictable and unpredictable acoustic startle probes
whilst simultaneously measuring error-related brain activity to determine whether individuals with
larger ERNs would demonstrate greater startle potentiation following errors. Consistent with their
hypotheses, the ERN appeared to be indicative of individual variations in aversive reactions to
errors. Subsequent work by these investigators, and others, has led to the proposal that the ERN
could be a potential neural marker for defensive motivation, with variance in the ERN reflecting
individual differences in the degree to which errors are evaluated as threatening (Weinberg et al.,
2016). This perspective aligns with the idea that the ERN could be part of a broader neural system
involved in responding to potentially threatening stimuli.
Since its publication, Hajcak and Foti (2008)’s article has been cited over 450 times according to
Google Scholar. Given the influence this result has had on the scientific study of error processing,
testing its replicability is especially important to validate further findings that may have clinical
implications. Indeed, the reliability and replicability of research findings is a widespread concern
in the scientific community. It has raised questions about the robustness of many published
studies and the overall credibility of scientific research. To ameliorate the state of study
replication, the #EEGManyLabs project is seeking to shed light on the robustness of results in
highly cited and influential electroencephalographic (EEG) studies (Pavlov et al., 2021).
Replication is essential for ensuring that these EEG findings are robust, credible, and contribute
meaningfully to the advancement of our understanding of psychological phenomena, which is
particularly prudent for clinically-relevant results. Hajcak and Foti (2008) recruited only 31
participants which was typical in the field at that time. Yet, despite the interest in the ERN and
defensive motivation, there have only been two attempts to replicate the original procedure,
measures, and analyses. One successful replication was conducted by the original authors who
found a significant correlation between ERN magnitude and error-potentiated startle (Riesel et
al., 2013). However this was only evident in a subgroup of 16 participants exhibiting higher ERNs.
Lewis and Pitts failed to find a significant correlation between ERN and startle potentiation (r=-
.25, p=.11, one-tailed). However, it is important to note that the small sample size of 51
participants, though larger than the original study sample size, may not have been sufficiently
powered to detect the effect.
In addition to concerns about statistical power, the generalizability of past studies have been
questioned. There is also a consistent bias towards studies taking place in the United States
which has been met with a recent push towards globalized efforts (Ledgerwood et al., 2022).
Therefore it is important to build upon attempted replications of this influential study by utilizing
an international network of laboratories. Both the original study and Lewis and Pitts’ replication
effort was conducted in the USA, therefore diversifying this original study’s sample (i.e., applying
a global sample) will increase the generalizability of its results and, ultimately, better test whether
the ERN is a marker of defensive motivation in the broader population. While the currently
committed participating labs are based in W.E.I.R.D. (Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich,
Democratic) countries, we will seek to recruit more international labs ahead of Stage 2 of this
Registered Report.
The focus on replicating highly cited ERP studies is motivated by the field’s reliance on these
typically smaller sample sizes and the complex data analysis methods that allow for researcher
degrees of freedom (Simmons et al., 2011). As part of the #EEGManyLabs project (Pavlov et al.,
2021), the current Registered Report proposes a close replication of Hajcak and Foti (2008),
involving the collection of data from laboratories across UK, USA, Germany, France, and Belgium
to test the robustness of the ERN, in tandem with startle potentiation, as a biomarker of defensive
motivation. Having a large international sample will provide clearer evidence into how this study
design and results replicate and generalize. The data will later be combined to compute global
effect sizes of ERN, startle potentiation, and their interaction. Collectively, these replications will
place our understanding of error processing on firmer grounds.
There have been few studies that have since investigated the direct relationship between the
startle response and ERN. Riesel et al., (2013) found that an association between ERN and error-
potentiated startle was only observed in a subgroup of adults with relatively large ERN amplitude.
More recent studies have found mixed evidence in children whereby Meyer et al., (2017) found a
relationship between ERN and aversive potentiation of the startle reflex during picture viewing
whereas Jackson et al., (2017) found no relationship between the ERN and startle response in
8–14 year old girls. Conversely, Lo et al., (2015) found a significant result but in the opposite
direction whereby smaller ERNs were associated with high defensive reactivity (larger startle) in
3-7-year old children. Furthermore, although studies have supported the notion that the ERN
reflects motivational reactivity to errors in relation to anxiety (Moser et al., 2013; Moser et al.,
2016; Pasion and Barbosa, 2019; Saunders and Inzlicht, 2020), recent work challenges this
interpretation. For instance, Clayson (2024), using a multiverse analysis, has highlighted
inconsistencies in the relationship between the ERN and anxiety, raising questions about whether
heightened ERN amplitudes universally reflect increased defensive emotional reactivity. These
findings underscore the need for rigorous, high-powered replications to clarify the functional
significance of the ERN. If our replication supports the original findings, it will reinforce the
framework linking the ERN to defensive motivation. Conversely, a failure to replicate would
necessitate a re-evaluation of the theoretical models underpinning the ERN’s functional
significance and motivate further investigations into alternative explanations, such as the role of
individual differences, task characteristics, or broader contextual factors.
By clarifying the ERN’s reliability and theoretical underpinnings, this replication effort will inform
both basic research and clinical applications, contributing to a more comprehensive
understanding of neural mechanisms underlying error processing and emotional reactivity. Our
primary hypothesis (H.1) is that the magnitude of the ERN correlates with the degree of startle
potentiation following errors: participants with larger ERNs demonstrate greater startle
potentiation following errors. Additionally (H.2), we will test whether startle responses will be larger
after errors than after predictable and unpredictable correct responses.
Methods
This manuscript adheres to the recommended open science practices for psychophysiological
research outlined by Garrett-Ruffin et al. (2021). All study materials, including comprehensive
details about each site, including equipment and electrode specifications, site-specific language,
and participant recruitment procedures, and code for stimulus presentation and data processing
repository functions as a central hub, connecting to raw EEG data as well as data processing and
analysis code.
This replication is a global initiative involving replicating labs that encompass multiple independent
study sites geographically dispersed. At the time of the initial Stage 1 report submission, there
are 8 replicating labs. Each lab will secure approval from their local institutional review
board/ethics committee to conduct the study and share de-identified data.
Participants
Participants will be recruited from the local community which is likely to be predominantly, but not
limited to, undergraduate and postgraduate students. Participants will be required to give written
informed consent before participating. The inclusion criterion is that participants must be 18 years
of age or older with no known hearing problems and typical-to-corrected vision needed in order
to properly complete the behavioral task. Individuals recruited from undergraduate courses will
receive compensation in the form of course credit for their time, while those from the community
will be remunerated in accordance with local policies governing participant compensation.
Power Analysis
A power analysis was conducted using G*Power (Kang et al., 2021) based on an effect size
estimate from the original study for the central finding (H.1). The statistics from the original study
showed a correlation between the amplitude of the ERN and the degree to which errors
potentiated the startle response as r = −.38, p<.05. To counteract potential overestimation of the
true effect size, we took into account that the effect size in pre-registered studies is about half the
size of that in large-scale replications (Open Science Collaboration, 2015) and studies without
pre-registration (Schäfer & Schwarz, 2019). Assuming that the effect size is half of what was
observed in the original study (i.e., -.19), a total of 303 participants will be needed to achieve 90%
statistical power, in a one-sided test. For H.2, regarding the effect stating that startle magnitudes
are larger following errors than following correct trials (original study results: t(30) = 2.51;
estimated dz = 0.451), the power analysis indicated that a sample of 57 participants is required.
The anticipated data collection involves each replicating lab gathering EEG data from as many
as necessary to collectively gather data from at least 303 participants overall.
Procedure
The procedure will follow, as closely as possible, the process described in Hajcak and Foti (2008)
with any deviations stated explicitly. Participants will be recruited via Institutional Review Board
or Ethics Committee approved channels, using approved language. Upon their arrival to the lab,
they will receive a verbal description of the experiment, have an opportunity to ask questions, and
provide informed consent.
Participants will then be prepared for the EEG and EMG recordings in the participant room. First,
the EEG cap will be positioned on the participant’s head, followed by four EOG facial electrodes
which will be placed on the orbicularis oculi and two EMG electrodes which will be placed under
the left eye to record eyeblink startle response. Once all sensors are correctly placed, participants
will have a chance to familiarize themselves with the task and response buttons with a practice
block of 30 trials, which will not be included in analysis. The training session will last approximately
3 minutes. Participants will then complete the flanker task. comprising 8 blocks of 30 trials (240
total trials) with feedback text written in between each block, using the mouse button to respond.
If the participant’s accuracy is below 75% or above 90%, the text will encourage the participant to
make more accurate or faster responses, respectively.
As part of the broader initiative on EEG replicability (#EEGManyLabs), in addition to replicating
the study, labs will also collect resting state EEG data and certain personality measures (see
current study; however, they will be consolidated across sites for a future replication project, the
findings of which will be reported separately. However, the inclusion of these measures will also
allow us to address exploratory subsidiary research questions such as the influence of trait anxiety
on the variability of ERN and the startle response. It will also allow us to test for potentially
confounding variables such as whether participants have experienced neurological, psychiatric
or sleep issues as well as current medications (for a full list of measures please see
Following the Flanker task, participating labs will gather 8 minutes of resting state EEG, and
participants will complete three brief questionnaires (translated into the local language where
applicable), including the Karolinska Sleepiness Scale (KSS; Åkerstedt & Gillberg, 1990), the
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson et al., 1988), and the State Anxiety
Inventory Version (STAI; Spielberger et al., 1970). Participating labs will also collect the Edinburgh
Handedness Inventory (EHI; Oldfield, 1971), the Behavioral Inhibition and Approach System
Scales (BIS-BAS; (Carver & White, 1994), the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale
(Radloff, 1977), the Short Version of the Big Five Inventory (Gerlitz & Schupp, 2005) and the Trait
Anxiety Inventory Version (STAI; Spielberger et al., 1970) in advance of the participant’s lab visit.
Upon completion, participants will be debriefed, compensated and released. In all, the task
(including electrode preparation) should last about one hour to an hour and a half.
Experimental Paradigm
The experimental paradigm will closely follow the methodology of Hajcak and Foti (2008) where
they used an arrowhead version (using < and > symbols) of the flanker task previously used in
(Hajcak et al., 2005). All participants will perform one practice block of 30 trials where the startle
probe will be delivered on 10% of all trials. As described in Hajcak and Foti (2008), the task was
presented as follows: On each trial, five horizontally aligned arrowheads were presented, and
participants had to respond to the direction of the central arrowhead by pressing the left or right
mouse button. Participants will be instructed to use their index and middle fingers on their
dominant hand. The response window will be limited to 1800ms (or 2000ms from stimulus onset);
if the participant does not respond within this window the response will be counted as incorrect.
On compatible trials, all five arrowheads pointed in the same direction (either left or right), and on
incompatible trials, the central arrowhead pointed in the direction opposite the direction of the
flanking arrowheads. Compatible and incompatible trials were equally frequent, and all stimuli
were presented for 200 ms with an intertrial interval that varied randomly from 500 to 1000 ms.
Participants performed eight blocks of 30 trials. At the end of each block, performance from the
block was calculated and participants received feedback designed to encourage fast and accurate
responding. If performance was 75% correct or lower, the message “Please try to be more
accurate” was displayed; performance above 90% correct was followed by “Please try to respond
faster”; if performance was between these levels, the message “You're doing a great job” was
displayed (Hajcak & Foti, 2008).
The experiment was originally programmed using Presentation (Neurobehavioral Systems, Inc.,
(English, German, and French).
Startle probe
Startle will be elicited with a 105-dB burst of white noise, 50-ms in duration and near instantaneous
rise time presented 300 ms after the response. Startle probe delivery will be performed through
headphones worn by the participant during the task, which will be connected to a stimulation
computer. Loudness will be assessed using a sound meter. Startle probes will be presented on
50% of error trials, on 50% of correct trials that followed errors, and on a random 4% of other
correct trials. This means that some startle probes are predictable (after both errors and correct
trials that followed errors), whereas others are not (randomly selected correct trials). Accordingly,
there are three trial types: error trials, predictable correct trials (i.e., correct trials on which the
startle probe is predictable), and unpredictable correct trials (i.e., correct trials on which the startle
probe is not predictable).
At a maximum of 105 dB, the intensity of this sound is safely below levels at which there might be
any risk of pain or physical damage as established by OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health
Administration) and NIOSH (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health) guidelines.
Specifically, risk associated with noise exposure is reduced in the current experiment by limiting
noise intensity to 105 dB, limiting total noise exposure time to no more than 5 s, and using broad
spectrum noise (i.e., white noise). The portion of the experiment in which white noise bursts will
be delivered to participants will last approximately 10 minutes. During this period, participants will
be exposed to no more than 100, 50-millisecond bursts of white noise for a total of 5 seconds of
exposure. The OSHA recommended limit for noise exposure at 105 dB is no more than 1 hour/day
(OSHA section 191095).
Neurophysiological Recordings
In Hajcak and Foti’s (2008) study, continuous electroencephalographic (EEG) and
electromyographic (EMG) activity was recorded using an ActiveTwo head cap and the ActiveTwo
BioSemi system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Recordings were taken from 64 scalp
electrodes based on the 10-20 system, as well as from two electrodes placed on the left and right
mastoids. The replicating labs will be using one of the following EEG systems: (1) ANT Neuro
eego mylab with 64-channel Waveguard Touch caps 2) Brain Products actiCHamp Plus, (3) Grael
labs will record data with equivalent Cz, Fz, and Pz channels, and mastoids (TP9, TP10)
positioned according to the extended 10/20 EEG system (Chatrian et al., 1985).
Hajcak and Foti’s (2008) measured the startle response using standard procedures for assessing
defensive reactivity (Bradley et al., 2005; Grillon et al., 1994). The electrooculogram (EOG)
generated from blinks and eye movements was recorded from four facial electrodes: two
approximately 1 cm above and below the participant's right eye, one approximately 1 cm to the
left of the left eye, and one approximately 1 cm to the right of the right eye. The startle response
was measured with two electrodes placed approximately 12 mm apart under the participant's left
eye on the obicularis muscle. All labs will record EMG from the same positions and most labs will
Participating Amplifier Electrode/Cap Sampling Reference, Online Filter Screen Type, Stimulus Sound delivery EMG
University System Model, Number Rate Ground Size, Ratio, Presentation, system electrodes
EEG + EOG Refresh Rate Language for fear
potentiated
startle
(FPS)
Manchester ANT Neuro 64-channel 1000Hz M1,M2 Anti-aliasing LED/IPS, 24 in, Psychopy, Headphones External
Metropolitan eego Waveguard Touch hardware filter 1920x1080, 60 English (Audio Technica bipolar EMG
University, mylab caps + ref/gnd + 2 Hz ATH-M30x) and channel
United channels (4 sound meter
Kingdom electrodes of
EOG
Oregon State Brain 32 channel 2500Hz Left mastoid Brain LED ASUS TUF Presentation, Headphones EEG cap
University, Products actiCAP slim/snap (online); Products anti- 23.8” 1080P English (Sennheiser HD electrodes in
USA actiCHamp 6 electrodes from linked aliasing Monitor 280 Pro) and bipolar
plus set diverted as mastoids hardware filter (VG249Q1R) sound meter montage
external (offline);
electrodes (26 dedicated
cap; 6 external); 2 ground
horizontal EOG, 2
vertical EOG, 2
mastoid
CORE Lab, Grael, 32 channel quik- 512Hz M1,M2 BP filter: 0.1- IIYAMA Prolite Eprime, French Headphones External
Rennes, Compume cap (4 EOG) 70 Hz E2083 HSD (Sennheiser HD bipolar EMG
France dics LED,, 19 in, 25-1 II) and channel
1600x900 chronos device
resolution
Ghent Active two 64-channel, 512Hz Online CMS LP filter: 19-inch CRT Psychopy, Headphones and External
English
University, Biosemi electro-cap & DRL; 102.4 Hz monitor (1600 x artificial ear bipolar EMG
Belgium including CMS & offline 1200 resolution (GRAS 43AG-S2, channel
DRL, six external linked at 75Hz) Ear and Cheek
electrodes (4 mastoids Simulator with
EOG) Kemar Pinna)
ASUS ROG Swift
PG248Q 24-inch
University of Active two 64-channel, 512 Hz Online CMS Anti-aliasing Psychopy, Headphones Biosemi
Michigan- Biosemi electro-cap & DRL; hardware and (1920x1080), English (Sennheiser HD EMG/ECG
Dearborn, USA including CMS & Offline digital 25); Creative (external)
144Hz
DRL, six external linked software filter blaster AE-7 active
electrodes (4 mastoids sound card channels
EOG)
Alienware 25
University of Active two 64-channels, 1024 Hz Online CMS Upper Psychopy, Bayerdynamic DT Biosemi
Goettingen, Biosemi electrode-caps and DRL, hardware Gamingmonitor English 770 PRO EMG
Germany including CMS & offline limit: ⅕th of headphones external
AW2523HF,
DRL, eight linked sampling rate active flat
24.5", 1920 x
external mastoids as bandwidth- electrodes
1080 resolution,
electrodes filter (204.8
255 Hz
(mastoids, vertical Hz)
and horizontal
EOG, EMG)
Asus ROG
University of Brain 64 channels, 1000 Hz Online CMS Brain Psychopy, Headphones EEG cap
PG248Q, 24-
Bristol, United Products acticap snap and DRL, Products English (Sony WH-CH500) electrodes
inch,
Kingdom actiCHamp including CMS & offline antialising
(1920x1080),
plus DRL, 6 electrodes linked filter
resolution at 60
from set diverted mastoids
Hz
as external
electrodes (58
cap; 6 external); 2
horizontal EOG, 2
vertical EOG, 2
mastoid
HP E233 LED
University of Active two 64-channels, 512 Hz Online CMS Upper Psychopy, Headphones Biosemi
Liverpool, Uk Biosemi electrode-caps and DRL, hardware backlit monitor, English (Audio Technica EMG
plus CMS & DRL, offline limit: ⅕th of ATH-M30x) and external
with 60Hz refresh
8 external linked sampling rate sound meter active flat
rate
electrodes mastoids as bandwidth- electrodes
(mastoids, vertical filter
and horizontal (approximatel
EOG) y 104 Hz)
EEG data processing
All EEG data will be analyzed in EEGLAB (Delorme & Makeig, 2004) and processed using the
pipeline that follows the original study as closely as possible (see Hajcak and Foti, 2008) and also
the pipeline that follows the current standard in the field. Before implementing both pipelines, we
will downsample EEG data to a common denominator of 250 Hz, making data analysis more
efficient without compromising the quality of results.
In the pipeline closely following the original study, EEG data will be re-referenced to the numeric
mean of the mastoids and band-pass filtered with cutoffs of 0.1 and 30 Hz. The EEG will be
segmented for each trial, beginning 200 ms before the response and continuing for 800 ms. The
EEG will be corrected for blinks and eye movements using the method developed by Gratton et
al. (1983). Specific intervals for individual channels will be rejected in each trial using a
semiautomated procedure, with physiological artifacts identified by the following criteria: a voltage
step of more than 50.0 μV between sample points, a voltage difference of more than 300.0 μV
within a trial, and a maximum voltage difference of less than 0.50 μV within a 100-ms interval.
We will complement this direct replication with a modern preprocessing approach optimized for
measuring ERN (Clayson et al., 2021) to test the robustness of the reported effects. If the modern
pipeline provides evidence for a similar pattern of results as the original, the effect will be
considered not only replicated but also robust and, to some extent, independent of analytical
choices. If the direct replication fails - expected effects fail to reach significance - we will conclude
that the replicability of the effect depends on analytical choices and is not robust.
The modern approach (Clayson et al., 2021) involves: (1) re-referencing to the numeric mean of
the mastoids, (2) implementing a bandpass filter ranging from 0.1 to 30Hz; (2) employing a notch
filter set at 50/60Hz (depending on the lab) to eliminate any electrical noise; (3) performing
spherical interpolation of channel activity that remains constant or significantly deviates from the
activity of other channels, determined through visual inspection of data and plotting channel
spectra maps; (4) removal of extremely noisy data segments (for improving Independent
Component Analysis (ICA) performance) as detected by EEGLAB’s clean_artifacts.m function,
which uses the artifact subspace reconstruction (ASR) algorithm; (5) cleaning the data of ocular,
muscular, or ‘bad’ channel artifacts with ICA (using the function ‘runica’ implemented in EEGLAB)
and using SASICA (Semi-Automated Selection of Independent Components of the
electroencephalogram for Artifact correction) plugin in EEGLAB (Chaumon, Bishop, & Busch,
2015). The following options will be enabled in SASICA: ‘Autocorrelation’ to differentiate muscle
components (components reflecting brain data are known to be strongly autocorrelated), ‘Focal
components’ (to determine bad channels), ‘Signal to noise ratio’ (to reject components with a low
signal to noise ratio), and ADJUST (for detection of eyeblinks, and vertical and horizontal eye
movements). The decision to reject or retain components will follow SASICA’s recommendations,
for reproducibility and consistency across analysts; (6) rejecting outlier epochs in terms of
kurtosis, joint probability, or power spectrum (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007). Specifically, kurtosis
and joint probability are computed over time for each trial and each electrode using EEGLAB’s
pop_rejkurt.m and pop_jointprob.m functions, respectively, after which these values are
normalized by subtracting the trial-average and dividing by the standard deviation over trials.
Trials with a normalized kurtosis or joint probability higher than 3.29 are considered outliers and
rejected. Similarly, power spectra in the frequency band from 1 to 30 Hz are computed per trial
and per electrode using EEGLAB’s pop_rejspec.m function, after which these are dB normalized
and the trial-average is subtracted. Trials with an absolute average power value of more than 90
dB are considered outliers and rejected. The same epoching and baseline correction measures
will be applied here as in the original pipeline.
To determine whether the magnitude of the ERN predicts the increase in startle following errors,
we will define startle potentiation for each participant as the startle magnitude after errors minus
the average of startle responses on predictable correct and unpredictable correct trials. The ERN
will be defined as the average activity at electrode FCz as used in Hajcak and Foti (2008) or Cz
if FCz is not available, as the ERN can be captured at Cz as well (Sandre et al., 2020), in the 0-
to 100-ms time window following response onset in error trials, after applying single-trial baseline
normalization using the -100 to 0 ms window before response onset as baseline.
The original study did not specify participant exclusion criteria based on the number of trials
remaining after artifact rejection. In both pipelines, to ensure sufficient data quality, we will exclude
participants for whom more than 75% of trials are rejected overall or fewer than six trials per
condition remain. The latter criterion is based on evidence that the ERN demonstrates sufficient
reliability with a minimum of six trials (Olvet and Hajcak, 2009). The feedback text written in
between each block, will encourage the participant to make faster responses, and therefore is
intended to encourage errors. We will report the number of participants excluded from analysis.
EMG data processing
For the startle data, EMG activity will be band-pass filtered (28–512 Hz; 24 dB/octave roll-off),
rectified, then low-pass filtered at 30 Hz (24 dB/octave) and baseline-corrected (-50 to 0 ms time
window). Individual trials will be examined and rejected if the startle reflex began less than 20 ms
following probe onset. Startle response magnitudes and latencies will be quantified in terms of
the peak in the 20- to 120-ms window after the presentation of the startle probe.
As well as adhering closely to the data preprocessing protocol outlined in Hajcak and Foti (2008),
in addition, we will also implement a more recent pipeline optimized for measuring EMG startle
(Bradford et al., 2014). This involves: (1) high-pass filtering (4th order 28 Hz Butterworth filter,
zero phase shift), (2) epoching from 50 ms pre-probe to 250 ms post-probe onset, (3) rectifying
and smoothing (2nd order 30 Hz Butterworth low-pass filter, zero phase shift) the data. We will
reject trials with values greater than +/- 20 μV in the 50 ms pre-probe to 10 ms post-probe window
as artifact (i.e., unstable baseline). We will reject trials with mean amplitude less than -10 μV in
the 100-250 ms post-probe window as artifact (i.e., movement artifact and baseline over-
correction). Next, we will visually inspect figures of epochs of all processed startle data (all trials
vs. accepted trials vs. algorithm rejected trials) and manually reject trials with excessive deflection
in the baseline or post-probe windows not detected by automatic artifact detection. We will
exclude participants who have lost >30 % of trials due to artifact rejection.
Statistical analyses
To test H.1, we will use Pearson's correlation between the ERN and startle response. To test H.2,
we will run 2 x 2 ANOVA of startle magnitude with factors predictability (predictable,
unpredictable) and trial type (i.e., correct or error). The effect of trial type will be used to make the
conclusion of whether startle responses are larger after errors than after correct responses. The
ERN and startle responses will be statistically evaluated with R. Greenhouse-Geisser correction
will be applied to p values associated with multiple-df, repeated measures comparisons.
Evaluation of the Replication of Effects
Replication success was defined in the #EEGManyLabs protocol (Pavlov et al., 2021). For each
hypothesis separately, we will, first, compute effect sizes (H.1: Pearson’s r Fisher’s z-transformed,
H.2: Cohen’s dz) for each individual lab and then combine all datasets in a random-effects meta-
analysis (with labs as a random effect) using the REML estimator for random-effects variance.
Employing a random-effects meta-analysis will address and help in estimating the effect of
heterogeneity in EEG devices and samples between labs. The replication will be considered
successful if a statistically significant meta-analytic estimate (p < .02) across replicating labs is
observed and if the effect is in the expected direction. We will report distribution of the weighted
effect sizes, their 95% confidence intervals, heterogeneity (τ2). The metafor package
(Viechtbauer, 2010) for R will be used for the meta-analyses.
If either H.1 or H.2 results in statistically non-significant effects, we will estimate evidence for the
null hypothesis using a random-effects Bayesian meta-analysis. For this, we will use JASP (Love
et al., 2019) with default priors (Cauchy prior with a scale of 0.707).