Spatial Proximity Determines Overshadowing Between Landmarks in Human Spatial
Navigation
1,2 3 3
Estibaliz Herrera , Joe M. Austen , Gonzalo P. Urcelay
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
GSU/GT Center for Advanced Brain Imaging, Atlanta, GA, USA.
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK.
Submitted: December, 2024
Author notes
This research was supported by a UK Economic and Social Research Council Grant
(ES/R011494/2) awarded to GPU, and by a doctorate studentship from the University of
Leicester (UK) awarded to EH. These findings were presented at the Society for
Neuroscience (2023) in Washington D.C. The authors declare no financial interest associated
was not preregistered. The data reported in this paper are available at DOI:
10.17639/nott.7507. CRediT: Estibaliz Herrera served as lead for conceptualization,
investigation, formal analysis, methodology, visualization, validation, software, and writing–
original draft. Joe M. Austen served as a lead for software, data acquisition, validation, and
data curation, and served in a supporting role for formal analysis, methodology, visualization,
writing–review and editing. Gonzalo P. Urcelay served as lead for conceptualization,
investigation, project administration, resources, funding acquisition, methodology, formal
analysis, visualization, writing–review and editing.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gonzalo P. Urcelay
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK. Email:
gonzalo.urcelay@nottingham.ac.uk or Estibaliz Herrera, School of Psychology, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA. GSU/GT Center for Advanced Brain
Imaging, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA. Email: estibaliz.herrera@psych.gatech.edu
Abstract
Previous studies involving birds and humans have identified spatial proximity as a source of
overshadowing between landmarks in navigation. In Herrera et al. (2024), subjects were
trained in an open environment to find a hidden goal with reference to a cross-shaped array of
four landmarks placed at various distances from it. Critically, two of the four landmarks (i.e.,
target landmarks) were placed at distances that were common among groups whereas the
remaining two were either proximal or distal from them. Landmarks near to the goal
overshadowed (i.e., competed with) learning about the further ones, and this effect
disappeared in the groups trained with distal landmarks. However, neither of these studies
included a control group providing a base line performance to assess the extent of
competition; were the data indicative of overshadowing or facilitation of learning? Thus, we
assessed whether spatial proximity determines overshadowing or facilitation between
landmarks, including a control group trained with the target landmarks only. We conducted
three experiments with varied training length: 6 training trials in Experiment 1 and 16 in
Experiments 2 and 3. We also extended the distance of the landmarks to the goal in
Experiment 3. In all experiments, we observed overshadowing in the groups trained with
closer nontarget landmarks (relative to the target) but no overshadowing when the nontarget
landmarks were distal from the target landmarks. Overall, these experiments reveal spatial
distance is a critical determinant of overshadowing between landmarks, a finding that is
consistent with domain-general theories of learning, such as a modification of Pearce’s
configural model.
Keywords: Spatial Cognition, Overshadowing, Competition, Proximity, Distance
Spatial Proximity Determines Overshadowing Between Landmarks in Human
Spatial Navigation
Landmarks provide relevant information about what ways we have to traverse our
environment to find destinations. However, it has been shown that when we experience
several landmarks simultaneously, these are usually weighted unevenly (Chen et al., 2017;
Cheng et al., 2007), with subjects relying more on some landmarks at the expense of others.
In other words, landmarks can enter into competition for behavioral control of navigation by
either blocking (Biegler & Morris, 1999) or overshadowing (Goodyear & Kamil, 2004;
Herrera et al., 2024) learning about other, usually less salient, landmarks of the array.
Organisms benefit from knowing the direction of a goal relative to salient places, but as a
representational mechanism it can be constraining, because each newly found place would
have to be linked with every other place in the environment (Jeffery, 2017).
Standard, domain-general theories of learning (Mackintosh, 2002; Pearce, 2009), when
applied to navigation, predict that landmarks should compete with each other (and/or with the
geometry of the environment) for control over navigation. However, domain-specific theories
have proposed that space is processed in an incidental manner in comparison with other input
systems, and thus there should be no competition between different sources of information
(e.g., landmarks and geometry; Gallistel, 1990; O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978). The literature is
clearly mixed, with some laboratories reporting said competition (Biegler & Morris, 1999;
Prados, 2011; Rodrigo et al., 1997) and some not (Pearce et al., 2001; Doeller & Burgess,
2008). To make matters more complicated, some laboratories have reported facilitation (i.e.,
the opposite to competition) between different sources of information in spatial learning
(Austen et al., 2013; Horne & Pearce, 2009; Pearce et al., 2006; Sturz et al., 2010). For
instance, Pearce et al. (2006) trained rodents to locate a hidden platform located in one of the
corners of either a kite-shaped or a rectangular pool. When the color of the wall surrounding
the goal location (e.g., white) was different from the opposite — distal — wall (e.g., black),
it facilitated learning about the global representation of the pool in the kite, but not in the
rectangle, relative to control groups which learned about the geometry alone (all walls were
white). In a further study conducted in the rectangular pool where the shorter walls were
white and the longer ones black, they found that learning about the geometry of the pool was
poorer in the experimental group compared to the all-white control group. Descriptively,
these experiments suggest that both competition and facilitation can be observed in spatial
learning, but the mechanisms remain unknown.
Although it is not entirely clear – at least at a psychological level - why some
laboratories have observed competition and some facilitation, accumulating evidence
suggests that temporal and spatial proximity may be key factors for cue interactions (for a
review see Herrera et al., 2022; Urcelay, 2017; Urcelay & Miller, 2009). For instance, in the
spatial domain it has been consistently found that different species such as birds (Cheng,
1992; Goodyear & Kamil, 2004; Gould-Beierle & Kamil, 1999; Spetch, 1995), gerbils
(Collett et al., 1986), bees (Cheng et al., 1987), rats (Chamizo & Rodrigo, 2004; Gimeno &
Chamizo, 2021), and humans (Deery & Commins., 2023; Herrera et al., 2022, 2024) tend to
rely on close sources of information relative to the goal location when navigating.
Similarly, Chamizo et al. (2006) trained 2 groups of rats in a Morris water maze to
locate the hidden escape platform in relation to a configuration of two landmarks, while they
manipulated the proximity of a third landmark that was either near (Bn group) or far (Bf
group) from the goal location. They tested both groups with the landmark configuration alone
and confirmed that the Bf group outperformed the Bn group, suggesting that spatial proximity
may be a key factor for competition to occur, results that are consistent with those found in
other species (Cheng et al., 1987; Goodyear & Kamil, 2004; Spetch, 1995). However, the
report by Chamizo did not include a control group trained with the landmark configuration
alone, so the extent to which competition occurred relative to a baseline measure is unknown.
In a recent study, Herrera and colleagues (2024) replicated in human participants a
study that Goodyear and Kamil (2004) conducted with Clark’s nutcrackers. Herrera et al.
trained human participants to find a hidden goal in a naturalistic virtual navigation task
resembling the experimental arrangements from Goodyear and Kamil. Participants
experienced the virtual environment from a first-person perspective and had to find a hidden
goal using an array of landmarks. That is, three groups of subjects were trained to find a
hidden goal in the presence of four distinct landmarks arranged in the shape of a cross, with a
hidden goal placed in its center. Landmarks were placed at different distances from the goal.
In Group Close, landmarks were located at 10, 30, 50 and 70 virtual units (hereafter, VUs)
from the goal. For Group Medium, these were located at 30, 50, 70 and 90 VUs, and for
Group Far these were located at 50, 70, 90 and 110 VUs. Following training, all groups were
tested with the 50 and 70 VUs landmarks (i.e., target landmarks). During test, subjects
showed better performance to the target landmarks when these were trained in the presence of
more distal landmarks (Group Far) relative to a group that received training with nontarget
landmarks close to the goal (Group Close; Group Medium performed in between these
groups). In other words, performance at test was “dose-dependent” on the distance of the
nontarget landmarks during training, thus revealing an effect of spatial proximity on spatial
learning.
One notable shortcoming of the studies by Goodyear & Kamil (2004) and Herrera and
colleagues (2024) is that the performance of the experimental groups (all trained with 4
landmarks and tested with just 2 of them) was not compared to a control group trained to
locate the goal with the target landmarks only (i.e., the 2 landmarks that were common across
groups, placed at 50 and 70 VUs from the goal), which would have provided a control for
overshadowing. The same caveat applies to the previously described rodent study conducted
by Chamizo and colleagues (2006), in which they observed more overshadowing of two
target landmarks by an additional landmark placed close to the goal relative to a landmark
that was distal from the goal. This precludes an assessment of the extent of overshadowing in
these studies. In other words, it is unclear from these studies whether the landmarks placed at
different distances overshadowed, had no effect, or perhaps facilitated performance based on
the target landmarks. Because the presence or absence of competition in the spatial domain
has been a litmus test for comparing domain-general (Mackintosh, 2002; Pearce, 2009) and
domain-specific (Gallistel, 1990; Jeffery, 2010) theories of learning, the current study sought
to assess whether nontarget landmarks placed at different distances from a goal interact
(compete, have no effect, or facilitate) with learning about target landmarks, relative to a
control group that only received training with the target landmarks.
In addition to assessing the effect of spatial proximity as a factor for interactions
between landmarks to occur, we wanted to assess whether overshadowing changes as a
function of practice. In nonspatial scenarios, it has been reported that overshadowing (and
other cue competition phenomena such as blocking and overexpectation) varies as a function
of the number of training trials. That is, whereas short compound training results in strong
competition, the effect wanes with extensive training (Bellingham & Gillette, 1981; Reed &
Quigley, 2019; Stout et al., 2003; Urcelay et al., 2012). In the spatial domain, it has been
suggested that navigation can engage two parallel strategies: learning the relative positions of
the cues in the environment (i.e., having a global representation of space, also known as place
learning), and acquiring a series of reinforced responses by repetition (i.e., stimulus-response
[S-R] associations). This has been supported by lesion work that has dissociated the
hippocampus and the striatum for place and S-R learning, respectively (Marchette et al.,
2011; Packard & McGaugh, 1996). For example, an inactivation study in rodents (Packard &
McGaugh, 1996) in which animals were trained in a T-maze, allowed dissociation of these
navigational strategies. They observed that hippocampal inactivation early in training
disrupted place learning, and striatal inactivation disrupted response learning after extended
training, revealing that the engagement of these strategies changes over time. In human
participants, however, a study (Marchette et al., 2011) that enabled the assessment of their
navigational style revealed that there is lots of variability in the degree of learning that
occurred in each system. Thus, despite these strategies presumably developing in parallel, it
is still not well understood how the differential engagement of these mechanisms develops
over the course of learning, and whether or not they compete for behavioral control. In a
recent study (Holden et al., 2021) in which participants were trained inside of a cross-shaped
arena for either 2, 4 or 16 trials, and their ability to transfer memories to the outside of the
arena was tested, they found very consistent results regardless of the extent of practice. Taken
together, these results highlight how little is yet known about the impact that practice may
have on spatial navigation, and in particular the evidence on how it may impact interactions
between landmarks in spatial navigation procedures is very sparse. In non-spatial tasks,
extended training sometimes abolishes cue-competition phenomena (Azorlosa & Cicala,
1982; Bellingham & Gillette, 1988) and sometimes results in facilitation (Urcelay et al.,
2012), therefore we also assessed the effect of extended training on the interaction between
landmarks.
In summary, the goal of this study was to assess, using the protocol in humans
developed by Herrera and colleagues (2024), whether overshadowing between landmarks
varied as a function of distance to the goal, with a control group which only experienced
training with the target landmarks. In addition, we explored whether overshadowing varied as
a function of practice, and whether facilitation could be observed with more distal landmarks.
We expected to see overshadowing of target landmarks by closer landmarks, and that the
effect would be attenuated (and perhaps reversed into facilitation) with more distal
landmarks. Thus, three experiments were conducted. In Experiment 1, participants were
trained for 6 trials whereas in Experiment 2, they received 16 training trials. In Experiment 3,
participants were trained for 16 trials with the target landmarks at longer distances from the
goal, in order to assess whether this configuration resulted in facilitation rather than
competition. In Experiments 1 and 2, Group Control experienced training with 2 landmarks
placed at 50 and 70 VUs from the goal, and the 3 experimental groups were trained with 4
Critically, the 50 and 70 VUs landmarks (i.e., target landmarks) were trained in all groups.
Group Close was trained with an additional pair of landmarks placed at 10 and 30 VUs from
the goal, for Group Medium these were located at 30 and 90 VUs, and for Group Far, they
were at 90 and 110 VUs. Following training, we assessed how well participants could
estimate the goal location in the presence of the 50 and 70 VUs landmarks in all four groups.
In Experiment 3, the experimental design was the same as in Experiment 2, but the target
landmarks were placed at 90 and 110 VUs from the goal in Group Control, and nontarget
landmarks distances in the three experimental groups were also increased by 40 VUs. In all
experiments, latencies to find the goal location were used as indicators of performance during
training, and errors in distance estimation were the dependent measure during test.
Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Two hundred and thirty-four participants (99 identified as male, 126 identified as
female, 5 as other and 4 preferred not to say) with a mean age of 27 years (range 18-49 years)
were recruited via Prolific and were given financial compensation in return (a video example
were randomly allocated to one of four groups. In Experiment 1, this resulted in 75
participants in Group Control, 43 in Group Close, 54 in Group Medium and 62 in Group Far.
Based on a previous report with this same task (Herrera et al., 2024), we aimed to recruit 40
participants per group after exclusions, as this has proven sensitive to detect differences in
performance based on distance of landmarks to the goal (comparison of Groups Close and
Far). Ethical approval was obtained from the Psychology Ethics Committee at the University
of Nottingham. Informed consent was obtained from each participant in the experiments
reported here.
Apparatus and Materials
The environmental set-up was the same as that used by Herrera et al., (2024) and was
built using Unity game engine (Unity Technologies, San Francisco, California, USA, version
2019.4.0f1 for Windows). It was composed of four background orientation cues (a windmill,
a snow-capped mountain, a village and a forest), and an array of four distinctive landmarks
forming a cross (unique black and white landmarks featuring distinct patterns: a chevron
pattern, horizontal stripes, a checkerboard pattern, and vertical stripes). The goal was located
in the center of the cross of distinctive landmarks and participants had to be within a distance
of 3 VUs from the goal to be successful. The landmark width was 2.5 VUs in Experiments 1
and 2 (but 5 VUs in Experiment 3), and the height was 6 VUs. The identity of the landmarks
(i.e., distinct patterns) was randomized between participants, but was kept constant through
the experiment for each participant. Each group was trained with a different landmark array.
In Experiments 1 and 2 for Group Close the landmarks were set at 10, 30, 50, 70 VUs from
the goal; for Group Medium at 30, 50, 70, 90 VUs; Group Far 50, 70, 90 110 VUs, and
all groups were trained with the 50 and 70 VUs landmarks, which allowed between-groups
comparisons. In Experiment 3, all landmark distances for the three experimental groups and
the control group were increased by 40 VUs. Hence, for Group Close, the landmarks were set
at 50, 70, 90, 110 VUs; for Group Medium at 70, 90, 110, 130 VUs; for Group Far at 90, 110,
130, 150 VUs; and Group Control was trained with landmarks at 90 and 110 VUs, which are
the distances shared across groups (i.e. target landmarks). The orientation cues were aligned
with each landmark.
Procedure
Each experiment was comprised by two phases, training and test. In Experiment 1,
participants received six training trials, and in Experiment 2, sixteen trials. Experiment 3 was
similar to Experiment 2, except that all landmarks were placed 40 VUs further away from the
goal. During training, participants were instructed to find a buried seed (i.e., the hidden goal)
in the presence of the four landmarks, which were key to learning the exact goal location. The
orientation (i.e., background) cues were consistently present during training and test, always
in the same location for each participant relative to the distinctive landmarks. Participants
were released facing in a random direction from one of the four corners of an invisible square
of 100 × 100 VUs (its dimensions were increased by 200 VUs in Experiment 3; se
Supplementary Materials), with the goal in its center and the four starting points placed at a
per block in a random order. To move forward participants used the up arrow key, the down
arrow key to move backward, and the left and right arrow keys to rotate counterclockwise
and clockwise, respectively, with a turning speed of 60° per second. Latencies to find the
goal were recorded during training. If participants did not find the buried seed within 60 s (in
Experiments 1 and 2) or 90 s (in Experiment 3), a corn plant within a blue light column was
presented at the goal location to aid participants in learning the exact goal location. Once they
reached the goal, participants could no longer move forward or backward, and a
congratulatory message was displayed encouraging them to rotate 360° and attend to their
surroundings. After 10 s, the next trial started automatically.
During the test phase, participants experienced a total of three blocks of tests. The first
block comprised four landmark tests with the combination of the 50 and 70 VUs landmarks
in Experiments 1 and 2, and with the 90 and 110 VUs landmarks in Experiment 3 (i.e., the
target landmarks) and is reported in the analyses. The second and third blocks were tests with
each landmark (50 or 70 [90 and 110 in Experiment 3]) alone, and because the results are
similar to those with both landmarks together we do not report them. The distance error from
where participants thought the goal was to the true goal location was calculated for each test
and measured in VUs.
Statistical Analyses
Participants who took more than 60 s to find the goal on Trials 6 (Experiment 1) or
Trial 16 (Experiment 2) of training were excluded from all analyses as this was considered as
an indication that they did not adequately learn the task (i.e., they had to be shown the goal
location on the final training trial). In Experiment 3, in which the landmarks were placed
further away from the goal and hence the task was much more difficult, the training criterion
was 90 s on trial 16 (the same conclusions are achieved if the criterion is 60 s). For training, a
mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Group (Control, Close, Medium and Far) and
Trials (6 in Experiment 1 and 16 in Experiments 2 and 3) was used. For the test data, we used
one-way ANOVAs with Group as the main factor. The distance between where participants
signaled the goal was located and its actual location (i.e., distance error) was assessed with
the two landmarks that were common across groups (i.e., 50 and 70 VUs). Hence, the
landmark tests consisted of 1 block of 4 trials, with the target landmarks (50 VUs and 70 VUs
in Experiments 1 and 2, and 90 and 110 VUs in Experiment 3) tested together. The distance
between where participants signaled the goal was located and its actual location (i.e., distance
error) was averaged across the 4 test trials.
Bonferroni post-hoc tests were carried out to further investigate significant ANOVAs or
interactions. All statistical analyses are reported with two-tailed levels of significance and
alpha set at .05. In repeated-measures analyses, the Huynh-Feldt correction was used to adjust
degrees of freedom when the sphericity assumption was violated.
Transparency and Openness Statement
The data reported in this article are available at DOI: 10.17639/nott.7507. Data were
analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics (Version 27). This study’s design and its analysis were
not preregistered. The task and materials are available upon request. Videos of the task can be
Results
Training. Eighty-eight participants (49 females, 35 males, 2 individuals identified as
‘other’, and 2 that preferred not to say) failed to reach the learning criterion and were
removed from the data analyses. The total sample size analyzed was composed of 146
participants (of which 72 as male, 68 identified as female, 3 as other, and 3 that did not
disclosure their gender identity) with a mean age of 25.6 years (range 18-49). Groups Close
and Medium comprised 35 participants each, and Groups Control and Far comprised 37 and
39 participants, respectively.
training trials. The data suggest that Group Close performed better than the other groups, but
for all groups latencies became smaller as training progressed. A mixed ANOVA with a
between-subjects factor of Group (Control, Close, Medium, and Far) and a within-subjects
factor of Trial (1–6) revealed a significant main effect of Trial, F(4.32, 613.83) = 118.38, p <
.001, η p = .46, 90% CIs [41, .50], indicating that participants found the goal faster as
training progressed. There was also a significant main effect of Group, F(3, 142) = 7.48, p <
.001, η p = .14, [.05, .22], however the Group x Trial interaction was not significant, F(12.97,
613.83) = 1.49, p = .116, η p = .03, [.00, .03]. A follow-up post-hoc Bonferroni test
confirmed that Group Close performed better than the Control (p = .001), Medium (p = .005),
and Far (p < .001) groups. There were no other differences across groups. A one-way
th
ANOVA was conducted to analyze the performance of the groups in the 6 , and last, training
trial, and showed that their performance was significantly different, F(3, 146) = 4.59, p =
.004, η p = .09, [.02, .19]. A further Bonferroni test revealed that Group Close significantly
differed from Groups Control and Far (p = .034 and p = .004, respectively).
Test. The results of the goal-landmark distance errors estimations with the 50 and 70
outperformed Groups Close and Medium, indicative of overshadowing by close but not distal
landmarks. A one-way ANOVA with Group as the independent variable (Control, Close,
Medium and Far) revealed significant differences between groups F(3, 142) = 25.93, p <
.001, η p = .35, 90% CIs [.24, .43]. Follow-up Bonferroni-corrected post hoc tests revealed
that Groups Control and Far were significantly more accurate in estimating where the goal
was located (i.e., less error) compared to Groups Close and Medium (p < .001 all). There
were no other significant differences between groups.
Experiment 2
Experiment 1 revealed a clear effect of landmark distance on the overshadowing effect,
in that close (but not distal) landmarks overshadowed learning about target landmarks, but
there was clearly no evidence of facilitation. Urcelay (2017) suggested that cue competition
and facilitation are the extremes of a continuum of outcomes that ranges from competition to
no competition to facilitation. In non-spatial tasks, cue-competition phenomena such as
overshadowing (Bellingham & Gillette, 1981; Reed & Quigley, 2019; Stout et al., 2003) and
blocking (Azorlosa & Cicala, 1988) disappear with increasing number of training trials.
There is also evidence that another cue-competition phenomenon, the overexpectation effect,
can reverse into facilitation with increasing number of compound training trials (Urcelay,
Witnauer & Miller, 2012; Experiment 3). The evidence in non-spatial tasks led us to reason
that perhaps no evidence of facilitation was observed in Experiment 1, because of the small
number of training trials. Experiment 1 revealed that this well-controlled task shows robust
cue competition (and its absence), so we sought to manipulate the number of training trials in
order to investigate why, previously, some laboratories have observed overshadowing and
others facilitation in the spatial domain, with otherwise comparable experimental designs. In
Experiment 2, we assessed whether the pattern of results observed in Experiment 1 would
change when increasing the number of training trials from six to sixteen and whether this
would result in facilitation instead of competition (in particular in Group Far). Although the
effect of extended training in the spatial cognition literature is not clear, it could be possible
that extended training changed how participants processed the landmarks, and this would
result in facilitation by distal landmarks instead of no overshadowing. This was the objective
of Experiment 2, which was similar to Experiment 1 except that the number of training trials
was extended from six to sixteen. Based on the results of Experiment 1, we expected that
landmarks placed close to the goal (10 and 30 VUs) would overshadow the target landmarks
(50 and 70 VUs). At issue was what would happen with the 90 and 110 VUs landmarks in
Group Far, with the possibility that the distal landmarks would facilitate learning based on
the target landmarks.
Method
Participants and Materials
Two hundred and fifty-nine participants (of which 160 identified as female, 97 as male,
and 2 as “other”) with a mean age of 29 years (range 18-50 years) took part in the study and
received economic compensation in return. Participants were randomly allocated to each
group resulting in 72 participants in Group Control, 55 in Group Close, 63 in Group Medium,
and 69 in Group Far. The materials used for this experiment were the same as in Experiment
1.
Procedure
The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1, except participants experienced 16
training trials instead of 6.
Results
Training. Sixty-six participants (61 females, 5 males) failed to reach the learning
criterion stated above, and were excluded from all analyses. The total sample size analyzed
was therefore 193 participants with a mean age of 28 years (range 18-50). Hence, there were
46 participants in the Group Control, and 49 in Groups Close, Medium and Far.
as training progressed, with participants in Group Close performing the fastest in finding the
goal location. A mixed ANOVA with Group as a between-subjects factor (Control, Close,
Medium, and Far) and Trial as within-subjects factor (1–16) revealed a main effect of Trial,
F(12.67, 2394.17) = 136.75, p < .001, η p = .42, 90% CIs [.39, .44], indicating that
participants found the goal quicker as training progressed. There was also a significant main
effect of Group, F(3, 189) = 10.85, p < .001, η p = .15, [.07, .22], as well as a significant
Group x Trial interaction, F(38, 2394.17) = 1.60, p = .012, η p = .03, [.01, .03], suggesting
that groups differed in their overall performance. A follow-up Bonferroni-corrected post hoc
analysis on the main effect of group revealed that Group Close performed the fastest,
outperforming Groups Control and Far (p < .001), as well as Group Medium (p = .002). A
one-way ANOVA comparing the performances between the groups in the last training trial
showed that their performances significantly differed, F(3, 193) = 3.29, p = .022, η p = .05,
[.41, .56]. A further Bonferroni test revealed that Group Close performed better than Group
Far, (p = .019), but there were no other significant differences between groups.
Test. The results of the goal-landmark distance errors estimations with the 50 and 70
Groups Far and Control outperformed both Groups Close and Medium, indicative of
overshadowing by close but not distal landmarks, although there was clearly no evidence of
facilitation. A one-way ANOVA with Group as the independent variable (Control, Close,
Medium and Far) was conducted on the test data with landmarks 50 and 70 VUs. The
ANOVA revealed significant differences between groups F(3, 189) = 23.32, p < .001, η p =
.27, 90% CIs [.18, .34]. Follow-up Bonferroni-corrected tests revealed that the distance
estimations of Groups Close and Medium were significantly poorer than the ones of Group
Control, and Group Far (p < .001 all), whereas Groups Far and Control performed in a similar
manner.
Experiment 2 revealed that the results of Experiment 1 can be replicated when training
is extended from 6 to 16 training trials, thus attesting to the reliability of the findings in
Experiment 1. However, there was no evidence of facilitation of target landmarks by more
distal landmarks. Although there are several demonstrations of facilitation in the spatial
domain, the majority of these have been observed with rodents (Austen et al., 2013; Cole et
al., 2011; Graham et al., 2006; Horne & Pearce, 2011; Pearce et al., 2001; 2006) and there are
only a few observations in humans that revealed facilitation (Katz et al., 2014; Sturz et al.,
2009; Sturz et al., 2010). What is unique about these is that participants had to learn about a
spatial pattern rather than a single goal location, thus making it difficult to extrapolate from
those findings to the current task in which there is a single goal location.
The non-spatial (i.e., temporal) literature, however, suggests that one reason why we
did not observe facilitation is that landmarks were not distant enough from the goal. For
example, Urcelay and Miller (2009) used a Pavlovian fear conditioning preparation and
observed overshadowing between auditory cues when there was no trace between cue
termination and outcome presentation. When there was a 20-s trace between cue termination
and shock presentation, the same cues resulted in facilitation instead of overshadowing.
However, when the trace was 10 seconds, there was no overshadowing nor facilitation.
Batsell and colleagues (Batsell et al., 2012) have observed a similar pattern in taste aversion.
When two tastes were immediately followed by LiCl, there was reciprocal overshadowing
between the tastes. When there was a 2-hour trace between flavor presentation and LiCl
administration, the same tastes now facilitated each other. However, at intermediate trace
intervals there was no overshadowing nor facilitation. Based on these results, we reasoned it
could be possible that the explanation for not observing facilitation in Group Far (in
Experiments 1 and 2) was not due to amount of training but instead because the landmarks
were not distant enough from the goal location. Thus, the goal of Experiment 3 was to assess
whether we could observe facilitation with landmarks that were more distant from the goal
than those used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Experiment 3
Experiment 2 revealed a strong effect of spatial proximity on overshadowing, in that
closer but not distal landmarks overshadowed the target ones. However, regardless of the
extent of training, there was no evidence of facilitation. Urcelay (2017) reviewed the factors
that determine the outcome of cue interactions (competition or facilitation) and argued that
weak proximity may be a relevant, domain-general, factor involved in facilitation, as seen in
Urcelay & Miller (2009). Evidence on this matter was later provided by Alcalá et al. (2023)
manipulating action-outcome temporal contiguities in humans. Based on the evidence
reviewed, we wanted to assess if longer goal-landmark distances (i.e., weaker spatial
proximity) would turn overshadowing into facilitation.
Thus, Experiment 3 was similar to Experiment 2 in that it included the same 4 groups
and also 16 training trials. The main difference was that the overall size of the invisible
boundary of the arena was enlarged so that landmarks could be moved 40 VUs further away
from the goal (relative to previous experiments).
Method
Participants and Materials
One hundred and fifty-nine participants (79 females, 79 males, and 1 participant
preferred not to say) with a mean age of 27 (range 18-47 years) were recruited via Prolific
and compensated for their time. They were randomly allocated to Groups Control (35
participants), Close (59 participants), Medium (29 participants), and Far (36 participants).
The task and procedure were the same as in Experiment 2 (including the same 4 groups and
16 training trials). The main difference relative to previous experiments was that the
landmarks were placed 40 VUs further away from the goal, and consequently, the size of the
arena was also increased to accommodate for the larger landmark distances. Because this
would render the task substantially more difficult than the versions used in Experiment 1 and
2, for example by reducing detectability of the now more distal landmarks, we doubled the
width of the landmarks from 2.5 to 5 VUs. In addition, to facilitate performance, the radius of
the goal was doubled from 3 VUs to 6 VUs, and the training criterion on Trial 16 was 90 s
instead of 60 s.
Results
Training. 34 participants (23 females, and 11 males) failed to reach the learning
criterion, and were removed from the data analyses. The total sample size analyzed was
composed of 125 participants (of which 68 identified as male, 56 identified as female, and 1
that preferred to not to disclosure) with a mean age of 26 years (range 19-47). Groups Close,
Medium, Far and Control comprised 50, 25, 26, and 24 participants, respectively.
increasing training trials. A mixed ANOVA with a between-subjects factor of Group
(Control, Close, Medium, and Far) and a within-subjects factor of Trial (1–16) revealed a
significant main effect of Trial, F(12.63, 1527.77) = 65.99, p < .001, η p = .35, 90% CIs [31,
.37], confirming that participants found the goal faster as training progressed. There was no
effect of Group, F(3, 121) = 2.31, p = .080, η p = .05, [.00, .11], nor a Group x Trial
interaction, F(37.88, 1527.77) = 1.30, p = .105, η p = .03, [.25, .31], which indicates that all
groups performed at a similar level during training. A one-way ANOVA was conducted to
th
analyze the performance of the groups in the 16 , and last, training trial, and confirmed that
there were no group differences in performance, F(3, 121) = .22, p = .884, η p = .01, [.00,
.03].
Test. The results of the goal-landmark distance errors estimations with the 90 and 110
outperformed both Groups Close and Medium, indicative of overshadowing by close but not
distal landmarks. A one-way ANOVA with Group as the independent variable (Control,
Close, Medium and Far) was carried out. The analysis revealed significant differences
between groups F(3, 121) = 8.72, p < .001, η p = .18, 90% CIs [.07, .26]. Follow-up
Bonferroni-corrected post hoc tests revealed that Group Control significantly outperformed
Group Close in estimating where the goal was located. Group Close’s performance was
worse than that of Groups Medium and Far, and these did not differ from each other (nor
from Group Control). These results reveal competition but not facilitation between
landmarks.
General Discussion
The purpose of this study was twofold: first, we wanted to assess if parametric goal-
landmark proximity manipulations may have a gradient effect on overshadowing when
comparing the performances (i.e., estimating distances) of experimental groups to a control
group (i.e., strong overshadowing with proximal goal-landmark distances and an attenuation
of it when they become distant). Second, we wanted to test if additional practice (i.e., length
of training) or more distal landmarks would result in facilitation of performance based on the
target landmarks by the most distal landmarks of the array. In all three experiments, the
absolute proximity of the target landmarks was kept constant across groups (including the
control group) whereas the distance of the other landmarks was either closer to, or further
from, the goal location. Although the parametric variations that we implemented did not
result in facilitation of performance based on the target landmarks, all three experiments
conclusively revealed that overshadowing between landmarks depends on spatial proximity,
in line with previous results observed when assessing the effect of close and distal landmarks
on learning about the geometric shape of an arena (Herrera et al., 2022).
The results are consistent with previous work reported on food-storing birds (Goodyear
& Kamil, 2004), and in humans (Herrera et al., 2024) in showing a “dose-dependent” effect
of landmark distance on overshadowing, with the addition of a control group which enabled
for direct comparisons between distance estimation abilities based on spatial proximity (all
groups had in common the target landmarks). These findings show that the way the target
landmark information is processed depends upon the relative distance of the other landmarks
in the array. In other words, whereas the target landmarks are placed at the same distance
across all groups, the degree of overshadowing varies depending on whether the nontarget
landmarks are closer to the goal (Group Close) or further (Group Far). Test results across all
experiments revealed a staggered degree of overshadowing, with Group Close showing the
largest errors in estimating distances based on the target landmarks, followed by Group
Medium, and Group Far, with the latter showing no difference when compared with the
Control Group. In this manner, we observed overshadowing in groups Close and Medium
(except in Experiment 3) and no overshadowing in Group Far, and to our knowledge this is
the first time this is documented in a first-person navigation task with human participants.
It is worth noting that Group Far in Experiments 1 and 2, which performed the best out
of all the experimental groups, is equivalent to Group Close in Experiment 3 in terms of goal-
landmark distances. Despite the increase in task difficulty in Experiment 3, the performance
of Group Far is significantly better than that of Group Close. This reveals that learning to
locate a goal with reference to a set of landmarks depends not only on the absolute distance
set between them, but also on their relative distances with other cues available during
learning.
As mentioned, we were interested in assessing whether extended training (Experiments
2 and 3) or placing landmarks more distal from the goal (Experiment 3) than the target
landmarks would facilitate learning of the target landmarks. In Experiments 2 and 3,
participants were trained for 16 trials rather than 6, and unlike the literature in other non-
spatial tasks (Bellingham & Gillette, 1981; Reed & Quigley, 2019; Stout et al., 2003), we did
not observe an attenuation of overshadowing, but a very similar pattern as in Experiment 1.
This result is consistent with prior literature that has failed to observe an effect of practice in
spatial tasks in which S-R associations are not relevant to find a goal (Holden et al., 2021;
Kealy et al., 2008; Sturz et al., 2013). Hence, even in the absence of practice effects, these
results replicate the basic finding that overshadowing depends on the spatial proximity of the
cues, showing that the results are robust and replicate across different parameters.
Of course, a question that remains to be addressed is why it proved difficult to observe
facilitation among landmarks in human participants. Studies in nonhuman animals have
sometimes revealed facilitation instead of overshadowing, but the exact reasons for these
discrepant findings are not clear. Pearce et al., (2006) trained rats in different shaped pools
with different walls painted in black or white and found facilitation as well as overshadowing
depending on how these cues were arranged. These authors argued that the relative salience
of the cue colors and the shape of the environment may be key factors for cue competition or
facilitation to occur. In human participants, three studies have consistently observed
facilitation of spatial learning by discrete cues when learning about a spatial configuration of
locations. For example, Sturz et al. (2009) used a matrix of raised bins in which participants
had to find a cross-shaped configuration of locations. The cross-shaped pattern could be
presented during training alone or signaled by color cues on each of the locations. When
tested in the absence of the color cues, participants trained with the color cues made fewer
errors when locating the pattern of goal locations, a result that was later replicated in different
setups and with parametric variations (Sturz et al., 2010; Katz et al., 2014).
Studies in the nonspatial domain have readily observed the findings that we observed
here. For example, in addition to spatial experiments with geometry as the target, Herrera and
colleagues (Herrera et al., 2022) also reported that temporal contiguity determined
overshadowing in predictive learning, with results consistent with the current report. That is,
they only observed overshadowing with strong temporal contiguity, but overshadowing was
attenuated with weak temporal contiguity. Using an action-outcome (i.e., instrumental) task
in human participants, Alcalá et al. (2023) manipulated the temporal contiguity between an
action and the outcome (2 vs 6s), and orthogonally signaled the traces with a salient stimulus
(Signal vs No Signal). They observed that the salient signal overshadowed instrumental
performance with a 2s trace between actions and outcomes but facilitated performance with a
6s trace between actions and outcomes. That is, they observed a cross-over interaction
between contiguity and the presence of the signal (also see Urcelay & Miller, 2009 for similar
results in Pavlovian fear conditioning with rats, and Urcelay, 2017 for a revision).
As mentioned above, the current results extend those of Herrera et al. (2022) in which
proximity to the goal determined whether or not a landmark overshadowed navigation
towards a goal on the basis of the geometric properties of the arena (and also in predictive
learning as discussed above). We interpreted those findings in terms of Pearce’s configural
model (1987). The model assumes that participants process environmental information in a
configural manner. In our study, this would mean that in the experimental groups trained with
four landmarks, all the landmarks of the array become integrated with the orientation cues in
the background, as a single configuration that guides participants towards the goal. However,
during test, when they are presented with a portion of the informational unit (i.e., the two
target landmarks rather than the entire landmark array), this results in generalization
decrement because what is tested is different from what was presented during training. In
other words, generalization decrement results in poorer performance due to the dissimilarity
between the information presented during training and the available information during test.
Hence, the more similar both training and testing environments are, the less generalization
decrement should be observed. Although Pearce (1987) was somewhat silent about the effect
of contiguity manipulations on generalization, in Herrera et al. (2022) we made the additional
assumption that weaker contiguity attenuates processing of unique elements in the
generalization rule, and this results in more generalization from training to test. In other
words, as contiguity becomes weaker, there is more generalization from training to test, and
this provides an account of the results observed here. Since the publication of that report, it
has been brought to our attention that generalization, which depends on similarity, cannot be
more than one, otherwise the model would incorrectly predict “hyper generalization” or more
responding at test to a compound AX when only one of the elements (X+) has been trained .
Thus, similarity cannot be more than a unit as we proposed then. With this being
acknowledged, the revised model can still predict the absence of overshadowing with weaker
contiguity, and the observation of facilitation. The latter can be expected because training a
compound AX, requires higher salience in the configural unit than training a single element
X, and therefore even when similarity is capped at one, more salience during training should
result in more associative strength, which in turn with little to no generalization decrement
anticipates the facilitation effect. Applied to the present experiments, when nontarget
landmarks are closer to the goal than the target landmarks, removal of nontarget landmarks
(as was the case in Group Close) has a greater impact on performance than removal of
nontarget landmarks which are more distal from the goal location than target landmarks (as in
Group Far).
The explanation outlined above is not unique in anticipating the present results. In
answering how different spatial cues are combined in an environment to guide navigation,
Cheng et al., (2007), building on a Bayesian framework, argued that subjects tend to assign
different weights to spatial cues based on how close they are to the goal. Landmarks which
are close to the goal are given more weight and this enables these landmarks to overshadow
the target landmarks, whereas landmarks which are further away from the goal relative to the
target landmarks are attributed less weight, resulting in an attenuation of overshadowing. To
put it differently, when, among many different landmarks, there is one that stands out from
the rest (in our task, it would be the landmarks closer to the goal), the weights given to the
landmarks are distributed unevenly, with more weight being allocated to the more salient
landmark, which ultimately leads to overshadowing of the more distal, lower weight
landmarks. However, if the nontarget landmarks are further away from the goal relative to the
target landmark then they are processed as a similar source of information. As such, they are
likely to be assigned similar weights and will therefore become integrated. Building on this,
Chen et al., (2017) argued that cue integration might be happening even in the presence of
competition, as the performances do not drop to chance levels. The varying degree of
overshadowing that we see in our results, and especially the absence of competition in Group
Far, whose performance is not different from Group Control, might indicate that there is an
interplay of competition and integration under intermediate to low interference conditions
(i.e., Medium and Far Groups), happening in a linear fashion rather than in absolute values.
Overall, our results conclusively demonstrate in human participants with a first-person
navigation task that overshadowing and its absence depend on spatial proximity. Much
research in spatial cognition has been devoted to discriminating between domain-general
(Mackintosh, 1975; McGregor, 2016; Pearce, 1987) and domain-specific explanations
(Cheng, 1986; Doeller & Burgess, 2008), with the former anticipating overshadowing in the
spatial domain and the latter anticipating absence of overshadowing. Whilst evidence for both
outcomes is available, there is no clarity as to when one should observe overshadowing and
when not. The current results (replicated three times) indicate that proximity is a critical
determinant of overshadowing between landmarks in humans, and we interpret these findings
in terms of domain-general theories of learning (Pearce, 1987), in line with other reports such
as that by Gilroy and Pearce (2014).
The current results reveal that spatial distance is a critical determinant for competition
between landmarks to occur. Despite there being a long-standing outcome-driven debate
leading to two approaches: domain-specific (i.e., based on the absence of competition;
Cheng, 1986; Doeller & Burgess, 2008), and domain-general theories of learning (i.e., based
on cue competition effects; Mackintosh, 1975; Miller & Shettleworth, 2007; Pearce, 1987),
here we provide a reconciliatory theoretical framework that can explain how competition
effects vary through a continuum (Herrera et al., 2022).