EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 1
Even or odd? Symmetry and the structure of category systems across languages
Charles Kemp
Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences
University of Melbourne
Author Note
We thank Dorothea Hoffmann, Bill Palmer and Alice Gaby for sharing their database of directional systems,
and Toby Elmhirst, Alice Gaby, Temuulen Khishigsuren and Terry Regier for comments on the manuscript. This
work was supported by ARC FT190100200.
DOI when this work is eventually published.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Charles Kemp, Melbourne School of
Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail: c.kemp@unimelb.edu.au
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 2
Abstract
Language reflects how people organize experience into categories, and cross-linguistic studies have revealed
universal tendencies in the categorization of domains such as kinship and color. Here we consider universal
tendencies involving the parity of category systems, and develop and test a theory that predicts whether category
systems for a given domain tend to include an even or an odd number of categories. Consistent with the theory, we
find that deictic day-naming and tense-marking systems tend to have an odd number of categories, but that systems
for domains including seasons, phases of the moon, kinship, and cardinal directions tend to have an even number of
categories. Our theory is founded on the principle of symmetry, and our results therefore provide evidence of the
widespread influence of symmetry on categorization across languages and domains.
Keywords: semantic typology, linguistic typology, symmetry, categorization, structuralism
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 3
Even or odd? Symmetry and the structure of category systems across languages
When studying categorization across cultures, scholars typically focus on one domain at a time. Collecting a
comprehensive set of category systems for a single domain such as kinship (Passmore et al., 2023) or color (Cook
et al., 2005) is a major challenge, and each such data set includes many details that can only be captured by a
domain-specific account. Decades of work, however, have produced enough data sets for individual domains that we
can begin to develop and test general principles that aim to account for categorization across multiple
domains (Evans, 2011; Kemp et al., 2018). We propose that a preference for symmetry is one such principle, and
show that this preference supports predictions about whether category systems across domains tend to have an even
or an odd number of categories.
Symmetry is evident in day-naming systems that treat the future (e.g. tomorrow) similarly to the past
(yesterday), in season-naming systems that give balanced treatment to the hottest (summer) and coldest (winter)
periods of the year, and in directional systems that label both ends of an axis (e.g. east and west). Many such
symmetries reflect symmetries in the world, such as predictable seasonal cycles, but they also suggest a cognitive
inclination towards symmetry. Symmetric category systems are compressible (Kirby et al., 2015), which makes them
relatively simple (Kemp et al., 2018) and thus relatively easy to learn and remember. Previous researchers have
proposed that category systems are shaped by evolutionary pressures toward simplicity (Carr et al., 2020; Kemp et al.,
2018; Kirby et al., 2015), and our proposed symmetry preference is a special case of this more general proposal.
Our work is related to previous investigations of the role of symmetry in perception and cognition (Chater
and Brown, 2008; Pizlo, 2019; Shepard, 2001; Shepard, 2008), and in particular to previous approaches that
characterize the simplicity or goodness of a category in terms of structural properties such as symmetry (Garner,
1974). Most work in this tradition focuses on visual objects such as patterns of dots, but ideas about symmetry and
invariance have also been used to characterize the goodness of categories defined in terms of abstract binary
features (Vigo, 2014). We go beyond previous psychological work on symmetry and categorization by considering
the symmetry of entire systems of categories, and by using symmetry to make predictions about categorization across
languages.
Our work also builds on and extends the structuralist approach in anthropology, which has been applied to
domains including food, mythology, and kinship. Lévi-Strauss (1978, p 2) describes structuralism as the “quest for
the invariant, or for the invariant elements among superficial differences,” and invariance is closely related to
symmetry. A standard idea in group theory, the mathematical theory of symmetry, is that symmetry can be defined as
invariance with respect to a set of transformations, and our theory makes use of this definition. Our approach is
therefore highly compatible with structuralism, but we go beyond prior structuralist approaches by evaluating our
theory against a diverse set of cross-linguistic data sets. The structuralist tradition has been criticized for placing
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 4
Bisected Bisected Binary
Linear
Linear Circular Feature
Structure
Structure Structure Structure
Seasons
Temperature Tense
Domains Moon Phases Kinship
Life Stages Temporal Deictics
Tides
Space
1 1
1 2 3 4
4 2 2 4
3 4 1 2
1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 3 3
Transformations
1 3
1 2 2 1
4 2 2 4
3 4 4 3
3 1
Symmetric
Systems
Parity
Both Odd Even Even
Four structures. Each structure consists of a space along with a set of transformations of that space. The transformation for the linear
and bisected linear structures inverts the one-dimensional space. The transformations for the bisected circular structure correspond
to a reflection in the vertical axis and a rotation through 180°, and the transformations for the binary feature structure exchange
values of the two features. Three symmetric systems are shown for each structure. The top row shows examples of domains that can
be modeled using each structure, and the bottom row indicates whether semantic systems in those domains are expected to have
both parities or to show a preference towards odd or even sizes.
more emphasis on theory than data (d’Andrade, 1995), but our work highlights the fact that structuralist approaches
can make testable empirical predictions.
The next section introduces our theoretical framework and shows how symmetry supports predictions about
the parity of category systems across domains. Subsequent sections test these predictions and mostly find support for
the theory.
Symmetry and domain structure
Each domain we consider is represented by a structure that includes a space along with a set of
transformations defined over that space. A structure may be relevant to multiple semantic domains. For example, the
(e.g. English cold, cool, warm and hot), where the underlying dimension is temperature (Koptjevskaja-Tamm, 2015).
The same structure is also appropriate for systems of life-stage terms (e.g. English infant, toddler, child, teenager,
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 5
adult), where the underlying dimension is age (Ember and Ember, 2003).
partition the one-dimensional space into two, three, and four categories. All of these categories are connected, and we
will assume that any category within a connected space must also be connected. All of the example systems in
maps to the right endpoint. A category system is symmetric if it is left unchanged by all transformations associated
with a structure, and this notion of symmetry is formalized in the Supplementary Information.
We will say that a structure is odd if all symmetric category systems defined over that structure have an odd
number of categories. Similarly, the structure is even if all symmetric category systems (except the system that
assigns all points to the same category) have an even number of categories. If the symmetric systems for a structure
has both parities.
Our core theoretical proposal is that human languages show a preference for symmetric category systems. If
so, then systems for domains with an odd structure should tend to have an odd number of categories, and attested
systems for even domains should tend to have an even number of categories. If a structure has both parities (such as
should have relatively similar frequencies. We initially focus on domains for which our theory predicts a tendency
towards either even or odd systems, and test the prediction that domains with a bisected linear structure show a
preference for odd-numbered systems, and that domains with bisected circular or binary feature structures show a
preference for even-numbered systems. A subsequent section considers two control domains that are expected to
show no preference towards either even or odd systems.
Bisected linear systems
A bisected linear structure includes a one-dimensional space bisected by a privileged central point that must
be assigned to a category. A bisected structure is similar to a linear structure, and the key difference between the two
is whether the one-dimensional space has a privileged central point. We consider two temporal domains that are
instances of the bisected linear structure. In both cases the dimension is time, and the privileged point represents the
present, or the point that separates past from future. The first domain is deictic day-naming: for example, English
includes the terms “yesterday,” “today” and “tomorrow,” and many languages also have terms for the day before
yesterday and the day after tomorrow. The second domain is tense marking: for example, English distinguishes
between past, present and future using inflectional morphology (e.g. “she walked”, “she walks”) and periphrasis
(“she will walk”).
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 6
In both of these temporal domains, symmetric systems must have an odd number of categories. Intuitively, a
symmetric system will have one category that includes the present, and each category for the past will be mirrored by
a corresponding category for the future, which leads to an odd number of categories overall.
Deictic day names.
We analyzed a set of 157 day-naming systems compiled by Tent (1998). The distribution over the sizes of
system has a size of 5 and picks out two days on either side of ‘today’, and systems of size 7 are also relatively
common. The sawtooth shape of the size distribution (high for odd sizes and lower for intervening even sizes) reveals
a strong preference for odd-numbered systems across languages.
For all domains considered in this paper, we implemented an intercept-only Bayesian logistic regression
model with system parity as the dependent variable. For each model, the 95% credible interval on the intercept is
take a credible interval that excludes and lies to the left of 0.5 as strong evidence that a domain favors odd systems,
and an interval that excludes and lies to the right of 0.5 as strong evidence that a domain favors even systems. In
preference for odd systems.
labels) for many systems show morphological or lexical symmetry. For example, Wayan attaches numerals (e.g. rua
‘two’) to the base bogi ‘(’night), so that the day before yesterday is a bogirua and the day after tomorrow is ei
bogirua. Analyses of form and meaning therefore both suggest that day-naming is heavily influenced by a preference
for symmetry.
Tense.
We analyzed a database of 233 tense systems compiled by Velupillai (2016). The size distribution in
is relatively smooth and does not have the sawtooth shape that provides the strongest evidence for a parity preference.
Further reason for caution is provided by systems with remoteness distinctions that divide either the past or future or
both into two or more categories. Remoteness distinctions are more likely to subdivide the past than the
future (Comrie, 1985; Velupillai, 2016), and Velupillai (2016) notes that symmetric remoteness distinctions are
relatively rare. Overall, then, tense-marking does show a preference for odd-numbered systems, but the role of
symmetry is less apparent for tense marking than for deictic day-naming.
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 7
a)
deictic day names tense seasons moon phases locational (cardinal)
60 10
40 50
5 20
0 0 0 0 0
4 6 8 10 12 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 5 10 15 2 4 6 8
siblings aunts+uncles grandparents grandchildren nieces+nephews
400 600
400 200
200 200
200 100
100 100 100
0 0 0 0 0
5 10 15 5 10 15 2 4 6 8 10 5 10 15 5 10 15 20
cousins social categories locational (other) color life forms
150 100 40
50 20
50 20
0 0 0 0 0
0 10 20 30 5 10 15 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8
size
tnuoc
deictic day names tense seasons moon phases locational (cardinal)
100 100 50
0 0 0 0 0
siblings aunts+uncles grandparents grandchildren nieces+nephews
500 500 500
0 0 0 0 0
cousins social categories locational (other) color life forms
200 50 50
0 0 0 0 0
odd even odd even odd even odd even odd even
parity
tnuoc
b)
social categories
grandparents
grandchildren
seasons
locational (cardinal)
aunts+uncles
nieces+nephews
moon phases
siblings
cousins
locational (other)
life forms
color
tense
deictic day names
0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1
proportion of even systems
niamod
c)
Analysis of system sizes across 15 domains and subdomains. a) Distributions of sizes across languages. b) Counts of even and odd
systems. c) MAP estimates of the probability that a system is even along with 95% credible intervals on the intercept of a logistic
regression model. A logistic transform has been applied so that a coefficient of 0 corresponds to a probability of 0.5. Credible
intervals for domains predicted to be even or odd are shown in red or blue respectively. Credible intervals for control domains are
shown in grey.
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 8
Bisected circular systems
bisected by a privileged axis, leading to two privileged points. Unlike bisected linear structures, bisected circular
structures are predicted to favor systems with an even number of categories. We consider three domains with bisected
circular structures: season naming, names for phases of the moon, and names for cardinal directions.
Seasons.
Consider a simple seasonal cycle in which a single variable (temperature, say) varies from low to high and
progression, and the two privileged points could be the summer and winter solstices, or the two equinoxes (see
the temporal order of the cycle, and shifting the cycle by half a year.
The Western season system divides the circle into four arcs corresponding to winter, spring, summer, and
autumn, but other systems of season categories are attested across cultures. We analyzed 53 season systems compiled
A second database of season systems was compiled by Orlove (2003), and 23 out of the 28 systems in this database
are even. Orlove notes that odd-numbered systems are rare, but did not provide an explanation of this result. Our
approach suggests that this result is a special case of a more general preference for symmetric category systems.
Moon Phases.
Consider now a lunar cycle that begins with a new moon, which waxes to become a full moon, then wanes to
return to the start of the cycle. The two privileged points in this cycle may correspond to the new moon and the full
cycle by half a lunar month.
English has labels for four major phases of the lunar cycle (new moon, first quarter, full moon and third
quarter, but the number of labeled phases varies across cultures. We collected a set of 52 moon-phase naming
systems from the Human Relations Area Files (Human Relations Area Files Inc., 2024) and a range of other sources.
a preference for systems of size 4. The credible interval for moon phases, however, includes 0.5, indicating that the
predicted preference for even systems does not have strong support. Some systems are odd because they use the same
term for the first and third quarters, and others because they include two terms for the start of the lunar cycle (one for
the new moon and another for the darkness preceding the new moon), but only one term for the midpoint of the cycle
(full moon).
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 9
As for deictic day naming, the moon phase systems for some cultures show morphological or lexical
symmetry. For example, speakers of Sa’a (Solomon Islands) name seven phases in the first half of the lunar month,
and the same names are used in reverse order with a different prefix during the second half (Ivens, 1927). This
morphological symmetry provides direct evidence of the influence of symmetry on moon-phase naming.
The lunar cycle leads to a monthly tidal cycle that includes spring tides near the new and full moons and
neap tides near the first and third quarters. Many languages name parts of this monthly cycle, and our approach
predicts that these monthly tide-naming systems will tend to include an even number of terms. Languages also have
names for parts of the diurnal tidal cycle that moves between high and low tides every lunar day, and again our theory
predicts that these diurnal tide-naming systems will tend to include an even number of terms.
Cardinal directions.
Names for seasons, moon phases, and tides label processes that unfold through time, and the bisected
limited to temporal phenomena, and can also be used to capture points of the compass. In this case, the privileged
points may correspond to the directions of sunrise (east) and sunset (west), and the two transformations correspond to
a reflection in the east-west axis and a rotation of 180°.
English labels four main cardinal directions (north, south, east and west), but this system is not universal.
We analyzed a set of 90 cardinal directional systems from a database of Australian directional systems compiled by
preference for systems of size 4. There is also the hint of a sawtooth pattern, because there are more systems of sizes
2 and 4 than systems of size 3.
Binary feature systems
All of the structures considered so far incorporate continuous spaces, but our framework can also
accommodate discrete feature spaces. Feature representations have been considered for domains including personal
pronouns (Ingram, 1978), indefinite pronouns (Denic´ et al., 2022), spatial demonstratives (Chen et al., 2023), and
spatial adpositions (Xu and Kemp, 2010), and we consider several examples drawn from the domain of kinship.
Kinship.
features: sex (male vs female) and relative age (older vs younger). The English kinship system ignores the relative
age feature and organizes the kin types into two categories (brother and sister), but many other languages categorize
exchanges male and female, and the second exchanges older and younger. Any category system that is symmetric
with respect to these transformations must have an even number of categories.
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 10
2023). Some of these systems include overlapping categories (e.g. younger brother and brother) and some are
referent of a sibling term has the same sex as the speaker. As a result a number of systems have sizes exceeding four.
both systems of size 2 and systems of size 4.
grandparents, grandchildren, nieces and nephews, and cousins. The features needed to represent these subdomains
vary: for example, the subdomain of grandparents requires a “sex of connecting relative” feature (paternal vs
maternal) that is not needed for the subdomain of siblings. All of these subdomains, however, can be represented
using a collection of binary features, which means that even systems are expected for all of these subdomains.
evident for siblings, aunts and uncles, grandparents, and cousins. The data therefore confirm the prediction that even
systems are typical in the domain of kinship.
Other domains
implications that go beyond these four simple structures.
Australian Aboriginal social classification.
In communities with classificatory kinship systems, rules of marriage and descent are formulated in terms of
some number of social categories (also called skin names, sections, or marriage classes) (Dousset et al., 2010). For
example, in a four-category Kariera system, individuals in category A may only marry individuals in category B. Any
children produced by such a marriage will belong to category C, and can only marry individuals belonging to
category D. Capturing the structure of these systems was one of the early successes of the structuralist approach to
anthropology (Rauff, 2016), and Lévi-Strauss (1949) includes an appendix demonstrating that the structures of
certain classificatory systems are isomorphic to mathematical groups.
Here we consider one simple property of these systems. Suppose that the set of possible marriage
relationships is invariant under a transformation that changes the sex of each individual from male to female or vice
versa. If so, then the system must organize individuals into pairs of marriageable categories (e.g. members of
shows the size distribution over 331 systems classified by AustKin (AustKin Team, 2024; Dousset et al., 2010;
McConvell and Dousset, 2012) as having sections, sub-sections, or moieties. All of them are even, and all have sizes
that are powers of 2.
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 11
Non-cardinal directional systems.
We previously considered cardinal directional systems, but many languages have other kinds of directional
systems including systems based on local rivers (upstream vs downstream), local coasts (coastal vs inland), wind
direction (upwind vs downwind), and topographic landmarks (uphill vs downhill). Although these locational systems
do not have the bisected circular structure used in our analysis of cardinal directional systems, they can often be
represented using pairs of opposing concepts such as upstream and downstream. If these systems are symmetric with
respect to transformations that exchange these pairs, then both concepts need to be named, which means that
symmetric locational systems will have an even number of categories.
directional systems mentioned earlier (Hoffmann et al., 2022). We included systems based on rivers, coasts, wind
direction, path of the sun, and tides, but excluded topographic systems because it was difficult to establish the sizes of
these systems. Some languages include multiple non-cardinal systems, and these systems are included as separate
preference for even-numbered systems. Several systems label just one member of an opposition: for example, Kuku
Yalanji has a form ngubar for ‘other side of the river’, but appears to have no form for ‘same side of the river’ (Patz,
2002).
Control domains.
We now turn to two domains for which a strong preference for even or odd systems is not expected. The first
is color. Color can be roughly modeled using a three-dimensional solid in which the axes correspond to red-green,
blue-yellow, and light-dark. Psychophysical work suggests that color space has no true symmetries, but
transformations that invert the three axes (e.g. that map red to green) are approximate symmetries of color
space (Palmer, 1999). Even if these approximate symmetries are allowed, the Supplementary Information shows that
symmetric color systems can be either even or odd, which means that no strong parity preference is expected.
2005). The distribution is relatively smooth, and is almost perfectly balanced between odd and even systems.
The second control domain is folk biology, and we consider systems of life-form terms such as bird, fish and
snake. The space of living creatures has a branching structure induced by evolution, but appears to have no
distribution over 144 systems of life form categories compiled by Brown (1984). As for color, the distribution is
relatively smooth, and shows no preference towards either odd or even systems.
(e.g. temperature terms (Koptjevskaja-Tamm, 2015) and life-stage terms (Ember and Ember, 2003)), and domains
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 12
with no apparent symmetries (e.g. smell terms (Majid, 2021)). In all of these cases we expect a relatively even
balance between odd-numbered and even-numbered systems.
Discussion
Our theory successfully predicts whether category systems across a number of domains tend to be even or
odd, but with one exception (Australian social classification systems) our results show these predictions to be
statistical tendencies rather than absolute universals (Evans and Levinson, 2009). Many individual languages are
inconsistent with these predictions, and investigating these cases is likely to reveal cultural and functional factors that
can override a default symmetry preference. For example, as noted earlier, tense systems are more likely to subdivide
the past than the future, and this finding is consistent with the observation that speakers are more likely to talk about
the past than the future (Mollica et al., 2021).
Our theory does not characterize the evolutionary process by which symmetric category systems emerge, but
makes an intriguing prediction about the trajectories produced by this process. Existing evolutionary accounts often
suggest that categories are added one by one (Berlin and Kay, 1969; Zaslavsky et al., 2018), but if the influence of
symmetry is strong then categories may be added in pairs. For example, season-naming trajectories might leap from a
two-category stage to a four-category stage without passing through an intermediate three-category stage, and
day-naming trajectories might leap from a three-category stage to a five-category stage. This evolutionary prediction
could be tested in the lab (Carr et al., 2020; Kirby et al., 2015), and phylogenetic analyses may also allow it to be
tested against cross-linguistic data (Haynie and Bowern, 2016).
Identifying universal tendencies across the world’s languages may seem like an ambitious challenge, but
psychologists have gone further and speculated about principles that may apply to intelligent organisms living
anywhere in the universe (Shepard, 1995, 2001). Symmetry may be one such principle. If civilizations are ever
discovered on other planets, our theory suggests that most of these cultures will organize their timeline into an odd
number of categories and their solar year into an even number of categories. These speculations may never be tested,
but considering the possibility helps to establish what it means for categorization to be shaped by the structure of a
domain.
Methods
Parity and domain structure.
Let be a space and be a set of transformations acting on that space. Space may be connected (as for
S T S
a bijection t : from to itself.
SæS S
A category system is a partition of the space, and can be represented as a binary relation
R : 0, 1 that indicates whether or not two items belong to the same category. If is connected, then we
S◊Sæ{ } S
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 13
assume that all categories in are also connected. A category system is symmetric if it is left unchanged by applying
each transformation in . More formally, a symmetric system satisfies
T C
R (x, y) = R (t(x), t(y)) (1)
C C
for each transformation t in .
The approach just described can be characterized in terms of a mathematical group acting on space . For
which is equivalent to the cyclic group Z of order 2. For the bisected circular and binary feature structures, the
transformation group is D , the dihedral group of order 4.
Although we assumed that each category system C is a partition of , the same approach applies to category
systems with “holes,” or items that are not assigned to any category. Our approach can also be generalized to systems
with overlapping categories, including hierarchical category systems.
Domains
For each domain we aimed to count the number of named categories per language. Some categories have
multiple names, and it is sometimes hard to tell whether two names should be treated as labels for the same category
or labels for different categories. For example, the database of Hoffmann et al. (2022) lists Jaru terms glossed as
‘south,’ ‘to south,’ ‘south side’ and ‘south across water,’ and we treated all of these terms as labels for the single
category ‘south’.
Some of our sources (especially older sources) are likely to be influenced by Western categories. For
example, an author may elicit terms that correspond to the Western concepts of new moon, first quarter, full moon,
and third quarter but fail to record additional terms for lunar phases. Our impression is that this issue arises more
frequently for lunar phases and cardinal directional systems than for the other domains we consider, and may
contribute to the finding that four is the most common size for both lunar-phase and cardinal systems.
Most of our regression analyses included a random effect for language family, and all exceptions are noted
below. Language families for all domains were derived from Glottolog (Hammarström et al., 2024). We used
Glottolog data included in version 1.1.20 of the lingtypology package in R (Moroz et al., 2024). Glottolog uses
language identifiers called glottocodes, and we used these glottocodes to determine the language family for each
language in our statistical analyses. Some of our data sets already included glottocodes, others included ISO
language codes which were mapped to glottocodes using the lingtypology package, and all remaining datasets
were manually annotated with glottocodes.
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 14
a) b)
Comparison between a seasonal cycle and the cycle of moon phases. (a) A sinusoidal function showing how temperature varies over
time. The curve shown here includes two calendar years. (b) A helix showing how moon-phases vary over time for a viewer in the
Northern Hemisphere. The curve shown here includes two and a half lunar months, and different colors indicate different months.
Deictic day names.
Tent’s database (1998) includes 157 day-naming systems. A glottocode could not be determined for one
language (Natleba), leaving 156 for the regression analysis. Tent reports that some of these systems show dual
symmetry, and use the same forms for days in the past and future. For example, Komba (Papua New Guinea) uses
mara-nan for ‘3 days before today’ and ‘3 days after today’, and these meanings are distinguished using tense
marking. Tent (1998) gives Komba, Hindi, and Capanahua (Peru) as examples of systems with dual symmetry, but
his data set does not specify the full set of systems with this property. As a result, our analyses do not allow for dual
symmetry, and we treat Komba as a 7 term system (i.e. a system that picks out meanings ranging from ‘3 days before
today’ to ‘3 days after today’) instead of a 4 term system. Although our theory assumes that categories are connected,
dual symmetry provides one example of how disconnected categories can arise for principled reasons.
Tense.
Velupillai’s tense database includes 318 languages. 77 of those languages have no grammatical tense, and an
additional 8 make remoteness distinctions but the number of these distinctions was not specified, meaning that the
sizes of these systems could not be determined. We excluded these 85 languages leaving 233 for analysis.
Seasons.
The seasonal cycle for a climate variable such as temperature can be captured by a function such as
{ æ }
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 15
inverting the temperature axis.
The database of season systems compiled by Kemp et al. (2019) includes 54 systems, and we removed one
language (Grand Valley Dani) that is reported to have no terms for seasons. Two glottocodes appear twice each in the
data, and in both cases the two systems for those glottocodes are both even. We included only one representative of
each glottocode in the regression analysis, yielding 51 systems in total for that analysis.
Moon Phases.
The monthly lunar cycle can be captured by a function f : time phase that traces out a helix over time
{ æ }
of seasons and moon phases are not isomorphic. For seasons, the temperature variable corresponds to an interval not
a circle, and a circular structure only arises if we keep track of whether temperature is rising or falling. For moon
phases, the phase variable is intrinsically circular. Although the domains are not isomorphic, both can be represented
We know of no existing database of terms for moon phases and therefore compiled our own set of 52
systems. 32 were drawn from the Human Relations Area Files (Human Relations Area Files Inc., 2024) by searching
for paragraphs that were classified with the subjects “ordering of time” or “ethnometeorology” and that included
either “phase” or “phases” and “lunar” or “moon.” The remaining systems were collected by searching Google,
Google Scholar and Google Books for combinations of terms and phrases such as “terms for”, “phases of” and
“moon.” Some cultures name every night in a lunar cycle: for example, Kelley and Milone (2011) give sequences of
30 Tahitian names and 32 Maori names for nights of the moon. We did not include these cases, and the largest system
in our database has 14 terms.
One culture was removed from the analysis because a glottocode could not be reliably identified. An
additional two cultures appear twice in our data because different authors give different numbers of terms for these
cultures. All of these counts were even, and we included each culture only once in the regression analysis, giving 49
systems overall for that analysis.
Cardinal directions.
in the east-west axis and a rotation of 180°. The rotation can also be replaced by a reflection in the north-south axis,
because both alternatives lead to the same transformation group.
Three glottocodes appeared twice in our set of cardinal systems, and we kept one representative of each for
the regression analysis. The two systems listed for one of these glottocodes (waja1257) have different parities, and
we kept the odd-numbered system to be conservative with respect to our hypothesis. Roughly 80% of the 87
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 16
languages included in the regression analysis belonged to the same language family (Pama-Nyungyan), and only two
other families were represented more than twice in the data set. We therefore did not include a random effect for
language family in the regression analysis for cardinal directional systems.
Kinship.
Some systems in Kinbank have a single category that covers all kin types in a subdomain (e.g. a single term
for ‘sibling’). Because we are interested in systems that divide each domain into categories, we excluded systems of
size one. Some languages appear several times in Kinbank with entries attributed to different sources. We kept all of
these systems and included random effects for both language and language family in the regression analysis.
Australian Aboriginal social classification.
AustKin includes information about ten types of social systems, and we included all of these types except
for phratries and totemic groups. The eight types included were sections, subsections, underspecified sections,
matri-moieties, patri-moieties, generational moieties, matri-semi-moieties, and patri-semi-moieties. Multiple systems
are specified for some languages: for example, the Alyawarr data include systems of type sections based on four
language. Because all systems were even, we did not run a regression analysis for this domain.
White (1963) demonstrates that any society that allows sister exchange or that allows patrilateral
cross-cousins to marry must have an even number of categories. Systems with odd-numbered sizes, however, are
theoretically possible, and it is reported that the Purum of India have a five-category system (Das, 1945).
Non-cardinal directional systems.
The database of Hoffmann et al. (2022) distinguishes between multiple types of non-cardinal systems and
we included those with the following types: sun only, wind only, wind and climate, climate/weather, coast and wind,
coast only, sun coast and river, river and sun, river only, tide, spiritual/cultural places of significance, or other. We
excluded systems based purely on topographic landmarks (topographic elevation only) or vertical elevation (vertical
elevation only) along with mixed systems that incorporated topographic landmarks or vertical elevation as a
component (e.g. vertical and river and topographic elevation and river). When attempting to determine the sizes of
these excluded systems, we often found it difficult to tell whether two terms should be treated as labels for the same
concept. For example, the vertical/topographic system of Yadhayekenu includes akinta ‘up’, anpaantu ‘upwards’ and
anpaa/anpima ‘above’, and we were unsure whether to treat these terms as labels for one, two or three categories.
Because the data set includes multiple non-cardinal systems for some languages, the regression analysis for this
domain included random effects for both language and language family.
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 17
Color.
We used the version of the World Color Survey released in the wcs R package (jvosten, 2024). The database
includes labels of color chips provided by individual participants, and for each language we identified all terms that
were provided by at least 60% of participants for at least one chip. The number of such terms was taken as the size of
the color-naming system for that language.
Folk biology.
For each language appearing in Appendix B of Brown (1984), we counted the number of entries under the
heading “life-form terms.” Brown’s comments on each language sometimes suggest that one or more of the terms
listed is not a true life-form term. For example, he lists three terms for Iwaidja (Australia), but suggests that they are
labels for “incipient life-form classes” rather than full-fledged life-form terms. We ignored these distinctions for the
purposes of our analysis.
Brown’s work has been criticized for relying on a notion of life-form that does not apply across languages
and that leaves out “a large number of highly inclusive categories of intellectual, communicative, ecological, and
economic significance” (Ellen, 1987; Randall and Hunn, 1984, p 344). These concerns threaten some of the
conclusions that Brown draws from his data, but seem less relevant to our finding that life-form systems show no
systematic tendency towards even or odd sizes.
EVEN OR ODD? SYMMETRY AND THE STRUCTURE OF CATEGORY SYSTEMS 18