Simple and smart – Promoting consumers’ willingness to
consume expired but still edible food through an informational
intervention
Karolin Schmidt1*
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Institute of Psychology, Environmental Psychology, Otto-von-
Guericke-University Magdeburg, Germany
* Correspondence:
Corresponding author
karolin.Schmidt@ovgu.de
Keywords: Food waste, Intervention practice, Consumer behavior, Informational
intervention, Date labels
Abstract
In order to curb household food waste in industrialized countries such as Germany, appropriate
interventions are needed to encourage consumers to adopt various food-waste-prevention
practices, for example, with respect to expired food. The main objective of the present study
was to evaluate the effects of an informational intervention (about the environmental
consequences of household food waste and typical periods of edibility for various foods) on
consumers’ willingness to consume and offer expired but still edible food to others. We
conducted an online survey in a sample of German consumers (N = 558). For the survey,
participants were randomly assigned to an experimental group (EG, which was given the
informational intervention) or a control group (CG, which was given a placebo informational
intervention). In line with our expectations, we found that EG participants reported lower
perceived health risks as well as stronger personal norms for the consumption of expired but
still edible food than CG participants did. Furthermore, EG participants were significantly more
willing to consume and to offer expired but still edible food to others in a hypothetical food-
choice experiment than CG participants were. Taken together, the present study provides
valuable insights for an intervention designed to prevent household food waste by focusing on
relevant consumption practices and going beyond a consumer-focused intervention perspective.
1 Introduction
After the United Nations Food Waste Index Report was issued in 2022, 1.05 billion tons of food
were wasted (i.e., discarded, not consumed in a timely manner, or deemed unsuitable for human
consumption; see, e.g., Thyberg & Tonjes 2016) in the retail, food service, and household
sectors combined. Out of the 132 kg of food waste that resulted per capita per year, 79 kg of
food waste per capita per year came from households (Forbes et al. 2024). In 2015, the United
Nations committed to the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 12.3, which prescribed the
target to cut per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels in half […] by 2030
(United Nations 2024). However, achieving this goal still seems a long way off, and hence,
effective ways to prevent household food waste are still needed.
In this context, research has provided comprehensive empirical evidence for the high relevance
of consumers’ various daily consumption practices for the prevention of household food waste
(see, e.g., Roodhuyzen et al. 2017; Schanes, Dobernig & Gözet 2018; Schmidt & Matthies
2018). In addition to consumption practices that refer to grocery shopping, food storage, and
meal preparation, consumers’ engagement in food-waste-prevention practices with respect to
expired food (i.e., preventing the direct disposal of expired food, further sensory testing, e.g.,
smelling or tasting for edibility, and finally, consuming expired but still edible food) has been
shown to be highly relevant for effectively preventing household food waste (Aschemann-
Witzel et al. 2015; Buzby, Farah-Wells & Hyman 2014; Schmidt & Matthies 2018). In this
context, the term “expired food” refers to the fact that foodstuff has deviated from
normal/optimal foods on the basis of their date labeling by, for example, being close to or
beyond the best-before date. Because consumers often report a great deal of confusion about
the meanings and implications of different date labels (e.g., best-before vs. use-by dates; see,
e.g., Patra, Feng & Howard 2022; Gong et al. 2022; Shamim, Ahmad & Alam 2022),
appropriate intervention strategies are needed to prevent direct disposal of expired but still
edible food and to promote consumers’ willingness to consume such food in order to further
prevent household food waste in industrialized countries such as Germany. Thus, previous
research that has examined psychological predictors of consumers’ willingness to consume
expired but still edible food represents a promising starting point for intervention development.
1.1 Psychological predictors of consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible
food
In previous research on predictors of consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible
food, two major categories of predictors exist: On the one hand, previous research has identified
nonpsychological predictors that affect consumers’ willingness to consume such food, such as
predictors that are related to consumers’ sociodemographic features, to the specific food
category in question, or to package size and other product features (see e.g., Hooge et al. 2017;
Thompson et al. 2018; Wilson et al. 2017). On the other hand, previous research has also
identified a range of psychological predictors of consumers’ willingness to consume expired
but still edible food. In this context, Schmidt (2019) provided empirical evidence of a
comprehensive psychological model explaining consumers’ willingness to consume expired
but still edible food based on an extended version of the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB; see
e.g., Ajzen 1991; Ajzen 2011). The TPB is the theoretical model most often used in decision-
making research in environmental psychology (see e.g., Steg & Norlund 2012 for an overview)
as well as in food waste research (see, e.g., Stefan et al. 2013; Visschers, Wickli & Siegrist
2016; Graham-Rowe, Jessop & Sparks 2015; Spence & Pidgeon 2010; Stancu, Haugaard &
Lähteenmäki 2016).
expired but still edible food is directly affected by perceived health risks from consuming
expired food, consumers’ habits for direct disposal of expired food, and consumers’ intentions
to consume expired but still edible food. These intentions, in turn, represent a reasoned choice
that people make by weighing their attitude (i.e., the extent to which engaging in the
consumption of expired but still edible food is positively or negatively evaluated), subjective
norms (i.e., the extent to which the person believes that important others would approve or
disapprove of the consumption of expired but still edible food), their perceived behavioral
control (PBC; i.e., perceived limits of resources, abilities, or opportunities to consume expired
but still edible food), and also by their personal norms (i.e., their feelings of strong moral
obligations to engage in pro-social behavior such as the consumption of expired but still edible
food; see, e.g., Klöckner 2015 for an overview of all abovementioned psychological predictors)
to prevent the direct disposal of expired food.
1.2 Theory-based selection of appropriate intervention techniques for the promotion of
consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food
Environmental psychological research and intervention practices provide a comprehensive
pool of possible intervention techniques that can be used to promote people’s engagement in a
range of pro-environmental behaviors (see, e.g. Steg, van den Berg & Groot 2012; Abrahamse
2019; Abrahamse et al. 2005 for an overview). Thus, in principle, there are also plenty of
opportunities to promote consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food by
applying environmental psychological intervention techniques. But in order to focus on the
techniques with the greatest potential for changing consumers’ food-waste behavior, the
techniques that are most important to consider are the ones that can be assumed to directly
affect relevant psychological predictors of consumers’ willingness to consume expired but
still edible food. On the basis of the comprehensive explanation model described above,
effective intervention techniques might consist of providing information about what the best-
before (in contrast to the use-by) date labels actually mean as well as about typical edibility
periods for various foods (which are typically quite longer than implied by the best-before
dates). Such information maybe offer effective ways to directly affect consumers’ perceptions
of the health risks that come with consuming expired food and may potentially increase their
willingness to consume expired but still edible food. Furthermore, also providing information
about the environmental consequences of household food waste, thereby implying a moral
obligation for consumers to prevent such waste (e.g., by preventing direct disposal of expired
but still edible food), consumers’ personal norms can be directly affected. In turn, a change in
personal norms should affect their intentions and consequently their willingness to consume
expired but still edible food. Against this background, an informational intervention—one of
the most frequently used intervention techniques in environmental psychology—could be an
effective and easily implemented tool for promoting consumers’ willingness to consume
expired but still edible food.
1.3 Consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food versus their
willingness to offer such food to others
Although Schmidt’s (2019) psychological model provides a comprehensive theoretical
background for explaining consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food as
well as for developing appropriate intervention techniques to promote this willingness, there
is still a need to expand the research perspective further. Such an expanded research
perspective refers to the different types of behavioral contexts in which consumers’
consumption practices with respect to expired food can take place in their daily lives. Since
food consumption often takes place in social contexts (e.g., family meals, bringing food to a
party or picnic with friends, offering snacks to guests), focusing only on consumers’
willingness to consume expired but still edible food by themselves seems too short-sighted.
Thus, it seems necessary to extend previous research perspectives by also considering
consumers’ willingness to offer expired but still edible food to others in addition to the sole
examination of their willingness to consume such food themselves. Although it seems
probable that consumers’ willingness to offer expired but still edible food to others should be
determined by the same variables that would predict their own consumption, previous
research has implied that there are other predictors that are especially likely to refer to social
contexts involving offering food to others and that these predictors should be considered
further: In this context, consumers’ good provider identity (i.e., consumers’ desire to
“purchase and prepare sufficient amounts of food so that family members and guests are well
catered for,” Visschers, Wickli & Siegrist 2016, p. 68; see also, e.g., Graham-Rowe, Jessop &
Sparks 2015; Porpino, Wansink & Parente 2016 for further information) should strongly
affect their willingness to offer expired but still edible food to others in addition to the other
predictors already considered for their own willingness to consume such food. Thereby,
consumers’ desire to be a good provider refers not only to the amount of food but also to the
quality of food that is served to family members and guests. As mentioned by Aschemann-
Witzel et al. (2020, p. 586) “it represents an identity because the resulting behavior is driven
by an ideal role that many consumers aim to fulfill, and this identity motivates certain food
choices and handling practices, including decisions to dispose of food.” Against this
background, when developing and evaluating effects of an intervention used to promote
consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food, effects of this intervention
on their own willingness to consume such food as well as on their willingness to offer this
food to others should be considered simultaneously.
1.4 Research aim and hypotheses
The main objective of the present study was to develop and evaluate the effects of an
informational intervention about the environmental consequences of household food waste and
about typical edibility periods for various foods on consumers’ willingness to consume expired
but still edible food as well as on their willingness to offer such food to others.
Based on the above-described theoretical background of the present study, the following
research hypotheses were tested:
H0: Participants report a significantly higher willingness to consume expired but still edible
food than they report for offering expired but still edible food to others.
H1a: Participants receiving the informational intervention (i.e., EG participants) report
significantly higher personal norms for the consumption of expired but still edible food than
participants who receive a placebo informational intervention do (i.e., CG participants;
Manipulation check a).
H1b: EG participants report significantly lower perceived health risks when consuming expired
but still edible food than CG participants do (Manipulation check b).
H2a: EG participants report a significantly greater willingness to consume expired but still
edible food than CG participants do.
H2b: EG participants report significantly greater willingness to offer expired but still edible
food to others than CG participants do.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Data collection and participants
We administered an online survey developed with the SoSci survey software in September
2019. Participants were recruited from the SoSci Panel. This panel represents a large pool of
mostly highly educated volunteer respondents from German-speaking countries (mostly from
Germany; for additional information, see Leiner 2016). Altogether, 819 people took part in the
online survey, whereas 660 people completed the entire survey. After deleting unreliable cases
by examining several control variables, attention-check questions, and answering time for the
entire survey, 558 people formed the final sample (281 EG participants and 277 CG
participants).
This final sample contained more women (62.7%) than men (36.1%), whereas 1.3% of the
participants defined themselves otherwise. Participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 82 years (M =
41.04, SD = 15.25). As expected, the final sample was highly educated (with 64.7% of the
participants reporting a university degree and 16.4% reporting a general higher education
entrance qualification). Most of the participants reported that they were employed (48.9%),
studying (16.5%), or retired (12.2%). Household income ranged from less than 800€ (11.2%)
sociodemographic features.
2.2 Study procedure
At the beginning of the online survey, participants were asked for some control variables (e.g.,
participants’ responsibility for handling different types of food in their household) in order to
exclude inappropriate participants from the analyses. Furthermore, participants were asked a
large variety of questions, which were later used for the randomization check procedure
between EG and CG participants (i.e., questions about the importance of sustainability-, health-
and economy-related aspects of participants’ food consumption practices in general, about how
frequently dairy foods are consumed in their household in a typical month, and how often they
make decisions about the edibility of dairy foods on the basis of the best-before date labels; see
After these initial questions, participants were randomly assigned to the informational
intervention (EG participants) or the placebo informational intervention (CG participants; see
Section 3.3 for details). After a brief attention-check question referring to the presented
both groups with the measurement of participants’ willingness to consume expired but still
edible food as well as their willingness to offer such food to others in a hypothetical food-choice
experiment (see Section 3.2 for details). Afterwards, a diverse array of psychological predictors
determining participants’ willingness to consume/offer expired but still edible food were
measured to capture (more) relevant variables for randomization and manipulation checks (see
again Section 3.2 for details). At the end of the survey, participants were asked for relevant
sociodemographic features.
Measuring participants’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food and to offer
such food to others
As mentioned above, participants’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food as well
as their willingness to offer such food to others was measured by using a hypothetical food-
choice experiment. By doing so, we used nearly the same experimental procedure as the one
used by Schmidt (2019).
Thus, the hypothetical food-choice experiment in the present study was designed for dairy
products (i.e., for yogurt and—to extend Schmidt’s (2019) experimental procedure—also for
cheese). We decided to focus on dairy foods for the same reasons described by Schmidt (2019):
(1) Conventionally produced dairy foods are causing high climate emissions (e.g., with
conventionally produced yogurt causing 1.7 kg CO equivalents per kg and conventionally
produced cheese causing 5.7 kg CO equivalents per kg; Reinhardt, Gärtner & Wagner 2020),
(2) dairy products are still characterized by high consumption levels in Germany (122.02 kg
per capita in 2022; Federal Agency for Agriculture and Food 2023), and (3) previous research
has implied that date labels (especially the best-before label) are highly relevant for consumers’
edibility decisions, especially with respect to dairy products (WRAP 2015; Thompson et al.
2018; WRAP 2013).
In the food-choice experiment, based on the materials used by Schmidt (2019), a neutrally
expiration dates was shown. Thus, we used three versions of the same yogurt/cheese across the
entire experimental procedure: (1) one version showing an unexpired yogurt/cheese (optimal
version), (2) another version showing yogurt/cheese 1 day beyond the best-before date (expired
one (Exp1)), and (3) another version showing yogurt/cheese 1 week beyond the best-before date
(expired two (Exp2)). In the experiment, there were six choice sets (three per yogurt and three
per cheese) in which participants were asked to “Imagine that you’re at home, ready to select
a yogurt. Which one of the presented, unopened yogurts [which of the two pieces of unwrapped
cheese] would you choose to consume?” Additionally, we integrated six additional choice sets
(again, three per yogurt/cheese) in which participants were asked to “Imagine that you’re at
home with friends and you want to offer them a yogurt. Which one of the presented, unopened
yogurts [which of the two pieces of unwrapped cheese] would you choose to offer?” In each
choice set, participants saw two out of the three versions per product (yogurt/cheese) in
randomized positions. Across the entire experimental procedure for the yogurt/cheese,
participants had to choose between the optimal version and Exp1, between the optimal version
and Exp2, and between Exp1 and Exp2. In every choice set, participants also had the option “I
In the analysis, an overall score representing participants’ willingness to consume expired but
still edible food as well as another overall score representing their willingness to offer expired
but still edible food to others were calculated as the mean values of the six choice sets referring
to participants’ own consumption/willingness to offer (with higher values per score
representing higher willingness to consume/offer expired but still edible food).
Measuring psychological predictors of consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still
edible food
We measured the psychological predictors of participants’ willingness to consume expired but
still edible food with nearly the same items/scales used by Schmidt (2019). Since the present
study focused on consumers’ willingness to consume (and offer) expired but still edible food,
we adapted the formulation of some of her items by explicitly referring to the consumption of
expired but still edible food (while most of Schmidt’s (2019) items referred to the direct
disposal of expired food or to preventing the direct disposal). Except for the items used to
capture participants’ attitudes toward the consumption of expired but still edible food, all items
were measured on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (do not agree at all) to 6 (completely
agree), introduced by the following question: “To what extent do you agree with the following
in the present study).
Attitudes toward the consumption of expired but still edible food
Participants’ attitudes toward the consumption of expired but still edible food were measured
with three items, which were answered on a 6-point Likert scale (e.g., ranging from 1 = not
completely negative to 6 = very negative). All items were introduced by the following sentence:
“I find that using up expired but still edible food in my household is ...”). With α = .89, this
scale demonstrated very good reliability (Field 2013; Gliem & Gliem 2003).
Subjective norms for the consumption of expired but still edible food
We used three items to measure participants’ subjective norms (e.g., “People who are important
to me (e.g., family and friends) expect me to consume expired but still edible food in my
household”), resulting in a scale with an acceptable level of reliability (α = .69).
Perceived behavioral control (PBC)
Participants’ PBC was measured with three items (e.g., “I can think of various ways that I can
consume expired but still edible food in my household”). With α = .68, this scale also
demonstrated acceptable reliability.
Personal norms for the consumption of expired but still edible food
Participants’ personal norms for the consumption of expired but still edible food were measured
with two items (e.g., “No matter what other people think or do, due to my values/principles, I
feel obliged to consume expired but still edible food in my household”). This scale demonstrated
very good reliability (r = .71, p < .001).
Perceived health risks when consuming expired dairy food
Perceived health risks when consuming expired dairy food were measured with three items
(e.g., “I think eating dairy products that expired some days ago is completely harmless”). The
resulting scale demonstrated good reliability (α = .74).
Additional variables captured for randomization checks
In order to provide comprehensive data for the randomization check between EG and CG
participants, we measured some additional variables. We chose variables that were likely to
determine whether participants would be willing to offer expired but still edible food to others
(i.e., participants’ good provider identity; see Section 2.3 for details) or that were relevant for
consumers’ pro-environmental behaviors (for which their consumption practices with respect
to expired food represent concrete examples; i.e., participants’ environmental attitude and their
biospheric value orientations).
Good provider identity with respect to expired food
Participants’ good provider identify with respect to expired food was measured with two items
(e.g., “I do not want other people in my household [family members, friends, guests, etc.] to eat
expired food, even if it is still edible”), which were newly created. The resulting scale
demonstrated good reliability (r = .60, p < .001).
Environmental attitude
Participants’ environmental attitude was measured with a short version of the New
Environmental Paradigm (NEP; Dunlap 2008; Dunlap et al. 2000). Our scale consisted of six
items (e.g., “We are approaching the limit of the number of people the earth can support”) and
showed good reliability (α = .73).
Biospheric value orientation
We measured participants’ biospheric value orientation with four items adapted from Groot &
Steg (2008). The items were introduced by “How much do you consider the following aspects
to be guiding principles in your life? Preventing environmental pollution: protecting natural
resources” and answered on a 7-point Likert scale (ranging from 1 = not important to 7 = very
important). With α = .86, the scale demonstrated very good reliability.
2.3 Implementation of the informational intervention
Following the randomized group-assignment procedure in the online survey, EG participants
received the informational intervention about the environmental consequences of household
food waste and about the typical edibility periods of various foods. The intervention was
introduced by a brief introductory text: “In the following section of our survey, we would now
like to present some selected recommendations for climate-friendly food consumption. Please
read all the recommendations carefully and at your leisure.”
On the subsequent survey page, EG participants then saw a list of four recommendations for
text), introduced by “Climate protection tastes good! Tips for climate-friendly food
consumption: The consequences of climate change are becoming more and more noticeable for
all of us—an increase in storms and floods, droughts, and crop failures. In this context, our diet
also contributes significantly to the greenhouse effect, especially through the production and
processing of food—from cultivation to the kitchen. In Germany, food consumption accounts
for around one fifth of the emissions of climate-impacting gasses. Thus, there are also many
ways for private consumers to protect the climate when shopping and eating.”
The list of recommendations closed with a fourth recommendation providing information about
the environmental consequences of household food waste and about typical edibility periods of
various foods:
“Avoid food waste! Every German throws away an average of 80 kg of food every year.
Every discarded product is associated with the consumption of large amounts of energy,
water, and other raw materials in the chain from cultivation to retail. Food waste also
harms the climate: Avoidable food waste in the EU produces as much greenhouse gas
per year as the Netherlands produce in total. Yet more than half of all household food
waste could easily be avoided, for example, by planning meals and grocery shopping in
advance or if food with expired best-before dates is not thrown away immediately or
viewed as spoiled. For example, unopened yogurt stored in the fridge can still be used
at least 1 week after the best-before date, a well-packaged piece of cheese can still be
kept for up to 3 weeks, and unopened UHT milk even up to 8 weeks.”
We deliberately provided EG participants with more information on climate-friendly food
consumption than just on the issue of household food waste in order to avoid making the aim
of the study (referring to the expected intervention effects) too obvious for the EG participants
and, thus, to avoid the disruptive effects of social desirability (see Section 5.3 for further
information) on EG participants’ food choices in the hypothetical food-choice experiment.
As mentioned above, CG participants received a placebo informational intervention in the
online survey. They were presented with recommendations on healthy nutrition (implemented
with a comparable introduction and explanatory text providing several brief recommendations
3 Results
3.1 Preliminary analyses
Willingness to consume versus to offer expired but still edible food to others
To examine the expected difference between participants’ willingness to consume expired but
still edible food and their willingness to offer such food to others, we computed a repeated-
measures ANOVA with data from all participants (EG and CG participants).
In line with our expectations, the analysis revealed a significant and meaningful difference
between the conditions (F = 524.436, p < .001, η ² = .49): Participants reported significantly
1 p
greater willingness to consume safe expired food themselves (M = 1.87, SD = 0.24) than
own own
to offer such food to others (M = 1.52, SD = 0.37). Thus, the data supported H0.
offer offer
Randomization check
In order to ensure that significant differences in participants’ willingness to consume/offer
expired but still edible food between EG and CG participants were not caused by relevant a
priori group differences, we conducted an extensive randomization check. Thereby, we
compared EG and CG participants on all the control variables, all the psychological predictors
of their willingness to consume expired but still edible food (except for the variables for which
an intervention effect was expected, see Section 4.2 for details), all additional variables
measured for the randomization check (see Section 3.2), and participants’ sociodemographic
features.
Out of these variables, we explored possible a priori group differences in metric variables by
using a MANOVA, which showed no significant overall group-difference effect as well as no
(15)
for an overview of all variable-specific comparisons). Furthermore, nonparametric tests for
categorical and nominal variables also showed no significant group differences between EG
and CG participants’ sociodemographic features (gender distribution: χ = 2.315, p = .31;
education: U = 0.684; p = .49). Taken together, this extensive randomization check procedure
implied that there were no relevant a priori differences between EG and CG participants. Thus,
any group differences identified in the dependent variables should be traced back to the
informational intervention in the experimental group (in contrast to the placebo intervention in
the control group).
3.2 Intervention evaluation procedure
Manipulation checks examining the intervention’s effects on participants’ personal
norms and perceived health risks
In the first step of the intervention evaluation, we examined the effects of the informational
intervention in the EG on the variables that were directly addressed by the intervention
techniques we used (i.e., we conducted appropriate manipulation checks). Because our
informational intervention was on the environmental consequences of household food waste
and on effective ways to prevent it (including information on the actual edibility periods of
dairy products such as yogurt and cheese), we conducted the manipulation check procedure by
examining expected differences between EG and CG participants’ personal norms for the
consumption of expired but still edible food (H1a) and their perceptions of health risks when
consuming expired dairy products (H1b).
In line with H1a, a t test for independent samples showed that EG participants (M = 5.28,
EG
SD = 0.99) reported significantly higher personal norms to consume expired but still edible
EG
food (t = 1.805, p < .05) than CG participants did (M = 5.11, SD = 1.18). By contrast
(552) CG CG
and in line with H1b, another t test for independent samples showed that EG participants (M
EG
= 2.04, SD = 1.08) reported significantly lower perceived health risks when consuming
EG
expired dairy products (t = -2.116, p < .05) than CG participants did (M = 2.24, SD =
(551) CG CG
1.14). Taken together, these results clearly suggest that the informational intervention had the
intended effect in the experimental group.
The intervention’s effects on participants’ willingness to consume and to offer expired
but still edible food to others
To examine the intervention’s effects on participants’ willingness to consume and to offer
expired but still edible food to others, we computed another MANOVA. In line with our
expectations, the analysis revealed a significant overall effect of group assignment (F = 4.328,
p = .01, η ² = .02). When looking at the variable-specific analyses, we found significant group
differences for both dependent variables (own consumption: F = 5.263, p = .02, η ² = .01; offer
1 p
to others: F = 6.426, p = .01, η ² = .01). Thus, EG participants were significantly more willing
1 p
to consume expired food themselves (M = 1.89, SD = 0.21; M = 1.85, SD = 0.27) as
EG EG CG CG
well as to offer expired food to others (M = 1.56, SD = 0.37; M = 1.48, SD = 0.37)
EG EG CG CG
than CG participants were. Thus, H2a and H2b were both supported by the data.
4 Discussion
4.1 Summary and classification of the present findings in previous research
The overall research objective of the present study was to evaluate the effects of an
informational intervention (about the environmental consequences of household food waste and
typical edibility periods of various foods) on consumers’ willingness to consume expired but
still edible food as well as on their willingness to offer such food to others.
In this context, we wanted to provide a more comprehensive research perspective that covers
various behavioral contexts in which consumers engage in the relevant consumption practices
in their daily lives. Thus, in the intervention evaluation, the present study focused not only on
consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food themselves but also on their
willingness to offer such food to others. In line with our initial expectations, our results showed
that participants’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food themselves was
significantly higher than their willingness to offer such food to others. To the best of our
knowledge, no previous research has explicitly examined such differences in consumers’ food-
waste-prevention behaviors involving expired food in different behavioral contexts as we did
in the present study. Nevertheless, our findings are consistent with previous research that
considered the relevance of consumers’ good provider identity as an important psychological
predictor (i.e., especially as an important barrier) of consumers’ engagement in various food-
waste-prevention behaviors. Although consumers’ desire to be a good provider can refer to
various types of food-waste-prevention behaviors, it can also refer to consumers’ willingness
to offer expired but still edible food to others. Even though the expired food is still edible, the
fact that it is close to or even beyond its best-before date clearly indicates that the food is not in
its most optimal condition for consumption. Thus, if consumers are characterized by a strong
preference to be a good provider (which implies offering only the most optimal food products
to others), it should thereby be assumed that consumers’ good provider identity can greatly
affect their willingness to offer expired food to others but not their willingness to consume
expired food themselves. Against this background, it seems quite reasonable that, in our study,
we would find that participants reported significantly lower willingness to offer expired but still
edible food to others than they reported for their own consumption of the same products.
With regard to these initial findings, we evaluated the intervention by comprehensively
considering participants’ willingness levels depending on their own consumption versus
offering expired food to others. In the first step of the intervention evaluation, we examined
direct intervention effects, that is, we focused on intervention-related changes in the
psychological variables that our theoretical behavior explanation model implied would be
directly affected by the intervention techniques we used (i.e., participants’ personal norms for
the consumption of expired but still edible food [due to the information provided about the
environmental consequences of household food waste] and the perceived health risks from
consuming expired food [due to the information provided about typical edibility periods of
dairy products such as yogurt and cheese]). In line with our assumptions, this manipulation
check procedure identified significantly higher personal norms and significantly lower
perceived health risks for EG participants compared with CG participants who received a
placebo informational intervention. Building on these findings, which indicated the basic
functioning of the intervention, we went on to examine the hypothesized differences in
participants’ willingness to consume and to offer expired but still edible food to others
depending on the informational intervention in the EG. Our results clearly showed that,
compared with the CG participants, the EG participants were more willing not only to consume
expired food themselves but also to offer expired food to others. Against this background, the
present study suggests that our simple and easy-to-implement informational intervention is an
effective tool for promoting consumers’ engagement in food-waste-prevention behaviors
involving expired food and, thus, to be an effective tool for the further prevention of household
food waste in general.
4.2 Implications for an intervention focusing on individuals’ daily consumption practices
and on other relevant actors for (household) food waste prevention
Considering all the findings in the present study, it can be assumed that simple informational
interventions, such as implemented in our study, have great potential for enacting relevant
behavioral changes in the household-food-waste-prevention domain. With regard to
intervention implementation, the present findings have some implications: In addition to the
already existing intervention programs and campaigns that are designed to educate consumers
about the concrete meanings of various date labels on food products (especially best-before vs.
use-by dates, see, e.g., WRAP, 2023) in general, there is also a need for future interventions.
There is an especially strong need for the kinds of intervention techniques that can “act” more
directly in the moment when consumers are deciding whether to consume or to dispose of an
expired but possibly still edible food product. Thus, and in line with the high relevance of habits
for the direct disposal of expired food (as shown, e.g., by Schmidt 2019), using appropriately
designed prompt interventions (containing brief messages, e.g., about the typical edibility
periods of a particular type of food or brief instructions on how to assess the edibility of a food
product by sensory testing, see, e.g., Steg & Norlund 2012 for an overview of prompt
interventions) placed on food packaging could be a very promising approach for effective
interventions in practice. At the same time, however, this consideration also makes clear that
the development and especially the implementation of most effective intervention techniques
in this field can be realized only if many different actors in the food consumption and production
system are considered—not only consumers. This conclusion is easy to illustrate using the
example of the above-proposed prompt-intervention technique: Since prompt interventions are
typically most effective when the prompts are recognized as being as “close” as possible to the
moment in which consumers’ engage in the behavior in question (e.g., to consume vs. to dispose
of expired but still edible food), food packaging would be the most appropriate location on
which to place prompts to prevent direct disposal of expired food. But such an intervention
procedure requires direct changes not only in conventional production processes (because new
food packaging designs would be needed) but also in the assessment of the significance of
standard success criteria in production and trading systems, as more clarification of date-label
meanings and the promotion of consumers’ willingness to consume expired but still edible food
could result in lower sales balances for the food producers and sellers (due to decreased
purchasing rates of food products when more expired food products are consumed instead of
disposed of and replaced with newly bought products). This implies that, although the
household food waste domain and especially consumers’ consumption practices involving
expired food should be viewed as private behavioral domains, in order to achieve the goal of
an extensive reduction in the amount of household food waste in industrialized countries,
change is needed not only in consumers’ daily consumption practices but also in the structural
conditions/behavioral contexts in which these daily consumption practices are performed. Thus,
an effective reduction in the amount of household food waste also requires extensive changes
in production and trade conditions and, thus, also changes that refer to the relevant political
measures that determine/promote current production and trade systems in the food sector. Only
by combining the engagement of a wide range of actors in the food domain (e.g., consumers,
traders and distributors, producers and politicians) can these profound changes in our society
be achieved, changes that are needed to finally fulfill the United Nations’ target to halve per
capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels by 2030.
4.3 Limitations and implications for future research
Although the present study has important implications for intervention practices, there are
nevertheless several limitations that should be considered to appropriately interpret the results.
As already mentioned in the Method section, participants in the present study were recruited
from the SoSci Panel, which represents a large pool of mostly highly educated volunteer
respondents from German-speaking countries. Thus, the sample cannot be assumed to be
representative of the German population at all. Therefore, our findings cannot be generalized
to the German population or to other populations without further research. Furthermore,
although we chose an especially appropriate food category for the present study, we should
mention that best-before dates are also relevant for consumers’ consumption practices involving
other food categories (e.g., packaged meat products, canned food). Thus, there is a need for
further research to examine intervention effects on consumers’ willingness to consume expired
but still edible food from other food categories.
Additionally, there are some limitations involving the measures used in this study: On the one
hand, the present results are based only on self-report measures, and thus, we cannot exclude
the possibility that some inaccuracies and possible response biases (especially referring to
social desirability; see, e.g., Cerri, Thøgersen & Testa 2019 for details) could have negatively
affected the data. In order to prevent response biases while collecting the data, we gave explicit
instructions in the survey to emphasize that no answers were considered right or wrong and that
only participants’ personal opinions were relevant. Especially with regard to the intervention
evaluation, using a study design that integrated a placebo informational intervention gave us an
additional opportunity to at least control for such response biases (especially because the results
of the randomization check suggested that the EG and CG participants were comparable
individuals). Nevertheless, the use of only self-report measures still remains a relevant
methodological limitation of the present study.
On the other hand, another methodological limitation refers to the hypothetical food-choice
experiment used to capture participants’ willingness to consume and to offer expired but still
edible food to others. Thus, participants’ decisions in such hypothetical situations might not
necessarily match the decisions they make in their real daily lives. In our food-choice
experiment, participants made their choice solely on the basis of a single product characteristic
(the information about the expiration date per food option). In real life, consumers would likely
make their choices on the basis of a range of criteria (e.g., foods’ sensory characteristics).
Although we deliberately chose a correspondingly focused/reduced study design (in order to
increase the internal validity of our findings), future research should consider this limitation,
which refers to the potential lack of external validity of the present results. Thus, future studies
could, for example, use a comparable hypothetical food-choice experiment but could improve
its external validity by integrating more information on the relevant characteristics of the
presented food options or—ideally—by conducting field experiments to examine consumers’
real-life consumption practices with respect to expired food in addition to such hypothetical
laboratory study designs.
5 Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the author,
without undue reservations.
6 Ethics statement
Ethical review and approval was not required for the study on human participants in
accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements. The participants provided
their written informed consent to participate in this study.
7 Conflicts of interest
The author declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as potential conflicts of interest.
8 References
Abrahamse, W 2019, Encouraging Pro-Environmental Behaviour. What Works, What
Doesn't, and Why, Academic Press.
Abrahamse, W, Steg, L, Vlek, C & Rothengatter, T 2005, 'A review of intervention studies
aimed at household energy conservation', Journal of Environmental Psychology, vol. 25, no.
Ajzen, I 1991, 'The theory of planned behavior', Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 179–211. Available from:
Ajzen, I 2011, 'The theory of planned behaviour: Reactions and reflections', Psychology &
Health, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1113–1127.
Aschemann-Witzel, J, Giménez, A, Grønhøj, A & Ares, G 2020, 'Avoiding household food
waste, one step at a time: The role of self-efficacy, convenience orientation, and the good
provider identity in distinct situational contexts', Journal of Consumer Affairs, vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 581–606.
Aschemann-Witzel, J, Hooge, I de, Amani, P, Bech-Larsen, T & Oostindjer, M 2015,
'Consumer-Related Food Waste: Causes and Potential for Action', Sustainability, vol. 7, no. 6,
Buzby, JC, Farah-Wells, H & Hyman, J 2014, The Estimated Amount, Value, and Calories of
Postharvest Food Losses at the Retail and Consumer Levels in the United States.
Cerri, J, Thøgersen, J & Testa, F 2019, 'Social desirability and sustainable food research: A
systematic literature review', Food Quality and Preference, vol. 71, pp. 136–140. Available
Dunlap, RE 2008, 'The New Environmental Paradigm Scale: From Marginality to Worldwide
Use', The Journal of Environmental Education, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 3–18.
Dunlap, RE, van Liere, KD, Mertig, AG & Jones, RE 2000, 'New trends in measuring
environmental attitudes: measuring endorsement of the new ecological paradigm: a revised
NEP scale', Journal of social issues, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 425–442.
Federal Agency for Agriculture and Food 2023, Pro-Kopf-Konsum von Milch und
Milcherzeugnissen in Deutschland nach Art im Jahr 2022. Available from:
und-milcherzeugnissen-in-deutschland-nach-art/ [04 September 2024].
Field, A 2013, Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics, sage.
Forbes, H, Peacock, E, Abbot, N & Jones, M 2024, Food Waste Index Report 2024. Available
Gliem, JA & Gliem, RR 2003, Calculating, interpreting, and reporting Cronbach’s alpha
reliability coefficient for Likert-type scales. Available from:
Gong, Z, Su, LY-F, Zhang, JS, Chen, T & Wang, Y-C 2022, 'Understanding the association
between date labels and consumer-level food waste', Food Quality and Preference, vol. 96, p.
Graham-Rowe, E, Jessop, DC & Sparks, P 2015, 'Predicting household food waste reduction
using an extended theory of planned behaviour', Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol.
Groot, J de & Steg, L 2008, 'Value orientations to explain beliefs related to environmental
significant behavior: How to measure egoistic, altruistic, and biospheric value orientations',
Environment and Behavior, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 330–354.
Hooge, IEd, Oostindjer, M, Aschemann-Witzel, J, Normann, A, Loose, SM & Almli, VL
2017, 'This apple is too ugly for me!: Consumer preferences for suboptimal food products in
the supermarket and at home', Food Quality and Preference, no. 56, pp. 80–92. Available
Klöckner, CA 2015, The Psychology of Pro-Environmental Communication. Beyond
Standard Information Strategies, Springer.
Leiner, DJ 2016, 'Our research’s breadth lives on convenience samples A case study of the
online respondent pool “SoSci Panel”', Studies in Communication | Media, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
Patra, D, Feng, S & Howard, JW 2022, 'Confusion of food-date label with food safety —
implications for food waste', Current Opinion in Food Science, vol. 48, p. 100917. Available
Porpino, G, Wansink, B & Parente, J 2016, 'Wasted Positive Intentions: The Role of
Affection and Abundance on Household Food Waste', Journal of Food Products Marketing,
vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 733–751.
Reinhardt, G, Gärtner, S & Wagner, T 2020, Ökologische Fußabdrücke von Lebensmitteln
und Gerichten in Deutschland. Available from:
ologische-fussabdruecke-von-lebensmitteln.pdf [04 September 2024].
Roodhuyzen, DMA, Luning, PA, Fogliano, V & Steenbekkers, LPA 2017, 'Putting together
the puzzle of consumer food waste: Towards an integral perspective', Trends in Food Science
& Technology, vol. 68, pp. 37–50. Available from:
Schanes, K, Dobernig, K & Gözet, B 2018, 'Food waste matters - A systematic review of
household food waste practices and their policy implications', Journal of Cleaner Production,
Schmidt, K 2019, 'Predicting the consumption of expired food by an extended Theory of
Planned Behavior', Food Quality and Preference, vol. 78, p. 103746. Available from:
Schmidt, K & Matthies, E 2018, 'Where to start fighting the food waste problem? Identifying
most promising entry points for intervention programs to reduce household food waste and
overconsumption of food.', Resources, Conservation and Recycling 2018, pp. 1–14.
Shamim, K, Ahmad, S & Alam, MA 2022, 'Consumer understanding of food date labels:
preventing food wastage', British Food Journal, vol. 124, no. 10, pp. 3116–3132. Available
Spence, A & Pidgeon, N 2010, 'Framing and communicating climate change: The effects of
distance and outcome frame manipulations', Global Environmental Change, vol. 20, no. 4, pp.
Stancu, V, Haugaard, P & Lähteenmäki, L 2016, 'Determinants of consumer food waste
behaviour: Two routes to food waste', Appetite, vol. 96, pp. 7–17.
Stefan, V, van Herpen, E, Tudoran, AA & Lähteenmäki, L 2013, 'Avoiding food waste by
Romanian consumers: The importance of planning and shopping routines', Food Quality and
Preference, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 375–381. Available from:
Steg, L & Norlund, AM 2012, 'Models to explain environmental behaviour' in Environmental
psychology: An Introduction, eds L Steg, A van den Berg & J de Groot, Wiley, Southern
Gate, Chichester, pp. 1–11.
Steg, L, van den Berg, A & Groot, J de (eds.) 2012, Environmental psychology: An
Introduction, Wiley, Southern Gate, Chichester.
Thompson, B, Toma, L, Barnes, AP & Revoredo-Giha, C 2018, 'The effect of date labels on
willingness to consume dairy products: Implications for food waste reduction', Waste
Management, vol. 78, pp. 124–134. Available from:
Thyberg, KL & Tonjes, DJ 2016, 'Drivers of food waste and their implications for sustainable
policy development', Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 106, pp. 110–123.
United Nations 2024, The Sustainable Development Goals Report. Available from:
Visschers, VHM, Wickli, N & Siegrist, M 2016, 'Sorting out food waste behaviour: A survey
on the motivators and barriers of self-reported amounts of food waste in households', Journal
of Environmental Psychology, vol. 45, pp. 66–78. Available from:
Wilson, NLW, Rickard, BJ, Saputo, R & Ho, S-T 2017, 'Food waste: The role of date labels,
package size, and product category', Food Quality and Preference, vol. 55, pp. 35–44.
WRAP 2013, Household Food and Drink Waste in the United Kingdom 2012. Available
in-the-United-Kingdom-2012.pdf.
WRAP 2015, Reducing food waste by extending product life. Available from:
WRAP 2023, Behaviour Change Interventions. Case Study. Day on Date Label -
Understanding the impact of a date label format change on citizen food waste behaviour in
08/BCI%20CS%20Design%201_DoDL%20v5.pdf [04 September 2024].
Tables
Sociodemographic features of the sample (N = 558)
Sample (%68)4
Gender
Male 36.1
Female 62.7 686
Otherwise 1.3
Age
18 – 25 17.6
26 – 40 37.7
41 – 60 32.7
61 – 65 5.5
> 66 6.5
Education
Completed primary school 0.5
Secondary education 17.0
Higher education entrance qualification 16.4
University degree 64.7
Household income
Less than € 800 11.2
€ 801 - € 1500 14.9 696
€ 1501 - € 2000 10.6
€ 2001 - € 2500 12.7
€ 2501 - € 3000 10.2
€ 3001 - € 3500 11.0
€ 3501 - € 4000 8.9
€ 4001 - € 5000 11.5
More than € 5000 8.9
Average household size (SD) 2.32 (1.20)
expired but still edible food proposed by Schmidt (2019).
food-choice experiment.
food-choice experiment.