“Thanks for caring about me, but I’m ashamed. I’m so tired.”: Mitigating refusals from a cross-
cultural perspective
Homa Babai Shishavan (Homa.babai@unimelb.edu.au)
The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Abstract
This study investigated the supportive move strategies used by Iranian English language learners
and a group of Anglo-Australian students to mitigate refusals. A discourse completion test (DCT)
was used to collect data from the two groups of participants. Focus group interviews (FGI) were
also used to investigate social and cultural norms motivating the pragmatic strategies used by
the Iranian participants. Unlike the prevalent approach of analysing refusals as a sequence of
direct and indirect refusals and adjuncts to refusals in previous studies of refusals, in this study
refusals were considered as combination of head acts and supportive move strategies accounting
for different function of semantic formulas in determining the illocutionary force of a response
as a refusal. The findings showed that the mitigation strategies used to soften refusals vary cross-
culturally. The performance of the two groups differed in terms of frequency, content and type of
supportive move strategies. Also, the strategies used by the Iranian participants at times reflected
the Persian cultural schemas of tă’ărof (ritual politeness) and sharmandegi (being ashamed)
distinguishing their responses from those of the Australian group. The FGI data also confirmed
that the Iranian participants relied on their first language cultural norms and schemas to enhance
the face of the interlocutor while giving refusals in English.
Key words: Refusal, Speech act, Supportive move strategy, Mitigation, Cultural schemas
1. Introduction
Although in some cultures and in certain context refusals may function as face-enhancing
politeness strategies (Babai Shishavan, 2016), in many languages and cultures they are considered
face-threatening speech acts (Brown & Levinson, 1987). Refusals are usually followed or preceded
by several external modification devices (Blum-Kulka et al., 1989) to attenuate the refusal.
However, these mitigation strategies, which play a crucial role in determining the politeness level
of a refusals remain under-researched (Abdolrezapour & Vahid Dastjerdi, 2012; Félix-Brasdefer,
2008), despite refusals being among one of the most researched speech acts (Roever, 2022).
Previous research has shown that the realisation of refusals varies from one language and culture
to another, reflecting the different cultural underpinnings that govern their production (Al-Eryani,
2008; Babai Shishavan & Sharifian, 2013; Beebe et al., 1990; Chang, 2009; Félix-Brasdefer, 2003,
2008; Ikoma & Shimura, 1994; Lyuh, 1992; Nelson et al., 2002; Nguyen, 2006). Therefore, it is
important to study how people of different cultural backgrounds soften their refusals while
speaking English as it is now an international language and the major global medium of
intercultural communication (McKay, 2018; Selvi et al., 2024; Sharifian, 2014c; Tajeddin & Alemi,
2021). The majority of English speakers all over the globe are people from various cultural
backgrounds who may not necessarily share a common language and culture (House, 2022;
Marlina & Ashish Giri, 2014; Sharifian, 2014c). Therefore, in addition to developing linguistic and
communicative skills, English language learners are required to develop intercultural
communicative skills as they are essential for efficient communication with other English
language users from various cultural backgrounds. English language learners need to develop
metacultural competence as well to be able to communicate and negotiate cultural
conceptualisations in intercultural communication (Sharifian, 2014c). Therefore, the learner’s
awareness of pragmatic differences between different cultures should be raised to help them
understand how these differences can have bearing upon their own communication in an
intercultural context.
Non-native English speakers are not the only group who use English for intercultural
communication. Native English speakers are also frequently required to participate in
communicative acts with interlocutors from different cultural backgrounds (Byram, 2009;
Sharifian, 2014c). Cross-cultural pragmatics studies can also provide native speakers with insights
into the cultural norms of possible interlocutors from different cultural backgrounds and help
them handle intercultural conversations more successfully. This study, therefore, investigated the
similarities and differences of supportive moves as linguistic politeness strategies used by Iranian
English language learners and Anglo-Australian university students to mitigate refusals to identify
possible areas of cross-cultural misunderstanding or miscommunication.
2. Background
Refusals are complex, and their production usually involves extended negotiations and verbal
cooperation as well as face-saving actions to mitigate their uncooperative nature (Gass & Houck,
1999). The majority of previous studies investigating the realisation of refusal speech act (Al-Issa,
2003; Al-Kahtani, 2006; Allami & Naeimi, 2011; Darwish, 2018; Fe´lix-Brasdefer, 2004, 2008;
Keshavarz et al., 2006; Kwon, 2004; Lauper, 1997; Wannaruk, 2008), have analysed refusals
following Beeb et al.’s (1990) pioneering study of refusals in which refusals were analysed as a
sequence of semantic formulas. Beeb et al. (1990), classified the semantic formulas used in the
realisation of refusals into the three subgroups of direct refusals, indirect refusals and adjuncts
to refusals. They considered direct and indirect refusals to be expressions through which the
speech act of refusal is realised in terms of its main content. Adjuncts, on the other hand, were
defined as expressions that usually accompany refusals but cannot stand as a refusal on their
own. For example, if a speaker refused an invitation to a friend’s house for dinner saying “I’d love
to, but I am sorry, I have theatre tickets tonight. Mybe I could come later for a drink.”, Beeb et al.
(1990) considered this as:
[I’d love to] [but I am sorry] [I have theatre tickets tonight] [Mybe I could come later for a
drink.]
[Statement of positive opinion] [Expression of regret] [excuse] [offer of alternative]
[Adjunct to refusal] [Indirect refusal] [Indirect refusal] [Indirect refusal]
Beeb et al.’s (1990) coding scheme provided a foundation for analysing semantic formulas used
in the realisation of refusals based on empirical data which makes it more reliable in comparison
with other coding classification systems (Gass & Houck, 1999). However, although this coding
scheme differentiates direct and indirect refusal strategies as demonstrated in the above
example, it does not account for the function of each semantic formula in determining the
illocutionary force of a response as a refusal.
The nature of a refusal is determined either by linguistic features (e.g. the form, content and the
surface illocutionary force of the utterance) or the features depending on the context of the
utterance (Gass & Houck, 1999). For example, linguistic forms like performative or non-
performative verbs, categorised as direct refusals in Beeb et al.’s (1990) classification, can
explicitly identify an utterance as a refusal like the performative verb ‘refuse’ in: ‘I refuse to work
for you’ or the non-performative verb ‘can’t’ in ‘I can’t make it’. The semantic content of the
utterance can also identify a refusal. For example, although there is no direct indication of a
refusal in ‘I need to study for an important exam’ issued to reject an invitation to a birthday party,
its semantic content implies that the speaker is declining to participate in the birthday party as
they need to prepare for an important exam. Such strategies are considered indirect refusals in
Beeb et al.’s (1990) classification. However, refusal responses often include a combination of
direct and/or indirect components some of which can stand as the core refusal and realise a
refusal independent of other elements and some of which constitute elements which are used to
modify the impact of the core refusal components.
Therefore, unlike the prevalent approach of analysing refusals as a sequence of direct and indirect
refusals and adjuncts to refusals, in this study refusals are considered as combination of head acts
and supportive moves. While head acts realise the speech act of refusal in terms of its main
content, supportive moves or external modifiers are “external units which precede or follow the
head act and modify its impact” (Blum-Kulka et al., 1989, p. 276). Supportive moves can either
mitigate or aggravate the effect of the head act. Mitigating or downgrading supportive moves are
meant to reduce the unwelcome effects of the speech act on the hearer (Fraser, 1980), whereas
aggravating or upgrading supportive moves are used to intensify the force of the head act (Blum-
Kulka et al., 1989). Whether an aggravating supportive move strategy increases or decreases the
face-threatening properties of a refusal head act, largely depends on the elicitation act in
response to which a refusal is issued. For example, when an aggravating supportive move strategy
is used along with refusals of offers, they enhance the face of the interlocutor rather than making
the refusal more face threatening. This is because in such situations the hearer should benefit,
but the offerer will incur an imposition if their offer is accepted. Therefore, using aggravating
supportive moves to emphasise the refusal of an offer can simultaneously indicate the refuser’s
care for the offerer, thus enhancing the interlocutor’s face. However, if used in refusals of
requests, aggravating supportive moves can elevate the face threatening properties of the
refusal. For example, by using an aggravating supportive move when refusing a request, the
speaker intends to point out the real impossibility of an acceptance. In other words, by using
aggravating supportive moves the speaker usually intends to make a definitive rejection of the
proposed action. Usually, a request is motivated by a need for help on the part of the requester.
Therefore, emphasising its refusal could be interpreted as lack of concern about the interlocutor’s
need of help, thus threatening his/her positive face (Brown & Levinson, 1987).
Due to the general face-threatening nature of refusals, supportive moves used alongside them
usually serve a mitigating function. Mitigating supportive moves play an important role in
downgrading and softening the refusals. In most of the cases, especially when the head refusal
act is a direct refusal, if it is not preceded or followed by a supportive move strategy, it will be
considered impolite and even confrontational. In this study, direct refusals were always
considered as head act and adjuncts to refusal were always treated as supportive moves. Indirect
refusals (as named by Beebe et al. 1990), however, were considered as head acts in contexts
where they occurred in the absence of direct refusals, but they were considered as supportive
moves when they happened in conjunction with direct refusal strategies. Where more than one
indirect strategy was used in the absence of direct refusals, contextual clues were used to
determine head acts and supportive moves.
2.1 Studies on refusal mitigation strategies
Limited previous studies have focused on the mitigation strategies used along with refusals. For
example, Bella (2011) investigated the mitigation strategies used to soften refusals of invitations
in interaction with close friends by two groups of advanced level non-native Greek learners. She
assigned the participants into two different groups based on their length of residence in the target
speech community and the intensity of their contact with native speakers. Her findings revealed
differences between the performance of both groups of participants and that of native Greek
speakers. However, her findings showed that the participants who had spent shorter time within
the target language community but had more intensive contact with the native speakers, used
mitigating supportive moves more appropriately compared to the participants who had stayed
longer in Greece but had little contact with the native speakers. Bella’s study indicated that the
intensity of interaction with native speakers was a stronger factor in helping non-native speakers
develop pragmatic competence than the length of residence in the target community.
Abdolrezapour and Vahid Dastjerdi (2012) investigated the use of internal and external
modification devices used by Persian speakers and native speakers of American English. Their
findings showed that Persian speakers used externally modified refusals more frequently than
internally modified refusals. However, their findings revealed that American English speakers
preferred to use internal modification strategies more frequently than external supportive move
strategies with their refusals. Their study also showed that the refusals of Persian speakers varied
according to the social power and distance differentials between the interlocutors while the
American English speakers used similar mitigation strategies in interaction with interlocutors of
differing social power and distance.
To extend the research in this area, the aim of this study was to investigate the external
modification strategies used along with refusals of Iranian English language learners and a group
of Australian English speakers to identify possible areas of cross-cultural miscommunication or
misunderstanding. The research questions addressed in this study were:
1. Which supportive move strategies do the Iranian and Australian students use to mitigate
refusals?
2. Are there any similarities or differences between the frequencies of occurrence, type and
content of supportive move strategies used by Iranian learners of English and those of
Anglo-Australian participants?
3. Cultural Linguistics and cultural conceptualisations
Cultural Linguistics is a multidisciplinary area of research that is concerned with investigating the
relationship between language, culture, and conceptualisation (Sharifian, 2014a). Cultural
Linguistics focuses on culturally constructed conceptualisations that affect language use. It
provides the researchers with an analytical framework to explore the relationship between
language and culture by analysising and examining cultural components (Sharifian, 2014a). This
area of research has emerged as a synthesis of cognitive linguistics with Boasian linguistics,
ethnosemantics, and the ethnography of speaking (Palmer, 1996). Language is viewed as a
representation of culture in Cultural Linguistics and linguistic behaviour is believed to be affected
and formulated fundamentally by cultural structures. Reflecting on cognitive linguistics as a base,
the study of cultural conceptualisations which are encoded and communicated through language
holds a central position within Cultural Linguistics (Sharifian, 2014a). Palmer (1996) suggested
that the common purpose of cognitive linguistics and Cultural Linguistics is to explore how
language is used and interpreted in relation to different kinds of “imagery”. “Imagery” for Palmer
is culturally defined and is not restricted to the sense of sight. Basically, it is how one perceives
the world. Palmer maintained:
“Images are mental representations that begin as conceptual analogs of immediate, perceptual
experience, from the peripheral sensory organs. Because they are analogs of peripheral
experience, they are also, therefore, indirect conceptual analogs of the environment, broadly
construed to include society, natural phenomena, our own bodies and the organic (and mental)
processes, and the rest of what is often called “reality” or “the world out there” (1996, p. 47).
Sharifian (2003, 2011) referred to the cultural schemas and cultural categories, which are
included in Palmer’s notion of imagery, as cultural conceptualisations. He defined cultural
conceptualisations as “cultural schemas (or, for complex conceptualisations, cultural models),
categories, metaphors, etc. that are emergent at the level of cultural cognition (2007, p. 34).
According to Sharifian “cultural conceptualisations are developed through interactions between
the members of a cultural group and enable them to think, more or less, in one mind” (2011, p.
5). This is to say that the common cultural background that members of a cultural group share
allows them to have a similar interpretation of the world around them. Sharing the same cultural
background, however, does not necessarily guarantee that cultural conceptualizations are equally
shared by all individuals across a cultural group. Rather, cultural conceptualisations are
distributed heterogeneously in the minds of the members of a cultural group (Sharifian, 2011).
Cultural conceptualisations form the basis of how people interact with others and there is a strong
link between cultural conceptualisations and language. In fact, one of the main channels through
which cultural conceptualisations are manifested and communicated is language (Sharifian,
2011). Cultural schemas, a class of cultural conceptualisations, provide pools of knowledge that
enable speakers to communicate semantic and pragmatic meanings (Sharifian, 2011). They are
cognitive knowledge structures for face to face interaction in one’s cultural environment (Nishida,
2005). These conceptual structures enable individuals to interpret cultural experiences and
expressions (Malcolm & Sharifian, 2002). They can facilitate the process of “inference making” as
part of the uptake of speech acts (Sharifian, 2008). Interlocutors can rely on them as common
ground while producing and/or interpreting pragmatic meaning and speech acts (Sharifian,
2014b). While drawing on shared cultural conceptualisations can facilitate communication within
a cultural group, relying on them may hinder successful communication in intercultural
communication.
Previous research has shown that cultural schemas of tă’ărof (ritual politeness) and ru-dar-băyest
(state/feeling of distance-out-of-respect) have a great impact on the pragmatic strategies used by
Persian speakers while realising refusals (Babai Shishavan & Sharifian, 2013). These cultural
schemas encourage Persian speakers to feel reluctant and hesitant about expressing genuine
refusals. Therefore, Persian speakers usually prefer to express their refusals through an indirect
style of communication.
Tă’ărof encompasses linguistic and social behavioural components (Beeman, 2020). According to
Beeman (2020), the two key aspects of linguistic Tă’ărof are word choices and elaborate phrases
demonstrating courtesy and deference. The practice of tă’ărof as a polite communication style is
a means of displaying deference, humility and cordiality towards the interlocutor (Koutlaki, 2010).
In production of face-threatening speech acts such as genuine refusals it provides the speakers
with necessary tools to avoid directness, thus decreasing the imposition involved in the speech
act. Verbal manifestations of tă’ărof include but are not limited to repeated offers of goods and
services, hesitation in asking for services and favours, hesitation in refusing requests, giving
frequent complements, hesitation in making complaints, offering ostensible refusals and
invitations (Sharifian, 2007, 2010). Although this strategy is most likely to be represented in the
realisation of refusal head acts, it may sometimes affect the choice of supportive move strategies
as well.
Ru-dar-bǎyesti which may be glossed as ‘face-out-of-obligation’ is another Persian cultural
schema closely related to the realisation of refusals in Persian. This schema bears close ties to the
cultural schema of tă’ărof to the point of having been described as a component of tă’ărof
(Sahragard, 2003). In the most comprehensive Persian dictionary ever published (Dehkhoda,
2009), it is defined as a state of being ashamed of making a statement or doing an action arising
from reservations due to respect for an interlocutor. This cultural schema involves a state or a
feeling of distance between individuals, which could arise from differences in social
power/distance and/or the high degree of respect/esteem one has for another individual. It
should be noted that this feeling of distance is not necessarily experienced only towards
interlocutors of higher social distance. Difference and cordiality felt towards close friends may
also give rise to this kind of distance. Keeping silent or showing hesitation over making face-
threatening speech acts can be possible manifestations of ru-dar-bǎyesti in verbal
communications. In the case of refusals, ru-dar-bǎyesti can cause reluctance to make a refusal
which usually leads to the employment of verbal strategies deemed to express a higher degree
of politeness such as providing detailed reasons and explanations with a refusal response and
using more indirect strategies. In some cases, ru-dar-bǎyesti can cause the speaker to avoid their
personally prefered response when that is a refual and accept the action proposed in the
initiation move. In such cases, despite his/her wish to refuse the proposed action, the speaker
opts out of this option on the basis of reservations like showing respect to the interlocutor and
enhancing his/her own face by not appearing impolite or disrespectful.
Sharmandegi (being ashamed) is another Persian cultural schema that can be manifested in the
production of refusals. Sharifian (2011, p. 106) suggests that this schema reinforces Iranians’
caution about their responsibility in the company of others so that they are careful not to do
anything wrong or not in accordance with the dignity of the other party. This schema encourages
an Iranian interlocutor to feel guilty and express this guilt verbally. Among other speech acts, it
usually underlies ‘apologies’ and ‘expressions of gratitude’ which are frequently used as
supportive move strategies along with refusals. Expressions such as ‘Sharmande-am’ which
sometimes may be shortened to ‘Sharmandeh’ meaning ‘I am ashamed’, ‘Sharmande kardin’
meaning ‘You made me/us ashamed’ and ‘sharmande shodam’ meaning ‘I became ashamed’ are
a few examples of how this cultural schema can be manifested verbally. Statements of apology
representing the cultural schema of sharmandegi that accompany a refusal imply that the speaker
is aware of the threat posed to the face of the interlocutor by the refusal and feels guilty about
it. Although statements of apology instantiating sharmandegi are politeness strategies used to
soften refusals in Persian, they can lead to intercultural miscommunication when present in the
English of the Iranian speakers. Similarly, when expressions of gratitude instantiating the cultural
schema of sharmandegi accompany refusals of invitations and offers they reflect the speaker’s
awareness of the trouble that might be imposed on the interlocutor by having his/her
offer/invitation accepted. They also convey the speaker’s awareness that the other person is
being too kind in making the offer or invitation when they lack any obligation to do so. These
strategies also function as face enhancing politeness strategies in Persian but can cause
miscommunication in an intercultural setting.
4. Methodology
4.1 Participants
Two groups of students participated in this study. The first group consisted of 24 Persian native
speakers who were Iranian undergraduate students majoring in English language and literature
at Urmia University, Urmia, Iran. They ranged in age from 19 to 25 and their average age was
M=21.8 years. The second group comprised of 24 Anglo-Australian undergraduate and
postgraduate students enrolled in different programs of study at Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia. All Australian participants were native speakers of Australian English. Their average age
was M=25.6 years and they ranged in age from 19 to 41 years. Each group comprised of six male
and 18 female participants.
The criterion for participation of Iranian students was based on the amount of English language
instruction that they had received. Only those students who had been engaged in learning English
in public or private language institutes for at least two years prior to beginning their
undergraduate studies were recruited. This was to ensure that participants were at an
appropriate level of foreign language proficiency and were able to understand and carry out the
tasks required. The average years of English study for the participants, including their formal
education at university was 6.8 years and they were estimated to have an intermediate to
advanced command of the English language.
All the Iranian participants completed English and Persian versions of the discourse completion
test (DCT). Nineteen of them also participated in FGIs. The Australian participants, however,
completed only the English DCT. All participants were asked to complete a demographic
information questionnaire which sought information regarding their age, gender, English
language learning background, field of study and their native language. The composite nature of
the participants is illustrated in
Participants/Location Male (DCT/FGI) Female (DCT/FGI) Total
Iranian English language learners/ 6/11 18/8 24/19
Urmia University, Iran
Anglo-Australian Students/ 6/0 18/0 24/0
Monash University, Australia
Total
12/11 36/8 48/19
4.2 Instruments
Discourse Completion Test
Data analysed in this study was collected through a DCT comprising of 16 scenarios based on real-
life situations. All the situations were described in writing following Brown’s (2001, p. 44)
guidelines for developing good questionnaire items. To enhance the validity of the DCT, the
situations were designed to require the students to perform ‘role enactment’ (McDonough, 1981,
p. 80). In other words, in all of the DCT situations the participants took the role of university
students, a role which they occupied in their normal life.
A discourse completion test was first used for the purpose of data elicitation in a study by Blum-
Kulka (1982) to investigate the speech act production of native and non-native Hebrew speakers.
Thereafter, it has become almost the most prevalent data collection instrument in pragmatic
research in general and speech act research in particular (Mackey & Gass, 2005). In a DCT, a
description of a context in which a speech act occurs is presented to the participants for which a
response is required (Mackey & Gass, 2005). As with any other data collection instrument, DCTs
have their advantages and disadvantages. The major concern about a DCT is that it may collect
inauthentic data, as compared to real-life situations the respondents may take extra time to
respond to the prompts. Cohen (1996) also argued that the nonverbal features and semiotics
present in natural data cannot be collected by DCTs. Moreover, in comparison with natural data,
the data collected by means of DCTs has been found to be shorter in length and less complex
(Beebe & Cummings, 1996). However, as Beebe and Cummings (1996, p. 67) argue “naturalness
is only one of many criteria for good data and other data collection methods featuring natural
data have drawbacks of other types”. The ease of administering a DCT (Varghese & Billmyer, 1996)
as well as the flexibility it provides in collecting data in similar situations from different cultural
groups makes it a suitable data collection instrument in cross-cultural pragmatics (Blum-Kulka et
al., 1989; Rintell & Mitchell, 1989). Furthermore, it has been shown that the data elicited by
means of a DCT share some features with natural data and at least represent the main formulas
and patterns of authentic conversation (Beebe & Cummings, 1996). Contextualised data collected
in this way also represent everyday human interactions and provide stereotypically appropriate
responses to particular social situations (Blum-Kulka et al., 1989). Moreover, the volume of
speech act realisation data collected from a large number of participants partially compensates
for the limitations imposed by the small number of the situations used in the DCT (Cohen, 1996).
Therefore, using DCT as a speech act data collection tool still remains relevant today (Taguchi,
2022).
Focus Group Interview
DCTs were complemented with FGIs to investigate the social and cultural norms underlying the
responses of the Iranian participants as well. FGI is a suitable instrument for shedding light on the
social realities of cultural groups (Hughes & DuMont, 1993) and can be used in combination with
surveys (Morgan, 1996). In this way, they can add more depth to the survey data and make it
easier to interpret. The main advantage of the FGI is that it makes it possible to gather purposeful
data (Carey, 1994, p. 226) through interaction (McLafferty, 2004). Furthermore, FGI is that can
gather a considerable amount of data from numerous people in a relatively short time. Similar to
any other data collection method, FGIs have their disadvantages too. Transcribing FGI data is
time-consuming and can be a daunting task as several people are interacting at the same time.
Another criticism of this method is that the inevitably small number of participants may not be
representative of the whole population (Bertrand et al., 1992) .
Each FGI session followed the same structure with 13 identical questions including five categories
of opening, introductory, transition, key, and ending questions being put to the group.
4.3 Data collection
The data analysed in this study was collected in the first semester of the academic year of 2010–
2011. Prior to data collection ethics clearance was obtained from the Human Research Ethics
Committee at Monash University, Australia. Both in Iran and Australia the participants were
invited to participate in the study by means of an advertisement. Participation in the study was
entirely on a voluntary basis. For the purpose of data collection in Iran, a paper and pencil version
of the English DCT was administered first and the Persian DCT was administered two weeks later
to minimise the test effect. At the end of the DCT sessions, volunteers were invited to participate
in the FGIs as well. All FGI sessions were conducted in a meeting room in the English department
of Urmia University. It took about 55 minutes to an hour to administer each FGI. All conversations
were tape recorded. Australian participants, on the other hand, answered an online version of
the English DCT.
4.4 Data analysis
For the purpose of coding and analysing the data in this study the categorisation of refusals
formulated by Beebe, Takahashi, and Uliss-Welt (1990) was adapted. The categorisation of
semantic formulas used by Al-Issa (2003) which is a modified version of Beebe et al.’s (1990)
categorisation was also consulted in developing the coding scheme for this study. Additional
strategies emerging from the data collected in this study were also added to the existing semantic
formulas. Finally, as explained earlier, the semantic formulas were categorised according to their
function (i.e. head act or supportive move). The categorisation of refusal strategies used to code
the data in the present study is presented in Error! Reference source not found. .
Direct strategies Example
1. Explicit refusal ‘No’; ‘No way’; ‘It’s not possible.’
2. Negative willingness/ability ‘I can’t.’; ‘I don’t think so.’
3. Hedged performatives ‘I have to refuse this time.’
Indirect strategies
4. Conditional acceptance ‘I accept provided that I pay the money back
later.’
5. Statement of regret/apology ‘I am sorry.’; ‘excuse me.’
6. Wish ‘I wish I could help you.’
7. Reason/explanation ‘I have a headache.’
8. Statement of principle ‘I never do business with friends.’
9. Statement of alternative ‘I can buy it later.’
10. (Set condition for) future or past acceptance ‘I’ll come to see you, if I finish early.’
11. Promise of future acceptance ‘I’ll do it next time.’; ‘I promise I’ll….’
12. Request for help/empathy ‘I’d appreciate if you could change my topic.’
13. Let interlocutor off the hook ‘Don’t worry about it.’; ‘That’s OK.’
14. Removal of negativity ‘I know you always choose the best things.’
15. Return invitation/suggestion ‘I suggest you take my food as well.’
16. Acceptance acting as a refusal ‘It’s ok, but I need my notes myself.’
17. Hesitation ‘I don’t know if I like it or not.’
18. Request for information ‘What other brands do you have?’
19. Positive opinion/feeling of agreement 1 ‘That is a good idea...’; ‘I’d love to.’
20. Pause fillers ‘Well’; ‘Uuhh’; ’Uuhhm’
21. Gratitude, appreciation ‘Thank you.’
22. Address term ‘Mr.’; ‘Professor’; ‘Darling’
23. Statement of negative consequence ‘I won’t be any fun tonight.’
24. Criticise the offer/suggestion ‘That’s a terrible idea.’
25. Blame the interlocutor ‘Why are you so careless?’
26. Other strategies
The frequency of occurrence of supportive move strategies was investigated in the responses of
the Iranian and Australian participants. In other words, the number of times each semantic
formula occurred as a supportive move in the total number of the responses of the Iranian and
Australian participants was calculated. The content of the different supportive move strategies
used by the Iranian participants in their L1 and L2 was also investigated in terms of culture specific
elements.
5. Findings
5.1 Frequency of supportive move strategies
The frequencies of supportive move strategies accompanying head acts in the responses of both
the Iranian and Australian participants in interaction with interlocutors of higher social status are
summarised in Error! Reference source not found.. Error! Reference source not found. shows
that sixteen categories of supportive move strategies were identified in responses of the Iranian
and Australian participants in interaction with speakers of higher social status, all of which, except
for ‘Statement of negative consequence’, had a mitigating function. Statements of negative
consequence when accompanying refusals warn the hearer about potential negative
consequences that may or would follow from the compliance with the initiation act. Statements
of negative consequence are dissuading strategies used to discourage the interlocutor from
persisting with the invitation, offer, request or suggestion. This strategy was used to emphasise
the content of the refusal thus upgrading the effect of the head acts. An instance of this strategy
is shown in 1:
1 S4EIr52F: I’d be very thankful if you change my topic because it is not of my interest, and I won’t be
able to perform well on that.
The strategy of a ‘statement of negative consequence’ was used with relatively low frequency in
the responses of the Iranian participants in both Persian (1.34%) and English (1.64%). It was also
used very infrequently in the responses of the Australian participants (0.52%).
of higher status
+P
Supportive moves Persian English IR English Au
f % f % f %
1 Statement of regret and apology 50 13.40 74 20.27 40 10.39
2 Excuse/ reason/ explanation 91 24.40 70 19.18 86 22.34
3 Alternative 44 11.80 46 12.60 15 3.90
4 Future or past acceptance 13 3.49 9 2.47 30 7.79
5 Request for empathy or understanding 10 2.68 9 2.47 9 2.34
6 Let interlocutor off the hook* 0 0.00 0 0.00 10 2.60
7 Removal of negativity 7 1.88 6 1.64 17 4.42
8 Return invitation*/** 1 0.27 3 0.82 0 0.00
9 Hesitation* 0 0.00 1 0.27 6 1.56
10 Request for information 2 0.54 6 1.64 37 9.61
11 Gratitude/appreciation 70 18.77 53 14.52 59 15.32
12 Positive opinion/feeling of agreement 22 5.90 33 9.04 39 10.13
13 Address term 52 13.94 32 8.77 4 1.04
14 Pause fillers* 0 0.00 7 1.92 27 7.01
15 Statement of negative consequence 5 1.34 6 1.64 2 0.52
16 Other strategies 6 1.61 10 2.74 4 1.04
Total 373 100 365 100 385 100
* The frequency of these semantic formulas was not included in the calculation of the Chi square
test due to their low or zero frequency in Persian and English responses of the Iranian group.
** The frequency of these semantic formulas was not included in the calculation of the Chi square
test due to their low frequency in English responses of the Iranian group as well as in those of the
Australian group.
The Chi-square test result showed that supportive move strategies were realised with significantly
different frequencies in the Persian and English responses of the Iranian participants in interaction
with interlocutors of higher social status (X2(11, N =717) = 22.274, p = 0.022). However, the three
strategies of ‘statement of regret and apology’, ‘excuse/reason/explanation’, and ‘statement of
gratitude and appreciation’ were among the most frequently used strategies in both first and
second language responses from the Iranian participants. The responses of the Iranian
participants in FGI sessions also showed that they generally preferred to use an indirect and
mitigated style of communication while making refusals and considered providing reasons and
explanations, regrets and apologies as well as statements of gratitude and appreciation efficient
ways of softening refusals.
As shown in Error! Reference source not found., the performance of the Iranian and Australian
participants was also significantly different in terms of the frequency of supportive move
strategies in the context of refusing invitations, suggestions, offers and requests of the
interlocutors who had higher social power (X2(14, N =747) = 118.364, p = 0.000). The Iranian
students used considerably more ‘statements of regret and apology’ (20.27%) than their
Australian counterparts (10.39%). They also used ‘alternatives’ more frequently (12.60%) than
the Australian students (3.9 %). The Iranian students also used ‘address terms’ more frequently
(8.77 %) than the Australian students (1.04 %). On the other hand, the Australian students used
‘requests for information’ and ‘future or past acceptances’ with higher frequency than their
Iranian counterparts.
Error! Reference source not found. summarises the frequencies and percentages of supportive
move strategies used in the responses of the Iranian and Australian participants in response to
status equals. Most of the supportive move strategies used in interaction with status equals had
a mitigating function when used by both groups. Two categories of aggravating external
modifiers, namely ‘criticise the offer/suggestion’ and ‘blame the interlocutor’, were also observed
in the responses of the Iranian and Australian students. However, they occurred very infrequently
and thus they were not included in calculation of Chi-square test.
of the same status
=P
Supportive moves Persian English IR English Au
f % f % f %
Statement of regret and apology 42 11.93 54 15.70 31 9.42
Excuse/ reason/ explanation 116 32.95 89 25.87 75 22.80
Alternative 30 8.52 41 11.92 45 13.68
Future or past acceptance 19 5.40 10 2.91 22 6.69
Let interlocutor off the hook 21 5.97 14 4.07 19 5.78
Removal of negativity 16 4.55 9 2.62 10 3.04
Return offer or invitation 3 0.85 7 2.03 0 0.00
Hedging 0 0.00 6 1.74 0 0.00
Request for information 6 1.70 7 2.03 17 5.17
Blame the interlocutor*/** 2 0.57 1 0.29 1 0.30
Gratitude/ appreciation 40 11.36 31 9.01 44 13.37
Positive opinion/ feeling of agreement 27 7.67 26 7.56 17 5.17
Address term 8 2.27 14 4.07 7 2.13
Pause fillers 2 0.57 22 6.40 26 7.90
Statement of negative consequence 0 0.00 2 0.58 7 2.13
Criticise the offer/suggestion*/** 4 1.14 0 0.00 0 0.00
Other strategies 16 4.55 11 3.20 8 2.43
Total 352 100 344 100 329 100
* The frequency of this semantic formula was not considered while calculating the Chi square test
to compare the performance of the Iranian students in Persian and English due to its low
frequency.
** These semantic formulas were not considered while calculating the Chi Square tests to
compare the performance of the Iranian and Australian groups due to their low frequency.
Error! Reference source not found. shows that the Iranian students used supportive move
strategies significantly differently in Persian and English in interaction with interlocutors of the
same social status (X2(15, N =693) = 49.913, p = 0.000). They used more ‘reasons and
explanations’ in Persian (32.95%) to mitigate their refusals than in English (25.85%). They,
however, used ‘pause fillers’ and ‘statements of regret’ less frequently in their L1 compared to
their L2 in interaction with such interlocutors. Nevertheless, despite statistical difference
observed between the performance of the Iranian students in their L1 and L2, the five most
commonly used strategies in Persian and English were the same. In other words, ‘Statement of
regret and apology’, ‘Excuse/ reason/ explanation’, ‘Gratitude/ appreciation’, ‘Alternative’ and
‘Positive opinion/ feeling of agreement’ were the five most frequently used supportive move
strategies in both Persian and English responses of the Iranian participants while interacting with
status equals. The three first of these strategies were especifically referred to in FGI sessions as
efficient refusal mitigation strategies among Iranians. Significant differences were also observed
in the performance of the Iranian and Australian students with regards to the frequency of
supportive move strategies in interaction with interlocutors of the same status (X2(14, N =671) =
39.821, p = 0.000). The Iranian students used more ‘regret and apology’ as well as ‘excuses,
reasons and explanations’ compared to their Australian counterparts. The Australian students,
however, used ‘gratitude and appreciation’ and ‘future or past acceptances’ more frequently than
the Iranian participants.
5.2 Type and content of supportive move strategies
Although the results of the Chi-square test revealed differences in frequency of occurrence of the
supportive move strategies in Persian and English responses of the Iranian group, some
similarities were noticed in the type and content of supportive move strategies used by the
Iranian students in their L1 and L2. One of the culture specific strategies used in Persian while
refusing invitations and offers is returning the initiation act (Babai Shishavan, 2014; Izadi & Zilaie,
2014). Although ‘returning invitation’ was used with low frequency, it was even so used by a
number of Iranian participants to mitigate refusals both in their L1 and L2. Some Iranian
participants softened their refusals of an invitation by returning the initiation act. For example, if
A had invited B for tea, after rejecting the invitation, B invited A to a similar activity sometime in
the future as is presented in 2 (a) to (c).
2 (a) S13P15F: Kheili dust dǎshtam ke da’vatetun ro qabul konam, vali mo’teasefăneh kǎr
dǎram. Lotfan fardǎ shab be manzel-e mǎ tashrif biyǎrid tǎ dar
khedmatetun bǎshim va bishtar ba ham sohbat konim.
I’d love to accept your invitation but unfortunately I have a job to do. Please
come (formal) to our home tomorrow night so that we can be at your
service and talk to each other more.
(b) S13EIr45M: Excuse me ma’am but I have something urgent to do and I can’t accept your
kind invitation. But, please accept to come to our home next week.
(c) S5EIr69F: Sorry, I’m not in such mood, but I will be happy if you come here for lunch so
that we would have a good afternoon together at our home.
This strategy is a way of manifesting tă’ărof in Persian culture. Such invitations are ostensible
invitations (Babai Shishavan, 2016) which are not meant to be taken seriously and both the
speaker and the hearer are aware of the pretence in their genuineness. Ostensible invitations in
Persian are face enhancing politeness strategies that in compliance with socio-cultural norms are
intended to enhance both the face of the speaker and that of the addressee (Eslami, 2005). While
declining an initial invitation, ostensible invitations supporting the refusal head act are offered
with the intention of expressing consideration for the interlocutor thus enhancing his/her face.
They simultaneously enhance the face of the speaker as well by indicating his/her care about the
addressee. This strategy also reduces the imposition of the refusal and helps the speakers
maintain interpersonal relationships. As shown in 2 (b) and (c), relying on their L1 cultural
background, the Iranian participants used this strategy in an attempt to enhance the face of their
interlocutor in English as well. However, in intercultural settings where the interlocutor might not
be aware of this culture specific politeness strategy, an ostensible invitation might be taken as a
genuine invitation, resulting in intercultural miscommunication (Eslami, 2005).
An analysis of the content of supportive move strategies also revealed that the Iranian
participants at times relied on their L1 social and cultural norms while supporting their refusals
in L2 to the point that it could lead to intercultural misunderstanding. Some instances of
‘statements of regret and apology’ as shown in 3, and ‘statements of gratitude/appreciation’ as
shown in 4, used by the Iranian participants to mitigate refusals in English instantiated Persian
pragmatic cultural schema of sharmandeghi (being ashamed).
3 S5EIr42F: Thanks for caring about me, but, I’m ashamed. I’m so tired. Promise, I’ll come with you next time.
A refusal such as 3 in response to a close friend’s invitation to the moves may make an English
speaker feel odd because for him/her such a situation may not call for an apology, particularly
one associated with an expression of shame (Sharifian & Jamarani, 2011).
The content of ‘gratitude/appreciation’ strategies used by the Iranian participants in response to
offers also reflected the Persian cultural schema of sharmandegi (being ashamed) at times.
Examples 4 (a) to (c) which were made in situation 3 (for the description of the situation see
Appendix A), are very different from the responses made by the Australian group. In responses
like 4 (b) and (c), ‘you make me ashamed’ and ‘I’ll be ashamed’ are used as supportive move
strategies and function as expressions of gratitude indicating the speaker’s awareness of the
imposition that the professor may incur because of his/her offer to buy the book for his/her
student. They also convey that the professor is being too kind to his/her student and the student
does not expect him/her to make such an offer. However, such responses sound awkward in
English as ‘being ashamed’ in English is associated with feeling shame because one has done
something deliberately wrong which usually cannot be remedied by an apology or reparation.
4 (a) S3P9M: Sharmandeham mikonid, vali ba’dan ham mitunam in ketǎb ro bekharam.
Unqadrhǎ ham zaruri nist.
You make me ashamed (Thank you), but I can buy this book later. It’s not that
necessary.
(b) S3EIr44F: Thanks for your kindness. You make me ashamed. I can come and buy the book
later. Thanks again anyway.
(c) S3EIr30F: I can’t accept this kindness. I’ll be ashamed.
The content of ‘address terms’ used by Iranian and Australian students also differed. The Iranian
participants used several sub-strategies of this category like titles such as ‘Mr.’ or ‘Professor’;
statements to define the relationship of the speaker and the hearer like ‘My dear friend’, ‘dear
teacher’, ‘my dear professor’; or endearment terms like ‘Honey’, ‘Dear’, ‘Darling’; and proper
names such as ‘Ali’. Iranian participants used statements defining the relationship between the
speaker and the hearer in interaction with both interlocutors of higher and equal social power.
However, they used endearment terms and proper names only in interaction with status equals.
They also used titles only in interaction with addressees of superior status. The Australian
participants, on the other hand, used only two sub-strategies of address terms, namely proper
names or ‘mate’. While they used proper names in interaction with both higher status
interlocutors and those with equal social power, ‘mate’ was used just in interaction with status
equals.
The results of FGIs further revealed that cultural conceptualizations and pragmatic norms of
Iranian society had a crucial impact on the type of strategies employed by the Iranian group
determining the level of politeness invested in refusals strategies. Specifically the two cultural
schemas of tă’ărof and ru-dar-băyesti were mentioned as influencing the choice of mitigation
strategies used by the Iranian English language learners in Persian and English to a great extent.
6. Discussion and conclusion
The linguistic and pragmatic strategies employed to produce refusals vary from one language and
culture to another, reflecting different socio-cultural norms governing production of refusals. In
intercultural settings where interlocutors draw on different cultural norms and rules of
appropriateness in encoding and decoding speech acts, there is a higher chance of
miscommunication and misunderstanding (Nardon et al., 2012; Wierzbicka, 2003, 2010). The
current status of English as an international language, particularly the fact that the majority of its
users do not share a common cultural background (Crystal, 2003; Matsuda, 2012; Selvi et al.,
2024), increases the potential for miscommunication and misunderstanding. Therefore, an
investigation of the pragmatic strategies used by different cultural groups while realising speech
acts contributes to the knowledge necessary to help in the reduction of cross-cultural
misunderstanding and help English speakers to handle intercultural encounters more efficiently.
The findings of this study showed that the mitigation strategies used to soften refusals can vary
cross-culturally and lend support to the findings of Abdolrezapour and Vahid Dastjerdi (2012) in
this regard. The Iranian and Australian participants also used supportive move strategies with
significantly different frequency. The performance of the two groups did not only differ in terms
of frequency, but the content of supportive move strategies used by the Iranian and Australian
groups were also different. The Iranian participants used different sub-strategies of ‘terms of
address’ in interaction with addressees of higher and equal social power. While they used sub-
strategy of ‘title’ (e.g. ‘Mr.’, ‘Professor’) only in interaction with addressees of higher status,
endearment terms (e.g. ‘Honey’, ‘Dear’), and proper names (e.g. ‘Ali’) were only used in
interaction with status equals. The Australian group, on the other hand, only used ‘mate’ and
‘proper names’ as terms of address. ‘Proper’ names were used widely but ‘mate’ was only used
in interaction with status equals. The activation of the Persian cultural schema of sharmandeghi
(Sharifian & Jamarani, 2011) instantiated in ‘statements of regret and apology’ and ‘statements
of gratitude and appreciation’ in the English responses of the Iranian group also made their
supportive move strategies different to those of the Australian group. Further, the use of
‘returning invitation’ as a supportive move strategy occurred only in the responses of the Iranian
participants which was a manifestation of the Persian cultural schema of tă’ărof, revealing that
the two groups relied on different cultural norms when producing mitigating strategies to
modulate their refusals. This finding was further supported by FGIs. The comments of the Iranian
students in FGI sessions revealed that they strongly relied on their local cultural norms and
pragmatics schemas such as tă’ărof while making refusals.
Although the results of Chi-square test revealed statistical differences in the frequency of
supportive move strategies used in the Persian and English responses of the Iranian group,
similarities were also observed in the way supportive move strategies were used in L1 and L2 of
the Iranian group. The Iranian students used certain supportive move strategies such as
‘statement of regret and apology’ and ‘statements of gratitude and appreciation’ with high
frequency both in their Persian and English responses. The content of these strategies in the
English responses of the Iranian group at times reflected Persian cultural norms and pragmatic
schemas. The analysis of FGI data also lent support to these findings. Their responses showed
that they considered certain strategies such as expressing regret and apology and gratitude and
appreciation efficient refusal mitigation strategies. The analysis of their comments also revealed
that their local cultural norms affected their pragmatic production to a large extent. The
differences observed in the frequency of supportive move strategies in the Persian and English
responses of the Iranian group, shows that L2 pragmatic performance of the language learners is
not necessarily predictable from their first language performance. Therefore, to study possible
areas of cross-cultural misunderstanding, it is important to investigate how English is used as an
international language by various cultural groups.
The findings of this study should be beneficial in raising the awareness of Iranian teachers and
learners of English of the cultural differences involved in the realisation of refusals in general and
mitigating supportive move strategies in particular which play a key role in determining the
politeness of refusals. The results can also help them to gain an understanding of the mitigation
strategies used to enhance the politeness level of refusals by Anglo-Australian speakers.
Australian English speakers may also benefit from the findings of the present study in that it
offers them insight into how different cultural conceptualisations and politeness rules may apply
to speech act production of possible interlocutors from different cultural backgrounds. If they
are equipped with such knowledge, Iranian and Australian English speakers should be able to
communicate more effectively and avoid potential sources of misunderstanding and
miscommunication. The findings of this study could also benefit English language learners and
teachers engaged in teaching and learning of English in the international context by providing
them with intercultural insights regarding the realisation of refusal speech act in different
languages and cultures (i.e. Persian and English).
A number of limitations need to be acknowledged. First of all, the findings of this study may not
be generalisable to all social situations and other populations as only one group of people, namely
students, participated in this study. The study may yield different results if replicated with
participants from other walks of society. Nevertheless, the results do seem to represent the way
young educated Iranian Persian speakers and Australian English speakers mitigate refusals.
Moreover, due to the limitations of the DCT, the instances of refusals analysed in this study are
limited to a single turn refusal response. Therefore, the data may not fully represent the patterns
of refusals and politeness rules attached to them, as these occur in longer spontaneous
conversations.