Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Questions in Information Seeking: A Primer
Tuval Raz , Yoed N. Kenett
¹ ¹
¹Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Author Note
Corresponding author:
Tuval Raz
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences
Haifa 3200003, Israel.
Email: tuval.raz@campus.technion.ac.il
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Abstract
Question-asking, a foundational aspect of human communication, is an integral part of information-
seeking behavior. This review delves into the complex landscape of question asking theories,
exploring their many intersections with a myriad of fields such as social discourse, early development,
problem solving, artificial intelligence (AI), and educational applications. We explore not just why
asking questions is important for cognitive development and learning, but also the nature of good
questions and potential benefits of learning to ask better, more complex questions. To this aim, we
introduce the Question-Asking in Information Seeking (QuInS) framework, a comprehensive
framework synthesizing decades of research on question-asking across developmental, social,
educational, and technological domains. Through QuInS, we introduce a unified perspective on the
iterative, dynamic processes that drive inquiry, emphasizing how curiosity, creativity, and cognitive
engagement shape effective question-asking. We examine the origins of question-asking in childhood,
theories of inquiry as information-seeking behavior, and the role of complex, open-ended questions in
fostering creativity and problem-solving. In addition, we explore how advancements in AI,
computational models, and educational strategies help us formulate better questioning approaches.
Lastly, we highlight the implications and future research directions which arise from these different
theories and explore how these findings can be harnessed to make people more efficient, effective and
creative learners and question askers.
Keywords: Question Asking, Information Seeking, Knowledge, Creativity, Problem-Solving
Public significance statement
This review summarises and compares decades of theoretical and empirical research on question-
asking, focusing on information-seeking behaviour, and suggests a new theoretical framework for
understanding them based on this past research.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
1. Introduction
Asking questions is an integral part of human interaction, going back to ancient
philosophers seeking information about the world (Scott, 2006; Zafeirenia, 2024). Question
asking opens opportunities for the asker to obtain information that they otherwise might not
be able to access (Flammer, 1981). Furthermore, the type and content of questions asked can
also tell a great deal about the person itself (Flammer, 1981). Research so far has shown that
question asking increases interpersonal liking (Huang et al., 2017), is a critical mechanism in
comprehension, problem-solving, creativity, and intelligence (King, 1994; Raz, Reiter-
Palmon, et al., 2024), changes according to learning proficiency and material difficulty
(Miyake & Norman, 1979), and can even change future behavior of other people (Miles et al.,
2020; Sprott et al., 2006). However, despite the significance of question-asking, relatively
little research has been conducted to elucidate parts of its nature, such as why do we ask
questions? What makes a question more effective? When do we start asking questions? This
might be due to both theoretical and methodological challenges in defining the construct of
question asking and developing empirical methods to directly study it.
When we ask questions, we usually have a general sense of what the form of answer
we are expecting is (Van der Meij, 1987). For example, when asking how something works,
we expect to get a procedural explanation rather than a label, and we expect to obtain reliable
and relevant answers from the person queried (Ronfard et al., 2018). We also determine the
answer to be valuable information, as we do not ask questions about everything we do not
know about (Flammer, 1981). There is also great variability in the quality and quantity of the
questions we ask – some people ask poorly worded or imprecise questions, while others ask
more precise questions and more often (Acar et al., 2023; Ronfard et al., 2018).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Although asking questions is a natural and fundamental human activity that is
prevalent throughout almost all of our conversations, the exact nature of question asking has
not been extensively investigated (Acar et al., 2023; Flammer, 1981; Kearsley, 1976; Ronfard
et al., 2018), with much of the past work focusing on largely qualitative research, essentially
cataloging different types of questions people ask (Rothe et al., 2018). Thus, a contemporary
review of the research is needed in order to further elucidate this significant cognitive tool –
Question asking.
1.1. The current review
In this review, we will focus on questions as a tool for epistemic information-seeking
behavior, which aims to minimize information gaps, solve contradictions and promote the
askers internal knowledge goals (Ivancovsky et al., 2024; Kedrick et al., 2024; Kedrick et al.,
2023; Kenett et al., 2023; Lydon-Staley et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2024). We argue that
question asking serves as a fundamental cognitive tool for bridging knowledge gaps,
resolving contradictions, and achieving the asker's learning and understanding goals. Yet,
questions are not just a means of acquiring information; they are central to navigating the
complexities of social interactions, intellectual development, and problem-solving. From
childhood to adulthood, the process of questioning is critical in cognitive development,
fostering creativity, and refining understanding of the world around us.
While there are different types of aims for questions – such as when asking for help
in the workplace or for social interactions (Gibson et al., 2018; Hart et al., 2021), the majority
of research on questions focus on their epistemic value: Questions develop and are present
throughout our lives at different capacities, are motivated by temperamental factors such as
creativity and curiosity and help us take control of our learning and development (Acar et al.,
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
2023). They also provide the key for understanding and navigating the newly unfolding world
of communication with artificial intelligence, machines and language models. They even hold
the potential for augmenting the lives of every knowledge worker (workers who apply
theoretical and analytical knowledge to develop products and services (Drucker, 1959;
Sasson-Lazovsky, Raz, et al., 2024). Lastly, questions help us understand who we are, and
what makes us different as an animal with an ability to inquire.
What does “information-seeking behavior” mean? The word “information” has been
given different meanings by various writers in the general field of information theory, but for
the purpose of our review, information is construed as the general definition of information
(Floridi, 2010). According to this definition, information is made of well-formed meaningful
data. “well formed” means that the data are rightly put together, according to the rules
(syntax) that govern the chosen system, code, or language being used, while “meaningful”
means that the data comply with the meanings (semantics) of the chosen system, code, or
language in question (Floridi, 2010). When defining information-seeking behavior, a
conception of information-seeking as a process in which information needs are pursued, or in
which problem-solving takes place is usually one that is present in most of the literature
(Foster, 2004). According to Al-Samarraie et al. (2017) the process of information seeking is
a cognitive activity which requires the involvement of long and short-term memory, relevant
background knowledge, and mental models, to name a few. Marchionini (1995) adds that
information-seekers commonly rely on their own mental models, dynamic mental
representations of the real world, to guide them through various mental and physical activities
that require representations of the information objects and different domains of knowledge
(Al-Samarraie et al., 2017).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Our aim in this review is not only to provide a current review of this critical human
capacity but present how it can be empirically investigated. We begin our review by
introducing and integrating significant past and current theories on question asking. Overall,
question asking is theorized to facilitate epistemological information-seeking to reduce
ambiguity and achieve clarity. Next, we review current research on the mechanistic role of
question asking in various cognitive domains, focusing on curiosity, creativity, learning, and
problem solving. Overall, asking good questions facilitates these domains, and is likely
realized by internal curiosity-driven motivation. Finally, we discuss question-asking in
different contexts, focusing on children, social interactions, and AI. Overall, question asking
serves a critical tool in development, and can be harnessed to enhance social interactions and
current man-AI interaction. We end our review by highlighting general frontiers experimental
research on questions asking should, and can, advance.
2. Question-asking theories
Theories of question asking have evolved to explore the cognitive, linguistic, and
social dimensions of this fundamental human behavior. Key theories were proposed by
Kearsley (1976) on question taxonomy, Flammer (1981) on information-seeking, and Ram
(1991) on knowledge goals form the foundation of this exploration. Kearsley’s theory
integrates linguistic and cognitive psychology to classify questions based on their
characteristics and purposes, while Flammer’s work narrows the focus to explicit
information-seeking questions, outlining six postulates on how and why questions are
formulated. Ram, expanding on these ideas, introduces the concept of knowledge goals,
emphasizing the role of questions in filling gaps in knowledge, both in humans and artificial
intelligence.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Overall, these three theories provide comprehensive insights into the theoretical
nature of question asking. Although other theories which contribute to the broader
understanding of question asking exist(see: Chin & Brown, 2002; Davey & McBride, 1986;
Graesser et al., 1993; Graesser et al., 1992) , they are not solely concerned with a general
question asking theory, and are thus outside the scope of this review. Importantly, the three
theories By Kearsley, Flammer and Ram (Flammer, 1981; Kearsley, 1976; Ram, 1991) lay
the groundwork for elucidating question asking.
2.1. Many types of questions – A taxonomy
What is a question? In his theory of question asking, Kearsley (1976) attempts to
combine research from linguistics and cognitive psychology into one comprehensive
framework for understanding question asking in conversational discourse. Questions are
defined as sharing a common goal of eliciting a verbal response from the addressee.
Questions, he argues, also serve additional purposes which are echoic (repetition or
confirmation of information “Pardon me” or “What”), epistemic (acquiring information -
“What is that?”), expressive (conveying attitudinal information -“Aren’t you coming?), and
social control (maintaining control of discourse -“Are you listening?” “Hey, know what?”)
(Kearsley, 1976). These classifications are not exclusive, and some questions can involve
multiple purposes. Based on this typology, Kearsley qualitatively reviews different types of
questions and proposes a taxonomy of different types of question forms, distinguishing
various characteristics such as verbal and non-verbal or direct and indirect questions
(Kearsley, 1976).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
According to Kearsley (1976), the process of questioning involves three intertwined
stages: question selection, formation, and asking. Question selection refers to how a question
arises cognitively; question formation involves the linguistic rules that structure the question;
and question asking refers to maintaining conversation and discourse. It is emphasized that
these processes occur concurrently and are interconnected. The essential notion of Kearsley’s
(1976) model suggests that question asking fills gaps in cognitive models or conceptual
structures of the immediate environment. Questions, in this view, serve as a behavioral
reflection of changes in cognitive conceptual structures as new knowledge is acquired.
2.2. Narrowing the definition – Questions as information seeking
In his theory of question asking, Flammer (1981) admits that the word “question” is a
very broad and heterogeneous concept, as there are to name a few – open questions, yes/no
questions, real and rhetorical questions and so forth. Instead, he chooses to focus on, in his
view, the prototypical question – the spoken or written explicit information seeking question.
Questions are viewed as tools used by the questioner to acquire specific information that aids
in planning actions to achieve certain goals. Therefore, rhetorical questions, suggestive
questions, or questions asked to please someone are not considered. The focus is on questions
where the questioner not only seeks information but also explicitly expresses this need.
Consequently, 'indirect' questions, such as exam questions, are also excluded (Flammer,
1981).
Flammer theorizes a conceptual framework composed of six postulates (claims) as
basis for a theory of question asking. The first postulate posits that questions are primarily
asked to obtain information that the asker lacks, focusing on explicit information-seeking. This forms
the core of Flammer’s question-asking theory. The second postulate claims that questions presuppose
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
some existing knowledge. Effective questions thus require a baseline of knowledge to formulate and
assess the question's relevance and potential efficacy. The more specific a question is intended to be,
the more the questioner must know. The third postulate concerns questions as formulated to narrow
the range of acceptable answers. The question asker has specific expectations about the missing
knowledge, which shapes the question's structure. Thus, the range of the acceptable answers is smaller
than the range of all the statements the answerer can make. The fourth postulate acknowledges that
the knowledge needed to ask a question is related to the specific information sought. Higher-order
knowledge helps locate lower-order missing knowledge, and questions are often based on hierarchical
knowledge structures. For example, the higher-order knowledge of how restaurants operate is crucial
for lower order questions such as “what sides does this come with?”. The fifth postulate deals with
contradictory knowledge, a special case of missing knowledge. Questions are asked to resolve
contradictions and achieve subjective consistency, reflecting the desire for coherent knowledge. For
example: a) John, at this moment, is in China, I am in London; b) John has just said to me...
Additional information to clear the contradiction between a and b: c) John just reached me by phone.
Finally, the sixth postulate describes questions which arise from knowledge that is available but held
with low confidence. These are often hypothesis-testing or decision questions used to confirm or
clarify uncertain information.
2.3. Questions as knowledge goals – A theory of questions and question-asking
In his theory, Ram (1991) emphasizes that questions are central to the cognitive
processes of acquiring and reorganizing knowledge, which he refers to as "knowledge goals."
These knowledge goals emerge when a reasoner’s mental model of a particular domain is
inadequate or incomplete, prompting the formulation of questions to fill gaps or resolve
contradictions in understanding. Unlike earlier models, Ram extends the concept of question-
driven learning beyond human reasoning by focusing on computational models and artificial
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
intelligence. He demonstrates how questions can guide both humans and machines in
identifying and acquiring the specific knowledge needed for effective reasoning.
Ram’s approach introduces a question-driven model of learning, where understanding
is seen as a dynamic and incremental process. In this model, questions are used not only to
seek new information but also to reorganize existing knowledge structures. In the
computational part of his question asking framework, he introduces a system called Asking
Questions and Understanding Answers (AQUA) which is designed to learn about its
environment through questions. AQUA incrementally refines its understanding by asking
questions about unusual or unexpected inputs, transforming those questions based on the
answers it receives.
One similarity between AQUA’s process and human question asking is the role that
questions play in guiding attention and focusing on relevant information. Both humans and
AQUA use questions as a tool to explore gaps or inconsistencies in their understanding,
seeking to refine their knowledge models. In both cases, understanding is seen as an active,
dynamic process, where questions arise naturally from the learner's current state of
knowledge and are used to drive the acquisition of new information. As questions are
answered, new questions often emerge, further advancing the learning process.
However, AQUA differs from human question-asking in several significant ways.
While humans possess a wide range of cognitive goals, such as social or emotional
objectives, AQUA operates solely with knowledge goals—its only purpose is to learn and
improve its world model. Humans, by contrast, may ask questions not only to fill cognitive
gaps but also to satisfy emotional or social needs, such as curiosity or interaction with others.
Additionally, AQUA’s questions are generated based on programmed algorithms that respond
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
to specific knowledge gaps, while humans may generate questions more flexibly, based on
personal interests, intuition, or past experiences.
Furthermore, Ram’s theory has significant implications for education. He proposes
that teaching should be structured in a way that encourages students to formulate and pursue
their own questions, thereby promoting a deeper, self-directed learning process. By
understanding how questions reflect the underlying goals of learners, educational programs
can be designed to foster intellectual curiosity and independent problem-solving. In this way,
Ram's theory extends the role of questions beyond information seeking, positioning them as
fundamental tools for both learning and cognitive development
2.4. Reducing entropy and increasing information gain
Contemporary theories (Gottlieb, 2021) discuss the ways in which people identify
information and decide which inquiries deserve more attention than others. According to
information theory, entropy is a measure of the amount of uncertainty in a given environment
of observations, and in many cases is something we wish to minimize in order to increase our
understanding (Crupi et al., 2018; Sasson & Kenett, 2023). Gottlieb (2021) reviews recent
research on question asking which found that there is a pervasive and strong tradeoff between
speed and accuracy in a sampling task in which people estimated the location of a hidden disk
on a screen by inquiring about different points on the screen (Petitet et al., 2021). The results
showed that when people inquire more quickly, they show less information gain, while
formulating higher quality inquiries was associated with reports of fatigue. Gottlieb (2021)
concludes that creating good questions requires learning or complex reasoning, which entails
a high computational cost that can prevent people from always being at their best.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
But the question remains: how do people decide what information to collect in a
specific situation? According to Coenen et al. (2019), information-seeking or inquiry-based
behaviors are like conducting scientific experiments. Thus, for example, a child playing with
a new toy, a pupil asking a question, or a person trying out their first laptop, can all be
conceptualized as scientists conducting a carefully designed experiment to test their specific
hypotheses. To help explain this hypothesis, Coenen et al. (2019) introduce the “optimal
experiment design” (OED) framework, taken from statistics literature (Fedorov, 1972).
According to the OED framework, people choose questions to ask by aiming to maximize the
knowledge they expect to gain from knowing the answer to that question (Coenen et al.,
2019). However, the OED framework relies on multiple theoretical assumptions concerning
the question askers’ prior knowledge and cognitive capacities, as well as being unsuccessful
in capturing the full richness of human question-asking (Coenen et al., 2019). The authors
present nine open questions that remain unresolved in the field of human inquiry. These
include challenges such as query generation, exploring the complexities of how people decide
what questions to ask, what constitutes a “good” answer, how learning from answers
influences future query selection and the cognitive constraints that affect inquiry strategies,
such as working memory and cognitive load (Coenen et al., 2019).
2.5. Interim summary
Overall, based on these theories of question-asking, question asking can be defined as
a cognitive process which is a) motivated by information seeking, b) is based on prior
knowledge, c) questions themselves as tools of eliciting required information and minimizing
contradictions and gaps in our knowledge (Flammer, 1981; Ram, 1991), and d) questions
serve to minimize ambiguity—or entropy—driving information seeking-behaviors (Coenen et
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
al., 2019; Gottlieb, 2021). A likely way to achieve the aim of such a cognitive process is by
maximizing the information questions retrieve. As such, asking more complex questions, that
can maximize the information-seeking process, seems like a critical feature of question
asking (see also: Chen et al., 2024). Thus, assessing question complexity is critical in
assessing its role in the information-seeking process. This is made possible by the Bloom
taxonomy.
3. Question complexity and the Bloom taxonomy
In 1956, Benjamin Bloom together with colleagues Max Englehart, Edward Furst,
Walter Hill, and David Krathwohl published a framework for categorizing educational goals
titled the “Taxonomy of Educational Objectives” (Bloom et al., 1956). Today this work is
familiarly known as Bloom’s taxonomy and is a widely accepted guideline for designing
learning objectives and questions of differing levels of cognitive complexity (Adams, 2015;
Omar et al., 2012). The taxonomy includes six cognitive levels of question complexity, which
are hierarchically ordered from simple to complex. An updated version of the taxonomy
includes the following levels, in ascending order of complexity (Krathwohl, 2002):
Remembering (retrieving relevant knowledge from long-term memory, for example when or
how did X happen), Understanding (determining the meaning of instructional messages,
including oral, written, and graphic communication, for example how would you
summarize..?), Applying (carrying out or using a procedure in a given situation, for example
how would you solve X using what you have learned), Analysing (breaking material into its
constituent parts and detecting how the parts relate to one another, for example how can you
make a distinction between…?), Evaluating (making judgments based on criteria and
standards, for example how would you prove or disprove…?), and Creating (putting elements
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
together to form a novel, coherent whole, for example what changes would you make to
solve…?).
Krathwohl (2002) in his later revision interprets the taxonomy as proceeding from
simple to complex, in relation to increasing levels of the taxonomy. Furthermore, it is
assumed that the taxonomy represents a cumulative hierarchy; that is, mastery of each
simpler category is a prerequisite to mastery of the next more complex one. When defining
complexity, it can be classified into the six levels in Bloom’s Taxonomy. At each level, the
number of tasks or solution steps (number of different steps needed in order to reach a
solution) necessary to solve or answer the question varies. Usually, low level complexity has
fewer steps than higher level complexities (Tan & Othman, 2013) and there is considerable
support for the idea that the steps toward higher cognitive complexity should be incremental,
moving from one level to the next (Granello, 2001).
Blything et al. (2020) define the concept of complexity from a linguistic viewpoint,
such that question complexity consists of lexical variability, length of response, and use of
causal language. Lexical variability is operationalized as the proportion of function words
(he, they, the, on, etc.) in relation to the total number of words in the question. A higher
proportion of function words thus indicates higher grammatical complexity (Halliday, 1989;
Isbell et al., 2004). Mean length of response not only indicates the length of a response but is
also the most common indicator of syntactic complexity in speech (Isbell et al., 2004;
McGinty et al., 2012). Causal language is traditionally associated with syntactic complexity
in speech (Halliday, 1989; Halliday & Matthiessen, 2013), given the importance of causal
explanations to support reading comprehension (Graesser, 2007).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Degener and Berne (2017) suggest that the complexity of engagement with a written
problem or question is not held within the text itself but, instead, in the demands placed on it
by the questioner. For example, a teacher may work with a student on an extremely
challenging text but not require complex or deep engagement with it, such that the teacher's
questions cue higher or lower levels of complexity consideration (Degener & Berne, 2017).
Thus, a low-complexity question when reading a text could focus on oral understanding and
accuracy, such that the teacher could then ask the student about mispronounced words and
request they break down the word. A high-complexity question could focus on relating the
text to the context in which it exists, including other concepts which aren’t in it. For example,
“How do you think this poem differs from others published in its time period?” (Degener &
Berne, 2017). Additionally, some studies postulate that the average time spent on a question
is also related to its taxonomic complexity (Iz & Fok, 2007).
Interim summary
Question complexity can be thought of or construed in the context of Bloom's
Taxonomy, a framework for categorizing educational goals into six hierarchical levels of
cognitive complexity. The taxonomy assumes a cumulative hierarchy where mastery of
simpler categories is essential for progressing to more complex ones. Complexity increases
with the number of steps or tasks required to reach a solution, and incremental progression is
encouraged. Linguistic factors such as lexical variability, response length, and causal
language also define question complexity, reflecting syntactic and grammatical challenges.
Additionally, complexity depends on the cognitive demands set by the questioner, with
examples ranging from simple comprehension to contextual and comparative analysis.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Finally, research suggests that time spent on questions correlates with their cognitive
complexity, further emphasizing the multifaceted nature of question design.
4. Question-Asking in Information Seeking (QuInS) framework
Although we have reviewed above different theories of question asking, there is a
need for a general theory which summarizes and integrates their main insights and findings.
The different theories on question asking arise from different realms and fields of study, and
an encompassing theory should provide a comprehensive viewpoint from which to explain
and understand the different aspects of question asking.
We thus introduce the Question-Asking in Information Seeking (QuInS) framework
(Fig. 1). QuInS synthesizes and extracts the gist of question-asking and information-seeking
behaviors from qualitative and quantitative research in the field. QuInS is based on the
different classic (Flammer, 1981; Kearsley, 1976; Ram, 1991; Ronfard et al., 2018), and
current (Coenen et al., 2019; Crupi et al., 2018; Gottlieb, 2021; Petitet et al., 2021; Sasson &
Kenett, 2023) question-asking theories reviewed above.
QuInS posits that question-asking is a dynamic, iterative process driven by epistemic
goals to resolve information gaps, contradictions, and enhance cognitive and social
understanding. This process is shaped by intrinsic factors like curiosity and creativity and is
influenced by situational, developmental, and social contexts. It is a 6-stage process (Fig. 1) :
A Stimulus or Knowledge Gap: a question-asking process begins when an individual
encounters a discrepancy or gap in their understanding, triggered by novel, surprising, or
inconsistent information. This drives the recognition of a need to acquire further knowledge.
This level is based on Flammer's postulates and Ram’s knowledge-goal framework
(Flammer, 1981; Ram, 1991) where questions arise when individuals detect inconsistencies
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
or gaps in their mental models. Pre-existing knowledge in hierarchical structures aids in
identifying and narrowing these gaps.
Curiosity Activation: curiosity, as an intrinsic motivator of inquiry (Acar et al., 2023;
Gruber & Ranganath, 2019; Kenett et al., 2023), drives a response to the knowledge gap. It
motivates the individual to seek information actively, fostering a state of cognitive
engagement that primes question formulation (Kedrick et al., 2024; Kedrick et al., 2023;
Liquin & Lombrozo, 2020).
Question Formulation: the individual generates a question using their existing
knowledge base to structure it meaningfully. Creative ability helps elevate question
complexity level and formulate higher-level questions (Raz et al., 2023). This level Draws
from Kearsley’s taxonomy and Bloom's taxonomy (Bloom et al., 1956; Kearsley, 1976):
Questions are linguistically and cognitively structured to maximize information gain.
Expression and Interaction (Considering Social and Contextual Appropriateness): the
formulated question is then expressed within the constraints of social norms and context. This
stage involves determining the best interlocutor or medium to ask the question and ensuring
the interaction remains productive. Effective question expression depends on identifying
knowledgeable agents and social appropriateness (Ransom et al., 2024). Expression evolves
with age, transitioning from simple queries in early childhood to strategic questioning in
adults (King, 1991; Ronfard et al., 2018).
Response Evaluation: upon receiving a response, the individual assesses its
relevance, accuracy, and sufficiency in resolving the knowledge gap. This evaluation
determines whether additional questions or actions are needed. Questions are evaluated based
on the accuracy, relevance, and utility of the responses received (Ronfard et al., 2018).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Iterative Refinement (Through Follow-Up or Independent Exploration): if the
response does not fully resolve the gap, the individual engages in further questioning or
explores alternative methods such as observation, research, or experimentation to achieve
clarity and deeper understanding (Ram, 1991; Ronfard et al., 2018). Follow-up questions aim
to refine understanding and eliminate residual ambiguities.
It is important to note that the process can also reiterate across the stages, sometimes
even without all the stages. For example, if the Iterative Refinement stage concluded that the
gap is not resolved, there isn’t necessarily a further need for more curiosity or social and
contextual cues, but there is a need for additional question formulation and evaluation.
Fig. 1
Different stages of QUINS framework
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Interim summary
The Question-Asking in Information Seeking (QuInS) framework offers a
comprehensive, integrative theory of question-asking, synthesizing insights from classic and
contemporary research. It views question-asking as a dynamic, iterative process aimed at
resolving information gaps and enhancing understanding. Critically, this process is flexible,
allowing stages to repeat or adapt based on the resolution of knowledge gaps.
5. The cognitive mechanistic role of question asking
While classic theories on question asking exist, they are mostly qualitative, or
descriptive, focusing largely on classrooms in their description of question asking behavior.
However, during the past decade, a slowly increasing number of studies empirically study
question asking (Nelson et al., 2014; Ruggeri & Feufel, 2015; Ruggeri et al., 2016; Schulz et
al., 2019). These studies often focus on simplified, laboratory-based tasks that require
learners to ask questions or take actions to acquire information, which range from games to
controlled experiments, and aim to determine whether children and adults ask the "best" or
most informative questions based on computational models (Ruggeri & Lombrozo, 2015).
The key measure of a good question is then defined as its ability to resolve ambiguity
between different possible world states. For example, asking whether you are near the right
bus stop helps resolve the ambiguity between two hypothetical realities: being at the correct
station or not (Rothe et al., 2018).
Thus, the general aim of such in-lab studies on question asking is a shift from
education-based, qualitative focus, classic studies on question asking. The aim is to elucidate
the cognitive capacities that drive question asking (e.g., curiosity), that are impacted by
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
question asking (e.g., creativity), or are impacted by question asking (e.g., learning, problem
solving), that lead to enhanced and efficient information-seeking behavior.
5.1. Curiosity as a Driver of Question Asking
Curiosity, a motivated state which drives learning and which is theorized to emerge
upon detection of an information gap (Gruber & Ranganath, 2019), likely also demands
formulating a question in order to solve this information gap (Kedrick et al., 2023). Curiosity
is also a likely driving force behind pursuing missing information (Ivancovsky et al., 2024;
Kedrick et al., 2023; Kenett et al., 2023; Lydon-Staley et al., 2021; Raz & Kenett, 2024; Zhou
et al., 2024) such that it drives us to engage in information-seeking behaviors, and is thus one
of the most important factors affecting question asking.
But effective information-seeking is not only about seeking the new, it also requires a
drive to avoid the old. A recent study by Seiler and Dan (2024) explores the intertwined but
distinct roles of boredom and curiosity as complementary drivers of information-seeking
behavior. Using a comprehensive review of existing literature, the authors conceptualize
boredom as a "hunger" for information, pushing individuals away from low-stimulation
environments, while curiosity functions as an "appetite," pulling them toward specific
knowledge gaps. The study employs information theory to analyze how environmental
complexity and individual decoding capabilities influence these states, proposing that
boredom drives broad, unspecific exploration, while curiosity fosters targeted, knowledge-
enriching behavior.
Additional research done by Lydon-Staley and colleagues (Lydon-Staley et al., 2021;
Zhou et al., 2024) has explored curiosity-driven information seeking by using Wikipedia
exploration. Lydon-Staley et al. (2021) explore the knowledge-networks that people build
when browsing and interacting with Wikipedia. They find two dominant styles of curiosity:
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
the "hunter," who builds tightly connected knowledge networks by focusing on related
concepts, and the "busybody," who creates loosely connected networks by exploring diverse
topics. Further work by Zhou et al. (2024) examined a much larger sample containing
hundreds of thousands of Wikipedia readers, and in addition to replicating the previous
curiosity types, found a new type – the “dancer”. The “dancer” is characterized by creative
leaps across disconnected knowledge areas. These different curiosity types showcase the
importance of using diverse methodologies to study human curiosity. But what of the
relationship between question asking, a dominant tool for information seeking, and curiosity?
Initial empirical support for an association between curiosity and question-asking can
be found in longitudinal education research. For example, a question-brainstorming strategy
referred to as the Question Formulation Technique (QFT; Rothstein & Santana, 2011) has
been examined in the context of curiosity and learning. This technique flips the usual teacher-
student dynamic by having students ask the questions using a Question Focus. A Question
Focus, or QFocus, is a prompt to jumpstart student questions, that can be presented in the
form of a statement or visual aid to focus and attract student attention and stimulate formation
of questions. The QFocus is different from many traditional prompts because it is not a
teacher’s question, but a focus for student questions so students can, on their own, identify
and explore a wide range of themes and ideas. For example, after studying the causes of the
1804 Haitian revolution, one teacher presented the QFocus: “Once we were slaves. Now we
are free.” The students then began asking questions about what changed and what stayed the
same after the revolution. In a classroom based study, Clark et al. (2019) found that
adolescents with a QFT-trained instructor exhibited higher trait curiosity over the course of a
semester (i.e., over the course of 3 measurement time points; (Clark et al., 2019).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Yet, how is this search for information influenced by whether the information we are
searching for provides answers to our own question or those posed by others? To answer
these questions, Kedrick et al. (2023) tested the influence of actively generating a question
using a curiosity Q&A task they developed. In their task, participants saw many statements
which contained intentional information gaps that might elicit questions. An example
statement was “Capybaras are the heaviest living rodent on earth, eating about 5 pounds of
food a day. They have specific body features that allow them to live in semi-aquatic habitats
in South America” where one possible gap-related question is, “What body features allow the
Capybara to live in a semi-aquatic environment?”. Participants read these statements and
typed questions they had, and then rated their curiosity about the topic, their questions, and
their familiarity with the information on a 7-point Likert scale. Participants then saw nine
buttons with topic-related questions, including gap-related ones, and could click any to view
answers, with no time or click limit. Participant questions were also rated for quantity and
quality. Kedrick et al. (2023) found that participants who generated a high number of quality
questions about information gaps expressed higher levels of curiosity, were more likely to
forage for the missing information, and were more likely to remember the information they
acquired. Their results imply that actively generating a high number of quality questions
inspires curiosity, promotes information foraging, and enables subsequent memory.
Additionally, Liquin and Lombrozo (2020) introduced the concept of "Explanation-
Seeking Curiosity" (ESC), which drives individuals to seek explanations when they
encounter something novel, surprising, or inconsistent with their knowledge. Participants
were presented with a series of real-world stimuli (questions sourced from the internet), and
their curiosity about these questions was measured using a Likert scale to quantify curiosity
levels. Through three studies, the researchers demonstrate that ESC is triggered by
expectations about the learning potential and future utility of explanations. The findings
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
suggest that ESC is sensitive not only to backward-looking factors such as surprise and
information gaps but also to forward-looking considerations, including the anticipation of
how an explanation could be useful in future contexts. The study highlights the importance of
explanation-seeking in driving learning and cognitive development.
Interim summary
This section explored the relationship between curiosity and question-asking as
fundamental drivers of learning and information-seeking. Curiosity, a motivated state
emerging from the detection of information gaps, propels individuals to ask questions that
articulate their knowledge deficits. Experimental research highlights the cognitive benefits of
question-asking: actively formulating high-quality questions about information gaps boosts
curiosity, encourages information foraging, and enhances memory retention. Together, these
findings illuminate how curiosity and question-asking intertwine to drive exploration,
learning, and cognitive development.
5.2. The Role of Asking Complex Questions in Creative Thinking
Creativity is the ability to come up with ideas that are both original and appropriate
(Green et al., 2024; Runco & Jaeger, 2012). Thus, creative ideas relate to the ability to search
ones’ memory and to “move away” from common ideas towards ones that are more novel or
conceptually distant (Abraham & Bubic, 2015; Beaty & Kenett, 2023; Benedek et al., 2023;
Volle, 2018). One extensively studied aspect of creativity is divergent thinking – thinking that
generates multiple possible ideas in a divergent manner (Runco & Acar, 2012). Divergent
thinking tests are among the most commonly used in creativity research (Acar & Runco,
2019), and are conceived as a key cognitive foundation of creativity (Runco, 2010). One of
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
the commonly used divergent thinking tasks is the AUT (Guilford, 1967; Guilford et al.,
1960). In the AUT, participants are presented with an object (e.g., a brick) and are required to
think of as many uses as they can (Acar & Runco, 2019).
An important but understudied part of creativity that likely facilitates information
seeking behavior is question asking ability. In fact, question asking originally was studied as
a part of the creative problem-solving process in children (Torrance, 1970). One of the tasks
historically used to assess question asking was the unusual questions task (UQT), based on
Burkhart (1961)’s divergent questions task, the UQT was part of the original version of the
classic creativity assessment battery, the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking (TTCT:
Torrance, 1966). The UQT was developed to assess divergent thinking, similar to the AUT.
However, later versions of the TTCT removed the UQT from its battery of divergent thinking
tests, which is perhaps part of the reason for the lack of research in the field of question
asking and divergent thinking.
Thus, it seems that asking high quality questions has an important role in bridging
information gaps and overall information seeking behavior. Yet, to better understand this
phenomenon, it is still pertinent to ask what makes a question – a higher quality one?
Raz et al. (2023) explored the relation between question asking and creativity using
Bloom’s taxonomy of question complexity to rate the complexity of questions asked for a
creative question-asking task - the alternative questions task (AQT; Fig. 2). The AQT requires
participants to generate creative and unusual questions about common objects (e.g., pen,
book, shoe) such as “Who invented the first pencil” or “What library has the most books?”.
Responses were rated separately in terms of their creativity, using a 1 (not at all creative) to 5
(very creative) scoring method (Runco & Mraz, 1992), and complexity, according to Bloom’s
taxonomy (Bloom et al., 1956; Krathwohl, 2002).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Fig. 2
Example of the Alternative Question Task
When evaluating the relation between complex questions and creativity, the authors
found that question complexity and creativity were positively related: questions that were
higher on the Bloom taxonomy (i.e., more complex) were also scored as more creative, and
those that were less complex were scored as less creative. The authors provided the first
empirical evidence that question complexity and creativity are related, such that higher
creative abilities accompany higher question-asking abilities. Thus, Raz et al. (2023) provides
evidence that the Bloom taxonomy can be used to assess question complexity in the AQT and
that creativity is related to gradual progression from basic knowledge acquisition to higher
order thinking skills. This work also led Raz, Luchini, et al. (2024) to develop a large
language model (LLM) capable of scoring AQT responses according to the Bloom taxonomy.
Specifically, they capitalized on previously collected human-rated AQT responses to train a
LLM to predict the complexity of newly collected open-ended questions. Their results reveal
that their LLM-generated Bloom scores correlated strongly with human ratings of Bloom
complexity (r = .73), whilst also greatly exceeding tested baseline measures. Their work
emphasizes the significance of LLMs in automating the assessment of open-ended question
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
complexity, and fostering cost-effective, automatic, and reliable measurements in this
domain.
Although the driving forces of question asking are important in understanding its
nature, additional ways to expand question asking abilities are needed, ways which rely on
teaching and enhancing high quality questioning in students and adults alike. Research
conducted on enhancing learning in the classroom through fostering questioning skills (Costa
& Kallick, 2015; King, 1991, 1994; Pelo, 2014; Salmon & Barrera, 2021), highlight the
educational applications that arise from turning question-asking theories to practice.
Interim summary
This section delves into the foundational role of question-asking in creative thinking.
The research expands on this by using Bloom's taxonomy to explore the relationship between
question complexity and creativity. Their findings reveal a positive correlation: more
complex questions are perceived as more creative, demonstrating the value of complex
question-asking for fostering higher-order thinking and creative abilities. This research
emphasizes the broader role of questioning in bridging information gaps, promoting
creativity, and advancing educational practices. But can learning also be influenced by
question asking?
5.3. Enhancing learning through effective question asking
As in our day to day interactions, question asking is an important cognitive activity in
the classroom, and one that enhances teaching and learning (Salmon & Barrera, 2021).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Although questions are the primary way of interaction with students, teachers often silence or
overlook children’s questions, causing students to lose opportunities to expand their theories
and scaffold their thinking skills (Pelo, 2014).
While different types of questions exist, the most commonly considered type of
questions relate to information seeking questions (Flammer, 1981). In this way question
asking is directly linked to learning, playing a critical role in knowledge acquisition. This is
especially true for children (Ronfard et al., 2018). Specifically, broad research on question
asking in children highlight that question asking can be divided into initiation (realization that
information is missing), formulation (identifying what information to ask for), expression
(deciding whether to express the question), and evaluation (assessing the information gained
by the response). Such a component approach to question asking can be utilized in
developing focused interventions on different aspects of the question asking process to
maximize learning. Furthermore, children demonstrate developmental changes in their
question asking capabilities as they age (Ruggeri & Lombrozo, 2014; Ruggeri et al., 2019).
Graesser et al. (1993) argues that question asking is a key mechanism in active inquiry.
This form of inquiry, the authors argue, is critical in learning, problem solving, and decision
making. Specifically, Graesser et al. (1993) conducted a study that empirically demonstrated
how question asking facilitated student learning. Kedrick et al. (2023) further demonstrated the
integral role of self-generated questions during the acquisition of new information, facilitated
by curiosity, that has been recently highlighted in its role in information seeking behavior
(Ivancovsky et al., 2024; Kenett et al., 2023) and creativity (Acar et al., 2023).
Salmon and Barrera (2021) claim that learning to ask good questions is crucial for
improving teacher discourse and facilitating deeper thinking among students. This is
especially pertinent as teachers serve as natural models for students, allowing them to model
their question asking and follow their curiosity and interests. Salmon and Barrera (2021)
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
conducted research by, with, and for people affected by a particular problem, which takes
places in collaboration with academic researchers (Kindon et al., 2009). Salmon and Barrera
(2021) find that children learn best when teachers build on their prior knowledge to make
learning meaningful and cognitively engaging. Good questions are crucial in understanding
children’s thinking and helping to mediate their knowledge construction. Teaching children to
craft their own questions empowers them and lets them take control of their learning. The
authors used Costa’s questioning levels framework (Costa & Kallick, 2015) in their studies to
better understand and to categorize question level and quality.
According to Costa and Kallick (2015), questions are essential for understanding
students' thoughts. Effective teachers not only ask many questions but also intentionally
design them to fit specific learning goals, thereby promoting critical thinking. Intentional
teaching is when adults mold their intention from teaching thinking to sparking authentic
conversations in children (Pelo, 2014). Questions can range from simple and close-ended to
complex and open-ended. Knowing when and how to ask the right questions helps in leading
are aligned with the Bloom's taxonomy (Bloom et al., 1956), to help teachers identify the
type of thinking their questions encourage in students and help their students develop a
growth mindset and awareness of their thinking processes.
Costa and Kallick (2015) framework includes some notable differences from Bloom’s
taxonomy. Costa and Kallick (2015) emphasizes a more intentional and strategic use of
questions designed to foster critical thinking, problem-solving, and self-awareness. While
both Bloom et al. and Costa and Kallick frameworks aim to develop higher-order thinking,
Costa and Kallick’s approach extends beyond content mastery and encourages the
development of "habits of mind," such as persistence, metacognition, and flexible thinking.
Costa's levels also highlight the role of questioning in promoting lifelong learning and
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
growth, which is less explicit in Bloom's taxonomy, which is more hierarchical and task-
specific in its classification of cognitive processes.
Costa and Kallick (2015) three questioning levels summary
Question Level Description
Level 1 (Information The goal of this type of question is to collect facts. Students are asked
to define, describe, list, observe and so forth.
Gathering)
Level 2 (Information The goal of this type of question is for students to compare, contrast,
classify, sort, distinguish, explain, infer, analyze and so forth. Students
Processing)
are asked to process the information generated from Level 1.
Level 3 (Information The goal of this type of question is for students to evaluate, generalize,
imagine, judge, predict, speculate, hypothesize, forecast and so forth.
Application)
Students are asked to use the processed information from Level 2.
Salmon and Barrera (2021) mainly discuss teacher-based facilitation of improved
question asking skills and focus on early life abilities at the preschool level. Work done by
King (King, 1991, 1994) focuses on high-school and college age students in self-guided
learning strategies. According to King (1992) students understand and remember new
material best when they elaborate on that material in some manner. Additionally, self-
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
generated elaborations have been found to be more conducive to learning, than those
provided by a teacher, textbook or external source (Pressley et al., 1987; Wittrock, 1991). It is
presumed that these personalized elaborations are more memorable because they are more
consistent with the learner's experience and knowledge base (King, 1992). King (1992)
describe a method for encouraging self-generated verbal elaboration through a guided
student-generated questioning strategy.
Over two years, King (1992) ran a series of classroom intervention studies which
compared self-generated elaborations effectiveness with other learning and study strategies.
In their procedure, students use general questions “stems” such as “what are the strengths and
weaknesses”, which are provided by the researchers, to create their own specific question
about material they learned. These stems are based the higher levels in Bloom’s taxonomy
(Bloom et al., 1956) and are designed to prompt critical thinking. Their results show that use
of student generated questioning helped students ask more thought-provoking questions and
to generate more elaborate explanations; and that these behaviors lead to improved material
understanding. King (1992) conclude that the guided student-generated questioning strategy
combines structured question stems with student autonomy to create a balanced learning
environment. While students have the freedom to generate questions and answers relevant to
their learning needs, the structured stems ensure that these questions and answers help them
build meaningful and detailed mental representations of the material.
Further work by King (1994) expanded on this student guided question generation,
and attempted to explore the role of personal control in the effectiveness of guided question
generation in an educational psychology course. The reason for exploring control stems from
the fact that individuals using guided question generation have a great deal of control over
both the questions asked and the answers generated. Although they are guided by the generic
question stems, learners are free to choose which of those to use and free to create whatever
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
specific questions they wish on whatever aspect of content they choose. King (1994) claim
that from a motivational perspective, putting students in control may improve their
achievements, due to enhancement of their intrinsic motivation and sense of autonomy. The
researchers also tested personal locus of control – the belief that we determine our own fate
and responsible for our successes and failures (Rotter, 1966) which is considered as an
internal locus of control versus the opposite belief of no control which constitutes and
external locus of control. Their study assessed the effects of control type over the questions
used in the guided question generation strategy by comparing student-generated questioning
(learner control) with provided questions (experimenter control) and to determine how
individual differences in locus of control might influence questioning performance.
In light of King (1992)’s findings, it is apparent that we need to further explore
additional thinking skills and cognitive abilities which are related to question asking. This is
especially pertinent since research has shown that in young children better questions can lead
to more accurate problem-solving and higher cognitive flexibility (Legare et al., 2013).
Surprisingly, the role of questions in everyday problem solving, and especially among adults
has only recently been explored (Acar et al., 2023; Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al., 2024), and not
much research exists on the subject.
Interim summary
This section explores the role of effective questioning in enhancing learning and
cognitive development, particularly in educational settings. Researchers highlight the
importance of scaffolding question-asking skills, which develop through stages such as
initiation, formulation, and evaluation. Studies reveal that teaching students to generate their
own questions, especially through guided strategies like question stems, enhances critical
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
thinking, motivation, and material comprehension. The section also emphasizes the
importance of empowering students to take control of their learning through self-generated
questioning, which aligns with their personal experiences and knowledge base, which has
been linked to improved engagement and intrinsic motivation (King, 1992, 1994). Yet,
despite progress in enhancing question asking abilities, the role of questioning in creative
problem-solving, a crucial part of life, remains underexplored, signaling a need for further
research in this domain.
5.4. The role of Question asking in everyday problem solving
Multiple cognitive models of creative problem-solving exist, and they all include an
initial phase or process called problem finding, problem identification, or problem
construction (Finke et al., 1992; Merrifield et al., 1962; Mumford et al., 1991; Sternberg,
1988). Problem finding is considered the first stage of the creative problem-solving process
but is still far from understood (Abdulla et al., 2020; Alabbasi et al., 2023). It can be defined
in general terms as the process or processes that precede problem solving (i.e., occurring
before a problem can be solved). Operationally, it may involve the identification of a problem
or the definition of an ambiguous situation into a workable problem (see also Fan et al., 2024)
or the raising of questions from ill-defined problem situations (Getzels, 1979; Runco, 1994).
Ill-defined problems often entail multiple, even conflicting, goals (Getzels, 1979;
Schraw et al., 1995). There are multiple possible approaches to solve ill-defined problems.
Before ideas can be generated, then evaluated, and selected for implementation, a process is
needed to conceptualize and structure the ill-defined problem. During the problem finding
process, an individual identifies, assesses, and structures a problem (Reiter-Palmon &
Robinson, 2009). This stage acts as a foundation for subsequent cognitive processes.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Constructing a new or unique approach to solving a problem makes the generation of creative
ideas for solving the problem possible.
During the problem finding process, an individual identifies, assesses, and structures a
problem (Reiter-Palmon & Robinson, 2009). Constructing a new or unique approach to solving
a problem makes the generation of creative ideas for solving the problem possible (Yang et al.,
2022). Operationally, this process involves the identification of a problem or the definition of
an ambiguous situation into a workable problem or the raising of questions from ill-defined
problem situations (Getzels, 1979; Runco & Nemiro, 1994). Importantly, this process includes
asking questions that would facilitate the structuring of the ill-defined problem such as
questions regarding the goals of the problem-solving effort, identification of constraints, or
further information needed (Mumford et al., 1994). That is, better questions asked at this early
stage of creative problem-solving likely leads to better ways to identify and frame the problem,
leading to more creative solutions.
Past research indicates that problem finding and construction are positively related to
creative problem-solving (Mumford et al., 1991; Mumford et al., 1994; Reiter-Palmon et al.,
1997; Reiter-Palmon et al., 1998) and to divergent thinking measures of creativity (Abdulla et
al., 2020; Alabbasi et al., 2023; Arreola & Reiter-Palmon, 2016).
Asking questions is also known to play a critical role in creative problem solving itself
(Acar et al., 2023; Raz et al., 2023; Reiter-Palmon et al., 1998). For example, Reiter-Palmon et
al. (1997) have found that people who excel at problem-solving tend to restate problems as
questions, which further allows them to structure the problem in a novel and effective way,
leading to improved creativity. The researchers measured problem-finding ability based on the
quality and originality of these questions. Further, work by Reiter-Palmon et al. (2023)
indicates that one important aspect during this process is evaluating and integrating conflicting
goals. When individuals can ask questions about conflicting goals and address them in the
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
solution, more creative solutions emerge. However, much is still unknown about the specific
types of questions asked and their relationship to creative thinking. Furthermore, high and
average achieving students use question asking more effectively than do less proficient learners
(King, 1994). But are the right kinds of questions – ones that promote learning, not rote
learning, or recall – asked at the appropriate time? Close-ended (one correct answer) questions
can stifle performance by creating confusion, intimidation, and by limiting creative thinking
and problem-solving (Tofade et al., 2013). Ortlieb et al. (2012) argue that the ultimate goal of
education should be advancing beyond the use of closed questioning style as its only means to
assess the learners, with Raphael and McMahon (1994) stating “If you only ever use closed
questions, then you are never going to encourage your learners to think”. The researchers
advocate for advancing open-ended questions, which are high-level questions that encourage
the learner to contemplate and explore before determining an answer (Ortlieb et al., 2012).
Another possible way to represent different types of question asking is through the
lens of creativity research, where open-ended questions are an example of divergent thinking
- multiple possible solutions generated (Acar & Runco, 2019), while closed-ended questions
are termed a part of convergent thinking - convergence on one solution (Cortes et al., 2019;
Guilford, 1956; Jones & Estes, 2015). Finke (1995) drew a helpful distinction between
divergent and convergent problem-solving, based on divergent and convergent thinking.
Insight problems (i.e., those that likely involve a sudden feeling of insight regarding the
answer) tend to involve convergent thinking, where a single answer is found that makes sense
of presumably unrelated problem elements. Conversely, divergent thinking occurs when one
finds many, original ideas for an existing, known structure.
Thus, as in creativity, problem solving may require both open- and closed-ended
thinking to provide multiple ideas leading to a single correct conclusion (Lee & Therriault,
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
2013). It then seems that to understand the role of question asking and problem solving, a
division must be made between open and closed questions and open and close-ended
problem-solving tasks. Recent research by Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al. (2024) examines the
effects of an open-ended question asking task – the AQT on close and open-ended problem-
solving tasks.
Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al. (2024) compared two problem-solving tasks involving
open- and closed-ended thinking. In their first study, participants completed the AQT (Raz et
al., 2023), a creative questions task, a close-ended (one possible solution) Stumpers task
(Bar-Hillel, 2021) - a set of riddles with varying difficulty levels, and the alternative uses task
(AUT), a common creativity measure (Acar & Runco, 2019; Runco & Acar, 2012). The
complexity of AQT responses were assessed using the Bloom’s taxonomy (Bloom et al.,
1956). No correlation was found between AQT complexity and the accuracy (number of
correct answers) for the Stumpers Task, although accuracy was correlated with AUT
creativity. In their second study, participants completed the AQT, AUT, and an open-ended
(many possible solutions) creative problem solving (CPS) task, involving workplace
dilemmas (Reiter-Palmon et al., 2009; Reiter-Palmon et al., 1998). Participants open-ended
responses were evaluated for originality and quality (Luchini et al., 2023). A positive
correlation was observed between AQT complexity and the quality of solutions in the CPS
task, albeit not with AUT creativity, which was related to CPS originality. This suggests that
complex, open-ended questions play a significant role in generating creative solutions to
ambiguous open-ended problems. By distinguishing between open- and closed-ended
questions and tasks, they stress the importance of promoting higher-order questioning
strategies which can enhance problem-solving and creative thinking in everyday contexts.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Interim summary
This section highlights the role of question-asking in everyday problem-solving,
emphasizing its connection to creativity and the initial problem-finding process. Ill-defined
problems require identifying and structuring goals, constraints, and approaches, where asking
effective questions facilitates novel and creative solutions. Research demonstrates that
restating problems as questions improves problem structuring and creative outcomes,
particularly when addressing conflicting goals. High-level, open-ended questions foster
divergent thinking, encouraging multiple solutions and exploration, whereas closed-ended
questions promote convergent thinking. Balancing both types of questions is essential for
effective divergent and convergent problem-solving.
6. Questions in context
Social and contextual factors play a crucial role in shaping how individuals,
particularly children, who have yet to master information seeking strategies, engage in
question-asking. Question-asking is not merely a cognitive skill but also a deeply social act
that depends on the environment, the presence of knowledgeable agents, and the
appropriateness of the situation (Huang et al., 2017; Ransom et al., 2024). For children, who
are surrounded by more knowledgeable adults, these contextual elements influence how and
when they seek information to resolve uncertainties and expand their understanding of the
world (Ronfard et al., 2018; Ruggeri et al., 2017). Thus, to understand question asking in a
deeper and more fundamental fashion, we must delve further into where it first begins
developing – childhood.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
6.1. Question asking in children
Children engage in question asking all the time, as they are usually surrounded by
more knowledgeable adults, such that asking questions is crucial for developing their
understanding of the world (Ruggeri & Lombrozo, 2015). Through exploration and
experimentation, they can begin to construct knowledge of the physical and social world
around them (Ronfard et al., 2018). Due to their ability to query other people whenever they
want, they can actively gather information and integrate it through learning and cognitive
development and theorizing (Ronfard et al., 2018). As in adults (Raz et al., 2023) children
use questions of differing levels of abstraction and complexity, by leveraging the hierarchical
structure of questions, and ruling out multiple hypotheses at once (Ruggeri et al., 2021).
Empirical research, including Betsch et al. (2014), Legare et al. (2013), Jirout and
Klahr (2020), and Ronfard et al. (2018), consistently show that children's ability to ask
effective and informative questions improves with age, starting in early childhood. These
studies reveal that as children grow older, they shift from simple inquiry strategies, such as
hypothesis-scanning, to more complex, constraint-seeking approaches that optimize
information gain. For example, by asking “do you like vegetables”, instead of “do you like
carrots?” they can rule out multiple options at once. This progression is influenced by
cognitive development, social context, and individual traits like curiosity and personality, as
demonstrated by studies like Ransom et al. (2024) and Liquin & Lombrozo (2020). Given the
pivotal role that question-asking plays in daily life, the developmental trajectory of these
skills highlights the importance of focusing on how and when children begin to inquire and
seek information. Thus, understanding the roots of inquiry in childhood is essential for
fostering environments that support intellectual curiosity and efficient learning from a young
age and understanding the root of information seeking and question asking in their early
stages of development (Ronfard et al., 2018).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Yet, despite its importance in education and cognitive development, much is still
unknown regarding question asking in children. This is due to research of this topic is split
across multiple disciplines, such as psychology, linguistics, and education (Ronfard et al.,
2018). Ronfard et al. (2018) provide an encompassing review of the literature and formulate
their own framework for describing the development and variability of question asking in
infancy and elementary school years and focusing on the use of questions as information
seeking methods of resolving uncertainty or knowledge gaps. Ronfard et al. (2018) propose
dividing question asking into four components. They are (1) initiation (realization that
information is needed), (2) formulation (What to ask and phrasing), (3) expression (Whether
the information is available and acceptable to ask for), and (4) response evaluation and
follow-up (Assessing answer and need for additional information). Ronfard et al. (2018)
argue that these components are present in adults and also throughout development in
children, while they learn to focus and refine their questions and information seeking
strategies. While the four components are presented in order, they do not claim that they
occur in this manner, as the process of asking questions is a dynamic and iterative process.
Ronfard et al. (2018) provide empirical evidence for the existence of these four
(12- to 35-months-old), preschool (3- to 5-years-old) and elementary school (6- to 10- years-
old). It seems that across age, children’s ability to seek information through questions
develops quickly between infancy, preschool and their elementary school years Ronfard et al.
(2018). To initiate request for information they must first realize that information is lacking –
whether by pointing at novel information at infancy Kovács et al., 2014) or by requesting
information when they have identified inconsistencies and contradictions in their
understanding by preschool years (Tizard & Hughes, 2008). After realizing that information
is lacking, they then decide what information to look for, with background information
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
shaping these questions and children’s content expectations (Greif et al., 2006). To obtain an
acceptable and informative reply, they must then identify knowledgeable agents – whether by
asking more frequently when faced with a knowledgeable speaker (Begus & Southgate,
2012) as evidenced in infants, or by considering additional features of the task and context in
preschool years (Fitneva et al., 2013). Lastly, they must try to actively monitor and respond to
the answers given. Evidence shows that both toddlers and preschoolers expect informative
replies to their questions and follow-up when they do not receive an appropriate reply
(Chouinard et al., 2007).
Summary of empirical evidence for the four components in childhood, adapted from Ronfard
et al. (2018)
Comp. Initiation Formulation Expression Response
Age Evaluation
12-month-old infants Questions asked 16-months-old infants 18-months-old,
increased their by 1- and 2-year- were more likely to children persist in
pointing because they old infants point to a novel object asking a question if
realized that there was suggests that their when interacting with a they do not receive
Infancy and
new or unexpected questions knowledgeable an informative
toddlerhood
information to be increasingly informant than when response, but rarely
learned from the reflect a concern interacting with an do so when they
experimenter whose about other incompetent informant receive an
responses were novel people’s beliefs, (Begus & Southgate, informative response
(Kovács et al., 2014) desires, 2012) (Chouinard et al.,
knowledge, mental 2007)
states, and
personality
(Chouinard et al.,
2007)
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Conversations between 4- and 5-year-old Children tended to ask At this age children
children and their children request more questions about more often provide
parents reveal that different kinds of causal relations to adults their own explanation
preschoolers also seek information for than to other children or ask a follow-up
information in unfamiliar artifacts (Davis, 1932) 3- to 5- question when they
Preschool
response to uncertainty (i.e., function) year-old children direct do not receive an
about their than for unfamiliar food questions at adults explanation to their
understanding of a animals (e.g., but toy questions at causal questions than
concept or idea (Tizard eating habits, children (VanderBorght when they do
& Hughes, 2008) habitat) (Greif et & Jaswal, 2009) (Frazier et al., 2009)
al., 2006)
Research reviewed in Elementary school 5- to 8-year-old children Children were more
(Tizard & Hughes, children ask more are able to distinguish likely to ask
2008)demonstrates informative between knowable and constraint seeking
Elementary
that already by the end questions than unknowable pieces of questions that
School
of the preschool years, their preschool information (Ronfard et “explored” possible
children seek counterparts al., 2018) answers rather than
information in (Legare et al., hypothesis scanning
response to the same 2013) questions that
cues as adults. “exploited” what
(Ronfard et al., 2018) they knew, when they
receive a “no”
answer to a question
(Ruggeri &
Lombrozo, 2015)
It seems that many factors play a role in the development of question asking. Factors
such as language development, in which research has shown that children’s mastery of the
syntax of WH-questions facilitates their ability to ask for explanations (Bloom et al., 1982),
or cognitive flexibility - the ability to sort information along multiple dimensions, which has
been shown to significantly correlate with amounts of constraint seeking questions
preschoolers ask (Legare et al., 2013). Children’s working memory is an additional factor
studied, where age-related developments parallel age-related developments in children’s
ability to manage multiple steps of the questioning process (Fitneva et al., 2013).
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Despite the extensive review by Ronfard et al. (2018), the authors conclude that
although many factors influence the emergence of question asking in humans, the uneven
research on components across different ages makes piecing together a fully coherent
developmental story of question asking somewhat challenging. They claim that information
on many cognitive skills related to question asking is still lacking, in addition to
understanding the mechanisms behind the frequency and quality of the questions asked.
Although the research on question asking remains incomplete, one key factor that has
emerged as a potential driver is curiosity, which plays a crucial role in motivating the pursuit
of missing information.
Legare et al. (2013) and Ruggeri et al. for example, have explored how children
between 4- and 6-years old use questions as problem-solving strategies and how they identify
the most informative questions. They both found that older children (6-year-olds) asked more
constraint-seeking questions (questions which eliminate multiple possibilities at once, as
opposed to hypothesis-scanning questions that target single hypotheses) compared to younger
children. Legare et al. (2013) also showed that the number of constraint-seeking questions
asked was a key predictor of problem-solving accuracy. These studies highlight that while
children begin using questions to gather relevant information early on, their ability to
consistently apply this information to solve complex problems and design sophisticated
question-asking strategies develops later.
Ransom et al. (2024) investigated how children's understanding of the
appropriateness of asking questions develops with age and is influenced by social context and
personality. 150 children (aged 4–8) and 100 adults watched vignettes featuring a child with a
question and were asked to indicate whether it was appropriate for the child to ask the
question in different social contexts. Results show that younger children are more likely to
endorse question-asking in inappropriate contexts (e.g., when an adult is busy), while older
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
children and adults demonstrate a better understanding of social norms for question-asking.
The study also reveals that personality traits, such as conscientiousness and openness, predict
individuals' question-asking behavior, highlighting the interplay between social learning and
individual differences.
Interim summary
This section explores the role of question-asking in children’s cognitive and social
development, emphasizing its importance as a tool for learning and problem-solving.
Research demonstrates that children’s ability to ask effective, informative questions develops
significantly with age. The developmental progression highlights the influence of factors such
as language mastery, cognitive flexibility, and working memory in shaping question-asking
abilities. While research provides evidence for varying question asking components in
children across different developmental stages, gaps remain in understanding the mechanisms
behind the frequency and quality of children’s questions. Studies also highlight the role of
curiosity as a primary driver, motivating children to resolve knowledge gaps. Finally, the
claim that personality and social context further influence question-asking, with older
children developing a nuanced understanding of when it is socially appropriate to ask
questions, prompts further investigation of the role of social discourse and context in the
question asking process.
6.2. The role of questions in social discourse
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
In social contexts, the ability to ask insightful and even creative questions plays a key
role in navigating interpersonal dynamics. Thus, the findings from Raz, Reiter-Palmon et al.
(2024) on the importance of open-ended, complex question-asking in creative problem-
solving can also be extended to social discourse. Just as complex questions in problem-
solving tasks are linked to higher quality of solutions, thoughtful, complex questions in social
interactions can help clarify and solve misunderstandings, promote deeper understanding, and
promote higher quality interactions (Berger & Kellermann, 1983; Hart et al., 2021). In social
discourse, asking sensitive questions can play a crucial role in understanding and navigating
complex social dynamics, such as relationships, personal values, and economic decisions. By
avoiding such questions, individuals may miss important opportunities to clarify
misunderstandings or gain insight into others' perspectives (Hart et al., 2021).
Hart et al. (2021) explored how individuals often avoid asking sensitive questions in
social interactions due to the fear of making others uncomfortable or being viewed
negatively. Through five experimental studies, the researchers show that this fear is often
misguided, as respondents tend to react more positively or neutrally to sensitive questions
than askers anticipate. Sensitive questions, despite the potential for discomfort, can yield
valuable information and foster deeper social interactions. The research underscores the
importance of recognizing that, while certain questions may seem intrusive, they can also
serve to build rapport, invite reciprocity, and strengthen interpersonal connections when
approached thoughtfully. This highlights the significant role of question-asking in shaping the
quality of social interactions and managing communication outcomes in everyday life.
Earlier work done by Berger and Kellermann (1983) examined how the structure and
content of questions significantly influence social interactions, shaping how individuals
exchange knowledge and manage interpersonal communication. Their study highlights the
diverse functions of questions in maintaining conversations, whether to seek clarification,
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
control the flow of dialogue, or elicit specific information about others. Furthermore, the
research explores how individuals employ questions strategically, not only to gain
information but also to establish social control, demonstrating the dual epistemic and
regulatory roles of questions in everyday discourse. The study shows how individuals adapt
their questioning strategies based on their conversational goals, balancing the need to gather
information with the necessity of maintaining social appropriateness. This dynamic reveals
the intricate relationship between question-asking and the broader context of social
interaction, where effective questioning can lead to deeper understanding and better
communication. As such, the ability to ask and respond to questions appropriately is a
fundamental component of successful social discourse, influencing everything from initial
interactions to ongoing relationships (Berger & Kellermann, 1983).
However, asking questions in social contexts such as asking for help is not always
productive or seen in a positive light. Research by Gibson et al. (2018) examines the
differences between reactive (i.e., assistance provided in response to a request) and
anticipatory (i.e., assistance offered or provided in advance of being asked) helping. They
find that anticipatory helping; asking if the recipient needs help, especially from helpers with
higher status, is more self-threatening than reactive helping; the recipient asks for help
themselves. Thus, recipients are less likely to accept this help and more likely to lower their
evaluations of both the helper’s performance and their relationship with the helper. We can
see that the use of questions in social environments such as the workplace requires
understanding of social ques and strategic use of questions.
The strategic use of questions in social discourse, as demonstrated by Berger and
Kellermann (1983), highlights their essential role in shaping interactions and maintaining
communication, a concept that becomes increasingly relevant in the context of emerging
technologies like artificial intelligence (AI). As AI models continue to evolve, their ability to
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
mimic human questioning strategies and engage in creative problem-solving opens up new
directions for exploring how questions function in human-AI interactions. Just as questions
guide and structure human dialogue, they are now central to how humans and AI collaborate,
with AI responding to prompts and providing information in ways that parallel human social
exchanges. This raises important considerations about the future role of questioning in these
evolving human-AI relationships, where AI can both enhance and potentially reshape how
questions facilitate creativity and problem-solving in modern discourse (Rafner et al., 2023;
Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al., 2024).
Interim summary
This section explored the role of complex question-asking in enhancing social
discourse and interpersonal dynamics: they serve both epistemic functions (gathering
information) and regulatory functions (controlling conversations). Thoughtful questions can
clarify misunderstandings, promote deeper understanding, and improve communication
quality. Sensitive questions, when approached thoughtfully, can foster rapport, invite
reciprocity, and strengthen relationships by yielding valuable insights into others’
perspectives. However, not all questions are met with the same responses and emphasize the
role of different types of asking for help and how it can affect how you are perceived. These
findings are also related to emerging technologies like AI, where questioning strategies play a
central role in facilitating human-AI interactions.
6.3. Question asking and AI
Many fields including the field of creativity and problem-solving research are now
experiencing and contending with the rise of artificial intelligence (AI) models such as
ChatGPT and GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) which are becoming increasingly popular tools in
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
many linguistic Human-Computer Interactions. As Hubert et al. (2024) state, the emergence
of publicly accessible AI large language models such as ChatGPT has given rise to global
conversations on the implications of AI capabilities and the potential for co-creative
cooperation between human and machine agents (Rafner et al., 2023).
Co-creativity is generally defined as multiple parties contributing to a creative process
in a blended manner (Davis, 2013; Kantosalo & Toivonen, 2016; Sasson-Lazovsky, Raz, et
al., 2024). Co-creativity is becoming especially relevant in the age of generative artificial
intelligence (AI) models (Rafner et al., 2023), where highly advanced generative AI can now
begin to match humans in creativity tests (Cropley, 2023; Hubert et al., 2024; Raz, Reiter-
Palmon, et al., 2024).
Recently, work done by Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al. (2024) attempted to test whether
links found between open-ended question asking and close and open-ended problem-solving
generalize to AI models, and who these same models compare in terms of performance to
humans. In their research, AI (GPT-4) agents (N = 100) completed the AQT, AUT, and the
Stumper and CPS tasks previously given to humans as described at the start of this chapter.
GPT-4 was significantly more creative, had more complex questions, solved more stumpers
and had higher quality CPS solutions. Surprisingly, human participant’s and GPT-4’s CPS
originality was not significantly different. As in humans, GPT-4’s AQT originality and
question complexity were strongly related with open (CPS), but not closed (Stumpers)
problem solving. As such, the researchers found a significant link between question
complexity and open-ended—and not closed-ended—problem-solving in humans and in AI.
Thus, these results provide further proof of AI creative abilities surpassing humans in most
metrics, but not all. Importantly, these results highlight the role of question-asking in open-
ended problem solving,– the first stage of the creative process, and offer intriguing results
that perhaps something similar is happening in AI.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Many social games use questions to proceed and accomplish certain goals of the game
(Zhangozha, 2020). These games may thus reflect aspects of natural question-asking
processes that I aim to further characterize and elucidate. Recent work done by Sasson-
Lazovsky et al. (2024; 2023) explored human question-asking strategies through interactive
AI powered games which combine AI large language models with classical gaming
mechanics. One such AI game is The Akinator, a worldwide popular online game, employs
an AI algorithm which asks questions to deduce the character occupying the player’s
thoughts. The Akinator sparks significant intrigue due to its remarkable performance and
Kenett, 2023), the authors collected extensive datasets of questions posed by the Akinator
across thousands of game instances. They then conducted an exploratory data analysis,
focusing on the game's question-asking process and examining the strategies used to reduce
the field of possible characters. They employed topic modeling techniques (LDA and BERT)
(Grootendorst, 2022; Vayansky & Kumar, 2020) to analyze the questions asked and found
that the Akinator uses strategies similar to humans use to resolve uncertainties.
These studies illustrate the potential inherent in analyzing such text-based online
question-asking games. Specifically, they demonstrated the viability of empirically analyzing
question-posing games and their temporal progression, a pursuit pivotal in unravelling the
intricacies of human question-asking. However, the games’ IP protection prevented them
from reaching a deeper understanding of its question-asking algorithm. To address these
limitations, Sasson-Lazovsky et al. (2024) developed a new game, “Spot the Spy” (STS).
STS is a hidden object game where players engage with the game through the process of
close-ended question-asking. Hidden object games are a popular genre of games in which
players must locate targeted objects in a detailed scene. Here they must find out who is the
spy in a room full of people, by asking questions that lead towards the right person
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
differences in intelligence, and the complexity of question asked during the game, were
related to performance in the game (Sasson-Lazovsky, Cook, et al., 2024). The study
measured the effectiveness of the questions using a novel metric called the Question
Effectiveness Measure (QEM), which quantifies how well questions help eliminate suspects.
Their findings suggest a positive relationship between intelligence and question-asking
effectiveness, highlighting that players with higher intelligence scores asked more strategic
questions, reducing the number of guesses needed to identify the spy.
Thus, both studies examined the relation between human question-asking and AI
through the use of interactive games, exploring how AI systems and human cognition
intersect in question-based tasks. The AI in both cases plays a crucial role in facilitating the
question-asking process, either by generating questions (Akinator) or responding to human
queries (Spot the Spy), demonstrating the growing role of AI in enhancing and simulating
human question-asking behavior in interactive environments. These studies both highlight the
potential of AI to both model and engage with human cognitive processes in dynamic,
question-based tasks.
A more recent theoretical paper by Sasson-Lazovsky et al. (2024) aims to push the
theoretical discourse on question-asking and AI further by proposing a novel claim that
prompt-engineering, the art of crafting cues for language models such as GPT-4, and
question-asking, form a symbiotic relationship which involves similar underlying traits.
Sasson-Lazovsky et al. (2024) suggest that prompt-engineering and question-asking are two
intricately connected endeavours that share a common foundation of essential skills, such as
creativity, critical thinking and empathy. Just as master painters skilfully manipulate their
brushes on a blank canvas, prompt engineers and question-askers craft the perfect prompts
and inquiries for engaging and thought-provoking interactions. This is accomplished by
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
utilizing tools of creativity, precision, and adaptability to retrieve information in an intelligent
and insightful way.
Sasson-Lazovsky et al. (2024) further highlight the possibility of leveraging existing
theories of question asking such as Bloom’s taxonomy and tailoring prompts accordingly by
aligning them with each level of Bloom's taxonomy. Key terms, which are verbs that fit their
respective Bloom level, can provide a starting point for crafting effective prompts. For
example, the Bloom level - Remembering, which involves retrieving relevant knowledge, can
be described with key terms such as ‘define’, ‘describe’, ‘label’, ‘list’, or ‘identify’. We can
then use these terms to craft the following prompt - “List all the planets in the Solar System
Example Prompts and Key Terms for LLMs Corresponding to Bloom Taxonomy Levels
Bloom’s taxonomy Bloom level description Key terms Example prompt
level
Remembering Retrieving relevant knowledge Define, describe, “List all the planets in the
label, list, identify Solar System in order from the
Sun”
Understanding Determining the meaning of Contrast, “Explain the significance of
instructional messages, generalize, outline, the water cycle to Earth’s
including oral, written, and explain, represent climate system”
graphic communication
Applying Carrying out or using a Apply, examine, “Given a dataset of weather
procedure in a given situation interpret, transfer, conditions, predict whether it
predict, organize will rain tomorrow using a
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
simple linear regression
model”
Analyzing Breaking material into its Discriminate, “Compare and contrast the
constituent parts and detecting compare, economic impacts of
how the parts relate to one differentiate, renewable vs. non-renewable
another structure energy sources”
Evaluating Making judgments based on Conclude, appraise, “Assess the effectiveness of
criteria and standards assess, justify, the recent public health
judge, review campaign on reducing
smoking rates among
teenagers”
Creating Putting elements together to Compose, design, “Design a sustainable city plan
form a novel, coherent whole compile, that incorporates green energy,
synthesize, rewrite, efficient public transport, and
formulate supports local biodiversity”
Note –Bloom’s taxonomy level: The corresponding level in the Bloom taxonomy. Bloom
level description: What this level entails in term of cognitive mastery.
Key terms: Important actions or verbs which describe this level. Example prompt: Guidelines
for phrasing prompts according to each Bloom level. Adapted from Sasson-Lazvosky et al.
(2024).
Sasson-Lazovsky et al. (2024) also suggest that the use of constraint-seeking
questions can significantly improve the efficiency of the searching process, by targeting
features shared by multiple objects or options. As previously reviewed, these questions help
eliminate several possibilities at each step (Legare et al., 2013; Ruggeri & Lombrozo, 2015;
Simmonds, 1990), and as a result, the language model can narrow down its focus and provide
more accurate and relevant responses. In contrast, hypothesis-scanning questions are
designed to test specific self-sufficient hypotheses and eliminate only one option at a
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
time(Simmonds, 1990). These questions may require more iterations to reach a conclusive
answer, as they explore individual possibilities in a more systematic manner. Prompt
engineers can leverage hypothesis-scanning questions to encourage the language model to
consider various potential solutions and systematically evaluate each option's validity.
Interim summary
This section examines question-asking, AI, and creativity, highlighting AI's growing
role in mimicking and enhancing human cognitive processes. These findings showcase AI's
capability to simulate human-like creativity and problem-solving dynamics through effective
questioning strategies. Critically, theoretical advancements suggest that question-asking and
prompt-engineering share foundational skills such as creativity and critical thinking. By
integrating established theories of question-asking with AI capabilities, this section highlights
the potential for co-creativity between humans and AI, where both sides contribute to
dynamic, question-driven problem-solving and knowledge creation.
7. Discussion
The current review offers a comprehensive and current overview of the theoretical
role of question asking, its relation to cognitive capacities, how it is differentiated in relation
to specific context, and proposes a comprehensive framework (QuINS) for understanding
question asking. Yet, the empirical research of question asking is relatively new, and much is
still unknown regarding the cognitive and neural mechanisms that realize human question
asking. This review highlights the multifaceted role of question-asking across a broad range
of cognitive domains, such as cognitive development, creativity, and social discourse. Central
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
to many cognitive processes, questions not only serve as tools for acquiring information
(Fitneva et al., 2013; Graesser et al., 1993) but also act as mechanisms to fill knowledge gaps
(Ram, 1991), resolve contradictions (Flammer, 1981), and minimize uncertainty (Ronfard et
al., 2018).
Theories of question-asking, such as those by Kearsley (1976), Flammer (1981), and
Ram (1991), highlight its role as a mechanism for bridging knowledge gaps, fostering
problem-solving, and shaping how we acquire and refine our understanding of the world.
Current theories coupled with research (Acar et al., 2023; Coenen et al., 2019; Costa &
Kallick, 2015; Crupi et al., 2018; Hart et al., 2021; Kedrick et al., 2023) propose that asking
questions is a structured cognitive process that involves multiple stages, from identifying
knowledge gaps to formulating queries aimed at resolving them. They also suggest that
questions play a vital role in social regulation by guiding discourse, structuring conversations,
and ensuring that interactions are meaningful and productive (Gibson et al., 2018; Hart et al.,
2021).
The studies reviewed here empirically examine how individuals and especially
children use questions in controlled environments. Studies such as those by Ruggeri and
Lombrozo (2015) and Legare et al. (2013) focus on how children develop more sophisticated
question-asking strategies as they grow, moving from simple information-seeking queries to
more complex questions designed to rule out multiple possibilities at once. These findings
offer a developmental perspective on how questioning evolves, showing that children
progressively refine their ability to use questions as powerful tools for learning and problem-
solving.
Curiosity and creativity are also key drivers of effective question-asking, linking
question complexity to enhanced learning, problem-solving, and creativity. Research
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
highlights the importance of fostering question skills across contexts, from early education,
where intentional teacher strategies and self-generated questioning improve cognitive
engagement and motivation (King, 1992, 1994; Salmon & Barrera, 2021), to advanced
problem-solving, where open-ended questions enhance creativity while close-ended ones fall
short (Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al., 2024). In social discourse, thoughtful questions improve
communication and foster deeper connections (Berger & Kellermann, 1983; Hart et al.,
2021), while frameworks like Ronfard et al. (2018) map the development of questioning as a
strategic tool from childhood onward. The rise of AI, exemplified by GPT-4, reveals potential
for co-creativity between humans and machines, with AI mimicking human question-asking
and facilitating dynamic problem-solving, educational innovation, and the future of cognitive
science (Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al., 2024; Sasson Lazovsky. et al., 2024).
Furthermore, the review demonstrates the importance of questions in educational
settings, where fostering better question-asking techniques can promote deeper understanding
and creative exploration (Chouinard et al., 2007; Jirout & Klahr, 2020; Legare et al., 2013;
Ruggeri & Lombrozo, 2015). In the context of AI, the review illuminates how the growing
capabilities of machines to generate and respond to complex questions could reshape human-
machine interactions (Booch et al., 2021; Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al., 2024; Sasson-Lazovsky,
Cook, et al., 2024; Sasson-Lazovsky, Raz, et al., 2024), with potential applications in
education (Chen et al., 2024), problem-solving (Raz, Luchini, et al., 2024), and creativity
enhancement (Sasson-Lazovsky, Raz, et al., 2024).
7.1. A general framework for the role of questions in information seeking
Based on the classic and contemporary theories on question asking reviewed here, we
propose a new theoretical framework for understanding question asking, Question-asking in
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Information Seeking (QuInS). The QuInS framework provides a comprehensive, integrative
model for understanding the dynamic process of question-asking and its role in information-
seeking behavior. Synthesizing insights from multiple theories and empirical studies, QuInS
conceptualizes question-asking as a six-stage, iterative process aimed at resolving knowledge
gaps, contradictions, and enhancing understanding.
The process begins with stimulus or knowledge gap recognition, where individuals
detect novel or inconsistent information, triggering the need to resolve discrepancies. This
recognition activates curiosity, an intrinsic motivator that drives inquiry and primes cognitive
engagement. The framework then moves to question formulation, where individuals construct
questions based on their existing knowledge, with creativity influencing the complexity and
structure of the questions. Questions may take forms such as constraint-seeking or
hypothesis-scanning, depending on the cognitive goals and strategies of the inquirer.
Following formulation, the expression and interaction stage ensures that questions are
presented appropriately within social and contextual norms, emphasizing productive
engagement and the selection of knowledgeable interlocutors. Upon receiving responses,
individuals engage in response evaluation, assessing the information's relevance, accuracy,
and utility in addressing the knowledge gap. If the response is insufficient, the process
transitions to iterative refinement, where follow-up questions or independent exploration are
employed to refine understanding and resolve remaining ambiguities.
This framework not only integrates cognitive, social, and contextual factors in
question-asking but also emphasizes its dynamic, goal-driven nature, making it a valuable
tool for advancing our understanding of inquiry and learning processes.
7.2. Limitations
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
A few limitations in our review exist. Firstly, the uneven research focus of question
asking studies across different age groups can differ greatly, such as adults and children,
which complicates our ability to make generalized claims about specific age groups.
Secondly, many of the empirical studies discussed are conducted in controlled environments,
which may not fully capture the complexity of real-world question-asking, particularly in
social and professional contexts. As such, more work is needed on ecological ways to
measure question asking (e.g., Sasson-Lazovsky, Cook, et al., 2024; Sasson & Kenett, 2023).
Finaly, due to the many different contexts and roles that questions play in our daily
interactions, it is difficult to empirically study all the different aspects of question asking and
information seeking behaviors. Even a participant in a study asking for clarification of the
study instructions is in itself exhibiting information-seeking behavior, which can further
complicate our understanding.
These limitations highlight the complexity and challenge in studying question asking
in empirical research. However, the increasing amount of recent empirical research on
question asking demonstrates the feasibility of conducting such research. Only through the
advancement of rigorous and novel experiments and methodologies to study question asking,
can we begin to understand its exact nature.
7.3. Further Research
Looking ahead, further research is needed to explore the developmental trajectory of
question-asking across different age groups, particularly in adulthood, where question-asking
behaviors remain underexplored. Additionally, future studies should investigate the cognitive
mechanisms that drive question-asking and their neural correlates, which may provide deeper
insights into the biological basis of curiosity and inquiry. As AI continues to advance, there is
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
a growing need to explore how human-AI collaboration can enhance question generation and
problem-solving in both educational and professional settings. Integrating question-asking
theories into AI systems could lead to the development of more effective co-creative tools
that empower users to engage in more complex and meaningful inquiry, ultimately enhancing
both individual and collective learning.
By integrating classic and current theories into a new general theory on the role of
question asking in information seeking, we bring forward a nuanced understanding of how
questions function as tools to bridge knowledge gaps and resolve contradictions. The
significance of this review lies in its multidisciplinary approach—synthesizing insights from
cognitive psychology, linguistics, education, and AI—offering a holistic perspective on how
questions serve as a core mechanism for intellectual growth and adaptive learning. This
synthesis of question-asking across diverse fields highlights its far-reaching impact and sets
the stage for future research aimed at optimizing the role of inquiry in both human and AI-
driven contexts. Here, we highlight three different unexplored scientific frontiers in the
domain of question asking, that would propel our understanding of this critical human skill.
Elucidating the cognitive and neural mechanisms that realize question asking –
while recent work has advanced our understanding of how question asking is related to
cognitive capacities such as creativity, curiosity, learning, and problem solving (as reviewed
above), much is still unknown regarding its underlying cognitive and neural mechanisms.
Similar to previous psychometric studies conducted on creativity (Lee & Therriault, 2013;
Weiss et al., 2021), understanding how question asking relates to a broad range of cognitive
capacities (e.g., intelligence, attention, memory, cognitive control, etc.) will significantly
elucidate its nature. Furthermore, investigating the neural mechanisms that realize question
asking would shed new light on what neural systems are involved in question asking and how
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
such neural systems relate to general neural profiles that support high-level cognition, such as
creativity and intelligence (Frith et al., 2021).
Assessing individual differences in question asking – to date, most empirical
research on question asking has been conducted either on children (Ruggeri & Lombrozo,
2015; Ruggeri et al., 2017; Ruggeri et al., 2021), or young adults (Raz, Reiter-Palmon, et al.,
2024). However, much is still unknown about many other individual difference variables such
as: how question asking changes in healthy aging, how question asking changes with
increasing domain knowledge and expertise, how question asking varies across domains (e.g.,
art vs. science), or how question asking is impacted by psychopathology. Such insights can
potentially address the increasing rigidity expressed by older adults (Cosgrove et al., 2021),
help mitigate expert-generated functional fixedness (Wiley, 1998), or address issues of
domain specificity vs. domain generality of question asking, similar to open discussions in
creativity research (Plucker & Beghetto, 2004).
Can question asking be enhanced via training? While work done by King (1992)
shows that the use of student generated questioning helped students ask more thought-
provoking questions and to generate more elaborate explanations; and that these behaviors
lead to improved material understanding, it is apparent that we need to further explore
additional ways to enhance question asking ability. It is then possible to study short term
question-asking interventions, perhaps based on Bloom’s taxonomy, which can boost
question complexity and creativity. If these prove effective, they have the potential to
enhance teaching and learning practices and provide effective ways to promote creativity and
problem solving through better questioning practices.
7.4. Conclusion
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Questions are essential tools for seeking epistemic information, aiming to bridge
knowledge gaps, resolve contradictions, and achieve the asker's internal learning goals. They
evolve and manifest in various capacities throughout our lives, driven by temperamental
factors like creativity and curiosity, enabling us to take control of our learning and
development. Additionally, questions are crucial for understanding and interacting with
emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, machines, and language models, and
they have the potential to enhance the productivity of those working with these AI tools.
Ultimately, Question-asking stands as a cornerstone of human cognition, bridging knowledge
gaps and propelling creativity, problem-solving, and learning. As research continues to
unravel its complexities across domains and contexts, the growing integration of AI and
further research insights promise to not only complement but also transform our
understanding and application of this fundamental human ability.
In sum, the studies reviewed here highlight the central role that question-asking plays
across multiple domains, from cognitive development and education to social discourse and
AI-driven problem-solving. As we continue to explore the drivers and effects of question-
asking, particularly in the context of rapidly advancing AI technologies, it becomes clear that
mastering the art of asking questions is crucial for fostering curiosity, creativity, and effective
communication in both human and AI interactions.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories
Acknowledgements
None.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Funding
None.
Author contribution
CRediT Statement: Tuval Raz: Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft, Review &
Editing; Yoed N. Kenett: Supervision, Writing – Original Draft, Review & Editing.
Running head – A Review of question asking theories