PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 1
***This manuscript currently is under review and has not yet been published. Therefore, some
details of this manuscript may change as it proceeds through the publication process**
Psychometric Properties of the Personality Inventory for DSM-5 Brief Form:
Multimethod Associations and Self-Other Agreement
Kasey Stanton
University of Wyoming, Department of Psychology
Author ORCID: 0000-0002-4519-5214
Jenna Mohr
University of Wyoming, Department of Psychology
Helena Towne
University of Wyoming, Department of Psychology
Laura Hemphill
University of Wyoming, Department of Psychology
Christina G. McDonnell
University of Wyoming, Department of Psychology
Author ORCDID: 0000-0001-5152-2288
Author Note and Ethics Approval Information: This research received ethics board
permission from the University of Wyoming Institutional Review Board. Research procedures
complied with American Psychological Association ethical standards and with ethical standards
described in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki. All participants provided their informed consent.
Complete Interests and Funding Statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest or
competing interests to disclose. Correspondence concerning this manuscript should be addressed
to Kasey Stanton (kaseyjstanton@gmail.com).
Funding Statement and Acknowledgments: This research was funded using an American
Psychological Foundation research grant (Theodore Millon Grant in Personality Psychology), a
University of Wyoming College of Arts and Sciences Research and Creative Activity Grant, and
startup funds from the University of Wyoming awarded to Kasey Stanton.
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 1
Abstract
The Personality Inventory for DSM-5-Brief Form (PID-5-BF) has become widely used for
providing efficient self-report assessment of trait domains from the Alternative Model for
Personality Disorders (AMPD). Existing studies of the PID-5-BF’s psychometric properties have
been informative, but have relied largely on monomethod assessment. We advance research on
the PID-5-BF’s psychometrics and understanding of multimethod personality-psychopathology
associations by conducting analyses integrating self-report, informant, and interview measures.
As a second related aim, we examined the degree of self-informant convergence for AMPD
ratings based on brief trait assessment with the PID-5-BF. Adult participants (N = 235; 44%
currently accessing psychotherapy) completed self and interview measures of psychopathology
and substance use, with a subset of these participants (n = 116) also contributing informant data.
Results indicated that PID-5-BF scores generally showed theoretically consistent mono- and
cross-method associations, though some specific findings indicated possible discriminant validity
issues for select PID-5-BF scales. Self and informant AMPD trait ratings also converged
moderately, with self-rated negative affectivity and psychoticism mean levels slightly exceeding
informant-rated means. Thus, our study presents multimethod results supporting the self-report
PID-5-BF’s validity overall, while also advancing understanding of self- and informant-rated
trait associations when using brief trait measures. We draw on these results to discuss ideas for
sharpening dimensional assessment in research on PDs specifically and transdiagnostic
psychopathology more generally.
KEYWORDS: Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders; self-other agreement;
assessment; convergent validity; discriminant validity
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 2
Psychometric Properties of the Personality Inventory for DSM-5 Brief Form:
Multimethod Associations and Self-Other Agreement
Different versions of the Personality Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5; Krueger et al., 2012)
have been widely used to assess traits from the Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality
Disorders (AMPD) described in Section III of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
th
Disorders (currently 5 ed., text rev.; DSM–5-TR; American Psychiatric Association [APA],
2022; Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023). The 220-item PID-5 was developed to provide self-report
assessment of AMPD trait domains of negative affectivity, detachment, antagonism,
disinhibition, and psychoticism, as well as narrower facet traits within each domain (Krueger et
al., 2012). Psychometric studies generally support the 220-item PID-5’s validity and utility
(Barchi-Ferreira, Bel, & Osório, 2020), and both informant and short form versions of this
measure have since been developed (Markon et al., 2013; Maples et al., 2015). Abbreviated PID-
5 versions include a 100-item short form (PID-5-SF; Maples et al., 2015) that provides both
domain- and facet-level assessment, as well as the 25-item PID-5-Brief Form (PID-5-BF; APA,
2013), which can be used for efficient assessment of domains.
Longer PID-5 measure versions have utility for providing detailed trait assessment, but we
focus here on the strengths and limitations of literature based on the PID-5-BF. The PID-5-BF’s
brevity enables it to be incorporated into assessment protocols in repeated-measures treatment
research (Porcerelli et al., 2019; Rodriguez-Seijas et al., 2020), which is a key consideration
given that additional clinical implementation research is needed to guide the use of dimensional
models and measures in treatment settings (see Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023 for review). The
PID-5-BF also provides a useful option more generally in cases where researchers wish to
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 3
efficiently assess AMPD domains alongside a range of other constructs within study protocols
(Anderson et al., 2018; Gomez et al., 2020; Stanton et al., 2020).
Accumulating evidence supports the PID-5-BF’s psychometric properties, as a number of
studies support this measure’s internal structure and overall utility (e.g., Anderson et al., 2018;
Athar & Ebrahimi, 2023; Asadi et al., 2024; Hyatt et al., 2021). Although this is encouraging,
there are key gaps in the literature on the PID-5-BF’s psychometric properties and on AMPD
assessment more broadly. Specifically, studies generally have focused on self-report assessment
of both AMPD traits and other study variables, and reviews of this literature highlight a need for
incorporating multimethod assessment (Barchi-Ferreira, Bel, & Osório, 2020; Clark & Watson,
2022). Self-report assessment has specific strengths as described subsequently and is not
necessarily a limitation depending on study goals (Samuel et al., 2018). Psychometric research
using monomethod assessment also has informed understanding of how PID-5-BF scores
associate with a range of symptoms and functioning (e.g., Anderson et al., 2018; Cox et al.,
2024). However, examining PID-5-BF associations with other measure types, in addition to self-
report, permits more comprehensive tests of the validity of this measure and others.
In addition to advancing research on the PID-5-BF’s psychometrics, assessing AMPD traits
and other clinical variables across multiple methods concurrently within studies informs how
different information sources should be integrated in research and practice (Clark et al., 2020;
Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023). Self-report assessment may have advantages for assessing
emotional states and cognitions that are not observable to others, while also providing insight
into how individuals view themselves and interpret their experiences (Samuel et al., 2018).
Regarding strengths of informant report, informant ratings from family members, friends and
other sources can provide useful, incremental information when assessing more observable
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 4
behaviors and outcomes (e.g., narcissistic behaviors; Hopwood et al., 2008; Oltmanns et al.,
2014). Clinicians or clinical interviews represent another “informant” source (Samuel et al.,
2018), and examining convergence, or lack thereof, across self-report and interview ratings
offers another avenue for informing evidence-based assessment. For example, identifying
discrepancies in patient and clinician ratings of internalizing symptom severity and impairment
provides data guiding how to incorporate information from both sources into treatment planning
(Levin-Aspenson & Watson, 2018).
In this study, we advance assessment research and the psychometric literature on the PID-
5-BF specifically by explicating associations for PID-5-BF scores with other psychopathology
assessed across self-report and interview methods. Our study also integrated PID-5-BF informant
assessment. Inclusion of informant ratings permitted additional tests of validity, and we also
examined how PID-5-BF self and informant scores associated with one another to further
understanding of self-other agreement when using brief AMPD measures. Prior to reviewing
these goals in more detail, we contextualize our study aims by reviewing prior research
examining the PID-5-BF’s external associations, as well as self-other agreement research based
on PID-5 assessment.
Research on Associations with Other Measures of Personality and Psychopathology
Various PID-5 measure versions have featured prominently in PD research as reviewed
(Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023), and associations for AMPD trait domains with other clinical
constructs generally appear consistent regardless of which specific version is administered. For
example, self-report antagonism scores obtained using either the 220-item PID-5 or PID-5-BF
both associate robustly with narcissistic PD ratings (see Anderson et al., 2018 for review).
Ratings from AMPD measures such as the PID-5 also can be used to account for clinical
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 5
information provided by traditional PD categories (e.g., Anderson et al., 2018; though also see
Weekers et al., 2022), in addition to the AMPD potentially being a more valid PD model.
The PID-5 measures also have been used extensively outside of PD-specific research to
assess dimensions in transdiagnostic research (García et al., 2024; Stanton et al, 2020). In fact,
the PID-5 measures are recognized as useful tools for assessing dimensions from the
Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP), a framework intended to guide the
dimensional classification and assessment of symptoms spanning traditional DSM chapters
(Simms et al., 2022). Convergent associations for PID-5 ratings largely align with theoretical
expectations. For example, self-reported PID-5 Negative Affectivity associates strongly with
functional impairment and internalizing symptoms (Cox et al., 2024; Watson & Clark, 2020).
However, in addition to PID-5 Negative Affectivity, some PID-5 Psychoticism and Disinhibition
content shows strong associations with internalizing (Watson & Clark, 2020). Regarding other
possible discriminant validity concerns, different self-report PID-5 domain scores associate
strongly with one another in some samples (e.g., rs ≥ .70 for Psychoticism and Detachment;
Anderson et al., 2018; Porcerelli et al., 2019). Similar discriminant validity issues have been
identified for select informant PID-5 scales in the limited literature on informant trait
associations (Markon et al., 2013), and other theoretical reviews also highlight a need for
evaluating discriminant validity more carefully in personality-psychopathology studies more
generally (Stanton et al., 2024; Watts et al., 2023).
Research on the Convergence of Self- and Informant-Rated Traits
Literature using the full-length PID-5 and other measures for examining self-other PD trait
agreement can inform predictions for studies using the PID-5-BF at a general level. However,
research is needed to determine the extent to which results based on a brief 25-item trait
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 6
assessment mirror those based on much lengthier item sets. We also are not aware of research
directly comparing an informant-rated version of the PID-5-BF with the standard PID-5-BF self-
report format. Keeping these points in mind, research using the full-length PID-5 across
community and clinical samples indicates that self and informant ratings of the same AMPD
domains generally associate moderately (e.g., Botessi et al., 2018; Markon et al., 2013, Jopp &
South, 2015). Some studies indicate that self-other convergence for psychoticism may be weaker
than for other domains, due at least in part, to some PID-5 Psychoticism items assessing
cognitive tendencies (e.g., specific dissociative experiences) that are difficult for informants to
observe (Jopp & South, 2015; Emery & Simms, 2023). Results also vary somewhat regarding
which convergent self-other associations are strongest: For example, Quilty et al. (2018) found
the strongest self-other associations for PID-5 Disinhibition of any domain, whereas Sleep et al.
(2019) found that antagonism had slightly stronger self-other associations than other domains
when administering an AMPD-based assessment to community adults and their informants.
Regarding mean differences across self and informant reports, Sleep et al. (2019) also
found that self-reported mean trait levels were higher than mean informant-report levels (effect
size ds ranged from .55 to 1.01). These findings are consistent with results indicating that mean-
levels of many self-rated AMPD traits from individuals in outpatient treatment exceed mean
ratings from their therapists (Bottesi et al., 2024; Peri et al., 2019; Samuel et al., 2018). However,
other studies indicate that PID-5 informant ratings from friends and family members tend to be
slightly higher on average than self-ratings for many traits (e.g., Quilty et al., 2018; Carnovale et
al., 2019; see Kim et al., 2019 for meta-analytic findings based on other personality models).
Current Study Goals and Predictions for PID-5-BF Multimethod Associations
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 7
Collectively, our study (a) advances research on the PID-5-BF’s psychometric properties
and multimethod associations and relatedly, (b) informs understanding of self-other agreement
based on brief trait assessment. Specifically, adult participants completed the self-report PID-5-
BF, other self-report measures, and structured interview measures towards our goal of mapping
the PID-5-BF’s multimethod associations. A subset of participants also participated with an
informant who completed an informant PID-5-BF version to address our second goal focused on
evaluating self-other agreement. Informant data also were used to evaluate the extent to which
PID-5-BF self and informant ratings showed incremental associations beyond one another when
examining their relations with other measures, thereby informing understanding of how brief self
and informant measures can be used in a complementary fashion. Other study measures included
substance use, internalizing, and externalizing measures, including interview-rated DSM PD
traits. We recognize that the AMPD is intended to address limitations of traditional diagnostic
models. Still, these interview ratings provide a third information source for study analyses, and
we focused on interpreting patterns of associations across ratings versus viewing any specific
interview rating as a “gold standard” to be compared against.
Although this study is not a registered report, we created a timestamped analytic plan prior
to conducting study analyses on the Open Science Framework (OSF): Link. This descriptive
research focused on quantifying a range of associations and mean differences, rather than
evaluating the statistical significance of individual analyses. We provide illustrative predictions
subsequently, and other predictions also are reviewed on the OSF in the same document as our
timestamped analytic plan (Link). Beginning with predictions for external associations for PID-
5-BF ratings, we predicted that PID-5-BF scores generally would show convergent and criterion
associations consistent with theory and prior research. For example, we anticipated that PID-5-
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 8
BF Negative Affectivity scores would associate strongly with internalizing symptoms assessed
across methods because these various measures all include significant distress-based content.
Perhaps more importantly given concerns about some PID-5-BF scales’ discriminant validity, we
also were interested in leveraging our multimethod design to evaluate the specificity of
internalizing associations with PID-5-BF Negative Affectivity. For instance, identifying that
PID-5-BF Psychoticism also associates strongly with self- and interview-rated internalizing
would indicate a potential lack of specificity in the information provided by this scale.
Analyses evaluating incremental associations for self- versus informant-rated PID-5-BF
traits focused on these measures’ associations with interview-rated dependent variables (DVs), as
done in prior research based on other measures and models (e.g., Emery & Simms, 2023;
Oltmanns et al., 2014). Interview ratings were made based on target participants’ responses in
interviews, so we predicted that PID-5-BF self-ratings would have some advantage in accounting
for interview rating variance. However, given these methodological considerations, it would be
informative if informant ratings still showed meaningful associations beyond self-ratings, and we
predicted this would be the case in some instances. Specifically, we hypothesized that informant
ratings would display key incremental associations with interview ratings of externalizing-
oriented PD traits (e.g., antisocial and narcissistic traits; Emery & Simms, 2023).
Examination of Self-Other Agreement in Brief Trait Ratings
Next, turning to predictions focused on self-other agreement, we predicted that all PID-5-
BF domains would have self-informant convergent associations ≥ .30 (e.g., for self- and
informant-rated PID-5-BF Disinhibition). We also predicted that psychoticism would have
weaker cross-method convergence than other trait domains such as disinhibition based on
research with the full-length PID-5 (e.g., Quilty et al., 2018). Given that relatively few studies
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 9
provide detailed information about discriminant cross-method associations (e.g., associations for
informant-rated detachment with self-rated psychoticism), we did not make specific predictions
regarding the magnitude of self-informant discriminant associations. When considering
discriminant associations amongst ratings obtained via the same method (e.g., associations for
self-reported disinhibition and detachment), we anticipated that at least some PID-5-BF scores
would be strongly intercorrelated (i.e., correlations > .50 amongst PID-5 Negative Affectivity,
Psychoticism, and Detachment). Lastly, we compared mean levels of PID-5-BF self and
informant scores. One point of relative consistency in prior research includes self-reported mean
levels of less observable traits such as psychoticism tending to be at least similar to, or higher
than, mean levels obtained via informant report (Sleep et al., 2019). Studies examining mean
differences are mixed overall though, so we did not have clear predictions otherwise.
Method
Participants, Procedure, Data Availability, and Other Open Science Considerations
This research was approved by the University of XX (masked for review) institutional
review board, and all research procedures complied with American Psychological Association
ethical standards and with ethical standards described in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki. All
participants provided their informed consent, and participants were adults (age 18 or older) who
were currently residing in the US. Deidentified data are available on the OSF in addition to the
timestamped analytic plan previously reviewed (Link). Online Appendix S1 also provides
additional details regarding our study procedure and response validity assessment (e.g., use of
attention checks in surveys). Participants were recruited using advertisements shared at a range
of locations, including local mental health centers, a University-based outpatient clinic, and other
online and community locations. Other online locations included websites that share mental
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 10
health resources and study advertisements, such as the National Education Alliance for
Borderline Personality Disorder and the Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance websites.
Participants were invited to identify someone else who they knew well to participate with them.
Both participants and individuals they identified completed both (a) self-report and (b)
informant-report questionnaires asking them to rate the other person participating with them.
Thus, all participants who participated in pairs contributed both self- and informant-report data
(versus one participant being a “target” only and the other being only an “informant”).
Participants completed interviews via Zoom and online questionnaires administered using
Qualtrics independently even if they participated in pairs.
Participants were not required to participate with an informant, however, as we sought to
recruit as many participants as possible to maximize sample sizes for analyses using only self-
report and interview data. Our overall sample size including participants without an informant
was 235, and mean participant age was 32.3 years (SD = 12.3; range of 18-73). Most participants
reported being White or European American (81.7%), 7.7% Black or African American, 4.7%
Multiracial, and 3.8% Asian American, with small numbers of participants providing other
responses (participants could select multiple responses or write in responses for this demographic
question and others); 6.4% reported being Hispanic or Latine. Most participants were women
(69.8%, 25.1% men, 4.7% nonbinary, with small percentages endorsing or reporting other
options; 2.6% were transgender). Furthermore, nearly half of the sample reported currently
accessing psychotherapy (44.3%). Use of specific medications reported was as follows: 32.8%
antidepressants, 15.3% mood stabilizers, 11.9% antianxiety medication, 9.4% antipsychotics,
9.8% sleep aids, and 8.9% stimulant medication.
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 11
Of this overall sample, a subset of 116 participants participated in pairs and provided
informant data. Participants were asked to rate how well they knew the other person participating
with them on a scale ranging from 1 (not well) to 5 (very well), with nearly all participants
providing a 4 (well) or 5 (very well) response (92.2%; 107/116). Participants who provided
informant data most commonly indicated being a romantic partner (43.1%; n = 50), friend (31%;
n = 36), or family member (17.2%; n = 20). These 116 participants were somewhat less likely to
be currently accessing treatment (37.9% psychotherapy; 25.9% antidepressant medication).
However, other subsample demographic characteristics were similar to the overall sample (e.g.,
mean age = 31.2, SD = 11.1; 79.3% White or European American; 6.9% Hispanic or Latine).
Questionnaire Measures
First, all participants completed the self-report 25-item PID-5-BF, and a subgroup
completed these 25 items in informant-report format (i.e., reporting on the other person who
participated with them in cases where participants completed the study in pairs). Subsequent
psychometric conclusions drawn from our results center primarily on the self-report PID-5-BF
rather than the informant version of the PID-5-BF administered. We are not aware of research
independently validating the structure of these 25 items administered in informant report format,
although these items were included in structural analyses of the full-length informant PID-5
(Markon et al., 2013). Participants rated all items across self- and informant-administration using
a 0 (very false or often false) to 3 (very true or often true) scale, consistent with standard PID-5
instructions. They rated how well items described themselves for self-administration and how
well items described the other person participating with them for informant administration. We
calculated domain scores by averaging the 5 items used to assess each domain (e.g., summing
and averaging the five self-report detachment item scores).
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 12
In cases where participants completed the study in pairs, participants also rated how much
they personally liked the person participating with them (i.e., “How much do you like the person
you are completing this study with?”). They rated this item on a 6-point scale ranging from 1
(Dislike them very much) to 6 (Like them very much). Participants were also asked to rate how
much they perceive that other people generally tend to like this person (i.e., “How much is this
person liked by other people in general?”), again providing responses on a 6-point scale ranging
from 1 (Others dislike this person very much) to 6 (Others like this person very much).
Additionally, all participants completed select scales from the Expanded Version of the
Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms (IDAS-II; Watson et al., 2012). This included
the 10-item Dysphoria scale, which assesses internalizing (e.g., “felt inadequate”), as well as the
Euphoria (5 items; e.g., “felt elated for no reason”) and Mania (5 items; e.g., “thoughts moved so
quickly”) scales to assess hypomania. Other self-report questionnaires included the 10-item
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT-SR; Saunders et al., 1993) and the 8-item
Cannabis Use Disorders Identification Test-Revised (CUDIT-R-SR; Adamson et al., 2010). Both
the AUDIT-SR and CUDIT-R-SR were used to assess substance use as well as possible impacts
of use (e.g., use impacting work or other responsibilities). Participants rated both the AUDIT-SR
and CUDIT-SR items on a 0 to 4 scale in reference to the past 6 months.
Interview Measures
Most participants (97%; n = 228) who completed questionnaire-based measures also
completed structured clinical interviews. Interviews were administered over a HIPAA-secured
Zoom platform by study team members, which included PhD-level clinical psychologists,
doctoral students, and advanced undergraduates who were supervised by a PhD-level
1 A very small number of participants did not follow through with scheduling an interview after completing study
questionnaires. Therefore, interview data were not available for these specific participants.
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 13
psychologist (N = 8 interviewers). All interviewers (a) completed didactics on structured
interview assessment, (b) completed a series of interview observations and supervised interviews
prior to conducting interviews independently, and (c) attended recurring study review meetings.
Interview items included 8 internalizing items from the Diagnostic Interview for Anxiety,
Mood, and OCD and Related Neuropsychiatric Disorders (DIAMOND; Tolin et al., 2018). The
DIAMOND is an open-source, structured interview, and these internalizing items included 8 of 9
items assessing major depressive symptoms experienced over the past month. Interviewers also
administered items from the Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality (SIDP-IV; Pfohl et al.,
1997) assessing antisocial (7 items assessing criterion A traits), narcissistic (9 trait items), and
borderline PD traits (7 trait items; see footnote 2 for further description). These items were rated
using a scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 2 (present; with subthreshold being an intermediary
option). Lastly, participants completed interview versions of the 10-item AUDIT and 8-item
CUDIT-R. As was the case for their self-report versions, AUDIT interview (AUDIT-I) and
CUDIT-R interview (CUDIT-R-I) version items were rated using a 0-4 scale. For all interview
ratings, respective item scores were summed to create composites (e.g., summing the 9
narcissism items to create a narcissistic trait composite). Study interviews were audio recorded
for interrater reliability (IRR) purposes, and a subset of 42 recordings (n = 39-42 for specific
ratings) were rated by an independent rater to compute IRR estimates. Intraclass correlations
(ICCs) were calculated to quantify IRR, and ICCs indicated acceptable to strong agreement
across interview ratings used for study analyses (average ICC = .89; all ICCs ≥ .70).
2 This major depression symptom item assessing suicidal ideation and two borderline PD items were not
administered due to logistic and institutional review board considerations for remote assessment. Interviewers still
were trained to follow structured, evidence-based protocols for risk assessment as needed.
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 14
Results
Descriptive Statistics
report, informant, and interview measures. Coefficient omega values were strong for all study
scales (≥ .75) included in analyses examining the PID-5-BF’s external correlates. Coefficient
omega was .69 for self-reported PID-5-BF Antagonism, with omegas for other self- and
informant PID-5-BF scales exceeding .70. Given the number of statistical tests reported, various
descriptions of results and results tables presented subsequently indicate whether results were
statistically significant at adjusted p-value levels of less than .01 and .001; however, as reviewed,
our study focused on explicating broader patterns of results rather than the statistical significance
of individual associations or mean differences.
Self and Informant Mean-Level Comparisons
Means and standard deviations for both self- and informant-reported PID-5-BF traits based
1. Means and standard deviations for self-report PID-5-BF scores based on the full sample (N =
and informant means using paired samples t-tests. Self-reported levels of (a) negative affectivity
and (b) psychoticism were significantly higher than informant mean ratings at p < .001, although
differences were significant even at p < .05, and all other effect sizes for differences were < .20.
Self and Informant Correlations
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 15
scales. Contrary to predictions, self-report and informant-report PID-5-BF Psychoticism scores
correlated strongly (r = .55). The self-informant convergent correlation for detachment also was
strong (r = .52), and correlations for both disinhibition (r = .46) and negative affectivity (r = .42)
were moderate. However, the correlation for self- and informant-rated antagonism was only .27.
traits were similar or stronger than heteromethod correlations for the same trait in some cases.
For example, self-reported PID-5-BF Negative Affectivity correlated .42 with informant-rated
negative affectivity as reviewed, but also correlated .56 with self-rated psychoticism and .51 with
self-rated disinhibition. Self-report PID-5-BF Psychoticism also correlated .64 with self-rated
disinhibition. Regarding notable examples for informant ratings, informant-rated antagonism and
negative affectivity correlated nearly twice as strongly (r = .51) as self and informant antagonism
ratings correlated (r = .27).
Correlations with Other Personality and Psychopathology Ratings
variables. Correlational patterns for self- and informant-rated traits were similar, although
correlations for self-rated PID-5-BF traits were stronger on average as predicted. Specific
differences in broader self-versus-informant correlation patterns included informant-rated
antagonism correlating -.33 with how much participants were rated as generally being liked by
others, whereas self-rated antagonism correlated only -.09 with this variable.
in their associations. For example, self-report PID-5-BF Negative Affectivity correlated strongly
with IDAS-II Dysphoria (r = .66) and interview-rated depression and borderline PD traits (both
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 16
rs > .50), but weakly with most other measures. As other examples, self-report PID-5-BF
Detachment correlated strongly with interview-rated depression (r = .53), and self-rated PID-5-
BF Antagonism correlated moderately with interview ratings of externalizing traits but weakly
with most other measures. Similarly, informant-rated PID-5-BF Antagonism also correlated
moderately with interview ratings of narcissistic traits (r = .36).
However, other results indicated that select PID-5-BF scales, and select self-ratings in
particular, showed somewhat broad, nonspecific associations. First, self-rated PID-5-BF
Disinhibition showed theoretically-consistent correlates with antisocial trait interview ratings (r
= .63) and various substance use measures; however, this scale also consistently correlated > .50
with distress-based measures (e.g., r = .51 with interview-rated depression). Self- and informant-
rated PID-5-BF Psychoticism’s associations with mania and euphoria symptoms also are
consistent with transdiagnostic perspectives, but similar to disinhibition, self-rated PID-5-BF
Psychoticism also correlated moderately to strongly with a range of other study variables.
Regression Analyses Examining Associations with Other Psychopathology
models wherein all five self-report PID-5-BF scales were entered as independent variables (IVs)
when examining scale associations with each interview-rated DV (e.g., interview-rated
4) and then only with (b) the subset of participants who also provided informant data (bottom of
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 17
Therefore, we present both sets of results for comprehensiveness, recognizing that self-report
associations using the full sample cannot be compared as directly against informant-report
associations based on a sample subset. Regardless, self-report association patterns were very
detachment associated moderately with depression in both analyses).
associated with interview ratings in theoretically-expected ways. For example, self-reported
Disinhibition showed somewhat more specificity in these analyses than the correlational analyses
via its strong association with antisocial traits (β = .52), moderate associations with substance
use, and weak associations otherwise. Additionally, PID-5-BF Antagonism showed specificity
with narcissistic traits (β = .41 full sample), and PID-5-BF Psychoticism associated very weakly
with nearly all DV measures (which did not include substantial Psychoticism-related content).
BF traits were entered as IVs and then (b) joint regression models including both self- and
2 2
estimates for models run in the subsample of participants providing both self and informant data
to facilitate comparison of the variance accounted for by self-ratings alone, informant ratings
alone, and both methods combined. Self-ratings accounted for ≥ 30% of the variance of
borderline PD traits, antisocial PD traits, and depressive symptoms when entered alone as IVs
3 Upon reviewing our preregistration, we realized that our description of our multiple regression analyses was
unclear, as it described running different sets of models that would have yielded redundant results (i.e., models
describing reversing the order in which self-report and informant-report variables were entered as IVs). Consistent
with our preregistration, we ran multiple regression models where IVs included (a) only self-report PID-5-BF
scores, (b) only informant-report PID-5-BF scores, and (c) both self and informant scores together.
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 18
informant ratings failed to account for as much as 25% of the variance for any DV. Variance
estimates also increased by > .05 for R in only one case (narcissistic traits) in joint self and
informant IV models beyond models based on self-rated IVs alone, despite including an
to self-ratings was statistically significant only for narcissistic trait ratings, though individual
informant-rated scales still associated robustly with DVs in some specific cases. Perhaps most
notably, informant-rated PID-5-BF Antagonism associated moderately with narcissistic traits
even in joint models including both self and informant-rated IVs (β = .47 for analyses with only
informant ratings as IVs; β = .37 for analyses also including self-rating as IVs), consistent with
the R change for narcissistic traits being greater than for other DVs.
Discussion
Our study integrated assessment of a range of traits and symptoms across self, informant,
and interview methods to advance understanding of the PID-5-BF’s multimethod associations.
First, our results indicated that PID-5-BF scores generally showed theoretically-consistent
associations overall, which is encouraging and supports the self-report PID-5-BF’S validity as a
brief trait measure. However, our results also indicated several possible discriminant validity
concerns for specific scales, as discussed in-depth subsequently. Second, our predictions
concerning self-other agreement for AMPD domains were supported in some ways, and both self
and informant rated PID-5-BF traits showed some distinctive associations with external
measures. At the same time, as we also discuss subsequently, other specific self-other predictions
were not supported, such as self-other convergence for psychoticism being unexpectedly strong.
Synthesis of Findings Focused on the PID-5-BF’s Multimethod Associations
Associations Informing Understanding of the Self-Report PID-5-BF’s Validity
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 19
Multimethod associations for self-rated PID-5-BF Negative Affectivity, Detachment, and
Antagonism largely aligned with our preregistered predictions and advance prior psychometric
research based on monomethod assessment (e.g., Anderson et al., 2018; Cox et al., 2024). For
example, self-rated PID-5-BF Antagonism consistently showed its strongest association with
narcissistic trait ratings. Additionally, self-rated PID-5-BF Detachment’s robust associations
with borderline PD were stronger than predicted, but its associations with depression measures,
which include anhedonia content, make sense theoretically.
Self-reported PID-5-BF Psychoticism and Disinhibition correlated strongly, and both scales
showed somewhat nonspecific external associations in our correlational analyses, which also
mirrors prior research (e.g., Clark & Watson, 2022). Contrasting specific scales’ associations
illustrates these issues: For example, self-rated PID-5-BF Negative Affectivity correlated
strongly with external measures of distress but was not associated overly strongly with external
measures including disinhibition content (e.g., antisocial traits); in contrast, PID-5-BF
Disinhibition associated robustly with measures of both distress and disinhibition. Both self-
report PID-5-BF Psychoticism and Disinhibition showed somewhat more specificity in our
regression analyses, including Disinhibition showing distinctive associations with antisocial
traits. Thus, these regression analyses may provide more support for these scales’ validity than
bivariate analyses, recognizing challenges with drawing firm conclusions about scale validity
from analyses controlling for shared variance with other measures (Sleep et al., 2017).
Other broader interpretive issues also are important to consider. First, many scales drawn
from omnibus measures other than the PID-5 also correlate strongly with one another; for
example, other disinhibition measures also correlate strongly with distress (Forbes et al., 2021).
Measures of disinhibition, psychoticism, and other psychopathology would be expected
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 20
theoretically to associate with one another, perhaps even to a substantial degree, and viewpoints
may differ regarding the degree to which measures of related but distinct constructs should
overlap. For example, we imagine that many researchers would find correlations exceeding.75 or
.80 with measures of distress clearly problematic, but not necessarily correlations in the range of
.40 to .60 that were observed in our data for disinhibition and psychoticism with distress-based
based variance, associations that may be more clearly problematic include self-report PID-5-BF
scales correlating more strongly with self-report PID-5-BF ratings of other traits than with
informant ratings of the same trait (e.g., self- and informant-rated disinhibition correlated .46, but
self-report disinhibition and psychoticism also correlated .64).
Regardless of these broader interpretive issues, some PID-5-BF scales (e.g., PID-5-BF
Negative Affectivity; Antagonism) still seemed to show more specificity in their external
associations than others (e.g., PID-5-BF Disinhibition). Future research potentially could
examine the use of refined item sets when administering the PID-5-BF and longer PID-5
measures versions. For example, as described by Clark and Watson (2022; p. 334), some
disinhibition item content may overlap more strongly with distress and negative affectivity than
others. In the case of the PID-5-BF, it is possible the disinhibition item about making “rash
decisions” may overlap especially strongly with distress indicators if participants report on times
where decisions were made rashly due to experiences of distress. Additionally, participants with
high levels of internalizing symptoms may endorse psychoticism items including content about
“having thoughts that others find strange” if they have anxiety-driven fears or concerns that are
not shared by others, but that are not indicative of high psychoticism per se (see Samuel et al.,
2018 for more discussion of psychoticism-distress overlap).
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 21
Notable Informant-Rated Trait Associations with Other Study Measures
Some of these same discriminant validity issues also apply to informant-rated PID-5-BF
scales (e.g., instances where informant-rated PID-5-BF traits correlated more strongly with other
informant PID-5-BF ratings than with self-ratings of the same trait). Furthermore, we found that
informant-rated traits accounted for less incremental variance than some prior studies using
interview ratings of psychopathology as DVs, though the specific amount of variance explained
by different rating sources seems to vary considerably across studies based on the
comprehensiveness of PD trait assessment, DVs of interest, and other study design factors
(Emery & Simms, 2023; Hopwood et al., 2008). For example, studies using more comprehensive
informant assessment indicate that informant ratings of trait hostility account for meaningful
incremental variance in externalizing interview ratings (e.g., Emery & Simms, 2023), but the
PID-5-BF includes no item content directly assessing hostility (the PID-5-BF item “get irritated
easily” may be broadly relevant, but does not assess outward behavior).
Acknowledging these issues, some informant-rated trait associations were notable.
Informant-rated antagonism associated robustly with interview-rated narcissistic traits, as did
informant-rated disinhibition with specific DVs (e.g., with AUDIT interview scores in some
cases). Related to this, informant ratings accounted for more incremental variance in narcissistic
trait ratings than for other DVs. Although self-rated antagonism also associated robustly with
narcissism, these results based on very brief trait assessment are consistent with studies using
much longer measures that highlight the value of integrating informant ratings of observable
externalizing behavior into clinical assessment (e.g., Oltmanns et al., 2014). These findings for
antagonism and narcissism also were consistent with our preregistered predictions, though
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 22
informant ratings accounted for relatively little variance in interview ratings of other
externalizing PDs (e.g., antisocial traits), contrary to prior research and our predictions.
Synthesis of Findings Focused on Self-Other Agreement
Regarding our secondary aim focused on self-other agreement, mean levels of self-rated
negative affectivity and psychoticism slightly exceeded those from informants, and effect sizes
for observed differences were similar to some prior studies (e.g., ds ranging from .30-.40;
Samuel et al., 2018). These results for negative affect and psychoticism are consistent with
trends from the broader literature based on other PD measures (Peri et al., 2019), although our
predictions for mean differences were tentative given discrepant findings reported in studies
using the full-length PID-5 (e.g., Quilty et al., 2018). The PID-5-BF items for negative
affectivity and psychoticism assess tendencies that may be less observable to informants as
discussed, which may account for why self-rated means exceeded informant levels.
However, contrary to this idea and our predictions, the self-informant convergent
correlation for psychoticism was strong in magnitude. Psychoticism self-informant correlations
may have been stronger than expected based on the specific nature of the PID-5-BF
Psychoticism item content. Specifically, self-report psychoticism items refer to one’s thoughts
“not making sense to others” or “having thoughts that others say are strange,” such that this
wording explicitly focuses on how others might perceive one’s thoughts even when providing
self-ratings. One PID-5-BF Disinhibition item also focuses specifically on the extent to which
one is viewed as irresponsible by others (versus seeing oneself as irresponsible per se).
Therefore, if these items explicitly instruct respondents to think about how others see them, this
potentially could increase self-other agreement, and the wording of even one or two items could
meaningfully influence results for PID-5-BF scales given that they are only 5 items each. These
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 23
ideas remain speculative until tested further, however, especially given that self-other agreement
for psychoticism is often much lower than observed here (Samuel et al., 2018).
Additionally, although other self-informant convergent correlations were moderate to
strong, we did not expect that self and informant antagonism scores would correlate only .27.
This correlation for antagonism is similar to what has been reported in some research using the
full length PID-5 (e.g., .32 in Quilty et al., 2018), although other studies have found stronger
agreement for antagonism (Sleep et al., 2019). It will be important for future research to examine
self-other convergence when using the PID-5-BF specifically to determine the degree to which
these results were due to use of this abbreviated measure rather than longer PID-5 measures as in
prior studies, or rather, due to other idiosyncrasies of our study.
Limitations, Future Directions, and Conclusion
In addition to future directions already discussed, several others are worth noting. First, our
informant sample size was still larger than sample sizes in some prior work evaluating self-
informant agreement using longer PID-5 measure versions (e.g., under 100 self-informant pairs
in Bottesi et al., 2018; Jopp & South, 2015; Samuel et al., 2018). Still, using larger informant
samples would be useful for making more precise comparisons of self- and informant-rated
AMPD traits. Relatedly, in interpreting our results including informant ratings, it is important to
keep in mind that research has not formally evaluated the structure of informant PID-5 short
forms to our knowledge (again, see Markon et al., 2013 for validation of the full-length PID-5
informant form). Developing abbreviated informant versions of the PID-5 may be helpful for
increasing the feasibility of informant AMPD trait assessment across study types. Our sample
also was homogeneous in some ways (e.g., regarding racial identity), and use of larger, more
diverse samples would have been useful for analyzing item-level structure within and across
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 24
methods. Using larger samples also would have permitted examinations of the self-report PID-5-
BF’s structure, although this was not a study goal given that other studies have already addressed
this issue (e.g., Athar & Ebrahimi, 2023; Hyatt et al., 2021).
Furthermore, Clark and Watson (2022) identified ways in which assessment with the PID-5
specifically and of the AMPD more generally could be improved. For example, PID-5 measures
could be made more comprehensive by adding assessment of anankastic traits that are central to
the dimensionally-based International Statistical Classification of Diseases PD model (Clark &
Watson, 2022). Related to these broader PD assessment issues, different versions of the PID-5
have been so widely used that there is a risk of seeing them as synonymous with the AMPD and
dimensional PD assessment even more broadly (Clark & Watson, 2022; Monaghan & Bizumic,
2023). However, other dimensionally based PD trait measures are increasingly used in the
dimensional PD literature (Clark & Watson, 2022; Simms et al., 2022), and different measures
vary somewhat in their facet-level content in addition to their domain-level organization. We
were not able to address these broader issues here, but we hope that researchers will work
towards harmonizing dimensional assessment approaches across studies.
Lastly, assuming the HiTOP eventually becomes the dominant model guiding clinical
assessment and diagnosis, PDs would no longer represent a grouping of trait features separate
from other types of psychopathology. Thus, further research informing how dimensionally-
oriented measures can be used in research and practice to assess broader dimensional
frameworks such as the HiTOP would be beneficial, in addition to research focused specifically
on PD assessment (Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023). We hope that future studies will address each
of these issues to build upon our findings advancing understanding (a) of multimethod trait
associations and (b) self and informant agreement when using brief trait measures.
PID-5-BF MULTIMETHOD ASSOCIATIONS 25