The Structure of Memory during Development
Samantha S. Cohen1, Ingrid R. Olson1, Nora S. Newcombe1
1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, 19122
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are openly available on
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge Tom Olino for his consultation regarding data analysis and Josh Litwin and
Kate Hill for their help in collecting the data. This work was supported by a National Institute of Health
grant to N.S. Newcombe and I.R. Olson [R01HD099165]. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of Mental Health or
the National Institutes of Health.
Research Highlights
- Episodic memory can be assessed through tasks ranging from fully laboratory-based
assessments to memory for real-world events and autobiographical memory.
- Four- to seven-year-olds completed lab-based and naturalistic measures of memory to
determine if they are assessing the same construct.
- While most measures of memory improved with age and were unrelated to IQ, lab-based
measures and naturalistic measures were separable components of episodic memory.
- Measuring memory for cartoon videos may be an important bridge in the gap between fully lab-
based measures of memory and autobiographical memory.
Abstract
Episodic memory, or memory for specific past experiences, can be measured in ways ranging from fully
controlled laboratory paradigms to real world settings. It is unknown whether different measures of
episodic memory are capturing the same construct. We examined this question in children between four
and seven years (N=76), using a battery of assessments ranging from measurements of memory for
mini-events presented in the lab, to measures of memory for a cartoon, and most naturalistically, recall
of real-world events, i.e., autobiographical memory. Most measures of memory improved with age.
After controlling for the effects of age and verbal IQ, a factor analysis revealed two distinct components
of children’s memory. The first component was comprised of our lab-based measures of memory and
captured the majority of variance in the data. The second component included autobiographical
memory and free recall of previously seen cartoons. This dichotomy may be driven by whether memory
was assessed via recall or recognition. However, it also yields evidence for the idea that lab-based tasks
and more naturalistic assessments of memory may not be measuring the same underlying construct.
Keywords
Episodic memory, autobiographical memory, factor analysis, naturalistic, child development
Introduction
Memory is a multifaceted phenomenon that allows one to not only retell stories of past experiences,
but also learn how to spell words, or to play an instrument (Kandel & Squire, 2001). Since memory is a
broad construct, it has been divided into two main branches: one for memories that you are consciously
aware of and one for memories that allow you to function in everyday life, but for which you cannot
verbally demonstrate your knowledge, such as riding a bike (Squire, 1995). Among consciously
reportable memories, there are at least two forms: semantic and episodic memory (Tulving, 1972, 1983,
2002). Whereas semantic memory forms a general knowledge base, allowing one to remember facts
and schemas, episodic memory allows one to recall specific experiences from the past (Tulving, 2002;
Tulving & Lepage, 2000).
Here we investigated the structure of episodic memory during child development. However, even
episodic memory is not a unitary function (Nelson & Fivush, 2004). Although it constitutes the memory
for specific past events, this fundamental phenomenon of human consciousness can be measured in
many different ways. For instance, there is a long tradition of examining memory for nonsense words or
syllables, or lists of real words (Ebbinghaus, 1913; Kahana, 2012). Although these fundamental studies
have helped us understand some aspects of episodic memory, some have argued that they do not
capture the full range of rememberable events and experiences (Neisser, 1982; Virk et al., 2024). Some
studies of episodic memory have thus utilized more naturalistic tasks that run the gamut from fully lab-
based stimuli meant to simulate real world experiences to studies of naturally-occurring events (Virk et
al., 2024).
There is an inherent tension, however, between precisely measured memories for items or events
experienced in the laboratory context and memories for freely experienced events in the real world
(Virk et al., 2024). In fact, there is a decades-long debate as to whether these two forms of episodic
memory research are in fact measuring the same phenomena, and whether one form of research is
more generalizable to the outside world than the other (Banaji & Crowder, 1989; Davies & Logie, 1993;
Neisser, 1982). This tension is especially apparent in the study of the development of memory during
childhood (Baker-Ward et al., 1993). Children may be less apt to learn arbitrary associations that are not
made socially or personally relevant (Baker-Ward, Ornstein, and Holden, 1984). Thus, their overall
memory capacity may be underestimated by purely lab-based measures of memory. Thus, having
children learn a staged event or situation in the laboratory has advantages since the events learned at
encoding are known, and can even be manipulated (Baker-Ward et al., 1993).
Some developmental memory researchers have posited that lab-based and real-world forms of memory
exist on a continuum of experimental control (Baker-Ward et al., 1993; Virk et al., 2024). It is thus
possible that different tests of the development of episodic memory all measure growth of the same
construct and using lab-based tasks is therefore sufficient for measuring real world memory phenomena
(Saragosa‐Harris et al., 2021). In fact, several previous studies using multiple measures of episodic
memory in children ranging in age from three to eight years have found that different tests of episodic
memory are a part of the same latent construct (Canada et al., 2022; Cheke & Clayton, 2015). However,
these previous studies cannot address whether lab-based and more naturalistic measures are measuring
the same construct because they only employed batteries of fully lab-based tasks (Canada et al., 2022;
Cheke & Clayton, 2015). It is therefore also possible that different assessments of episodic memory are
assessing separable facets of a larger system. This may be especially true when directly comparing
memories for items learned in the laboratory context and memories for experiences in the real world
(Canada et al., 2022).
In this study, with children ranging from four to seven years of age, we utilized a battery of episodic
memory tasks and examined the correlational and factor structure of these tasks. On one end of the
laboratory-based to fully naturalistic spectrum, we used a mnemonic discrimination task designed to
assess the process of pattern separation known to be essential for distinguishing similar episodic
memories from one another (O’Reilly & Rudy, 2001; Yassa & Stark, 2011). In this task we assessed
memories for events constructed from three simultaneously presented pictures (Horner & Burgess,
2013; Ngo et al., 2019a, 2021). Each event consisted of an animal, an object, and a location that were
accompanied by an auditory narrative. Children were subsequently tested on their ability to remember
which particular items they had seen in comparison to similar lures and distracting foils. Through this
task children were also assessed on relational binding, i.e., their ability to remember the associations
between all pairs of items (Horner & Burgess, 2013; Ngo et al., 2019a). Finally, this task also allowed us
to assess the phenomenon of holistic recollection which measures whether individuals tend to
remember or forget events as integrated units (Horner & Burgess, 2013; Ngo et al., 2019a).
On the other end of the spectrum is memory for real-world events. To approximate this in the
laboratory context we assessed children’s memories for several novel cartoons (Furman et al., 2007;
Yang et al., 2022). Memory was assessed one week after children watched the cartoons by asking
children to freely recall the cartoons’ narratives and asking the children specific questions about the
stories. Finally, in the most naturalistic task, we asked children to freely recall memories from their real
life past outside of the laboratory, or autobiographical memory (Nelson & Fivush, 2004; Virk et al.,
2024).
Our goal was to compare our fully lab based assessments of the specific factors thought to be
foundational for episodic memory function: mnemonic discrimination, relational binding, and holistic
recollection, to the increasingly more naturalistic measures of probed questions and freely recalled
narratives, and the most ecologically valid measure of autobiographical memory. We thus sought to
uncover the structure of episodic memory during a period in life in which episodic memory is
dynamically emerging (Newcombe & Nguyen, 2024).
Methods
Participants
A total of 104 four- to- seven-year-old children participated in the current study. Of these children, one
was excluded due to language proficiency, 12 did not return for the second session when several of the
memory measures were assessed, six subjects had over a one month gap between sessions, rendering it
difficult to test their memory for the first session, and nine subjects are missing because their data was
improperly recorded due to experimenter error. Overall, 76 children (5.81 ± 1.19 years, range = 4.1 – 7.9
years, 51 females, 25 males) provided useable behavioral data and were included in the analyses. The
interval between the two sessions was between one and 20 days (on average 6.59 +/- 3.00 days).
Children were recruited from a major metropolitan area in the northeastern United States through
recruitment events and online advertisements. All participants were enrolled in a larger, ongoing,
longitudinal study on memory and brain development in accordance with and approved by the
Institutional Review Board at Temple University. Prior to enrollment, children were screened via
parental report to ensure they were proficient in English, had not been diagnosed with a psychiatric,
neurological, or developmental disorder (including a history of head trauma, seizures, autism, or ADHD),
had no known metal in their body, and exhibited normal or corrected-to-normal sensory processing (e.g.
vision and hearing). Informed consent was obtained from parents, and written assent was obtained for
seven-year-old children. Most of the sample identified as white, from middle- to high-income
households.
Materials
All visual stimuli were presented on a 14” MacBook pro screen.
Short cartoons
Six cartoons previously used to examine narrative proficiency in children in the same age range (Demir
et al., 2014) were selected. The cartoons were short, silent stories about a small mouse and his friends
(30-73 seconds; Die Sendung mit der Maus). These cartoons were selected partly since we expected our
American subjects to be unfamiliar with them. Each cartoon had at least one goal, an initiating event
(the problem), multiple episodes (attempts to achieve the goal), and an outcome or resolution (Demir et
al., 2014).
Pattern separation (mnemonic discrimination) and pattern completion (relational binding and holistic
recollection)
The stimuli came from 216 child-friendly cartoon images used in a previous study (Ngo et al., 2021). Of
these stimuli one-third were scenes (e.g., a lake), one-third were animals (e.g., a sheep), and one-third
were objects (e.g., a mug). Each category of stimulus included 18 exemplar pairs (e.g., two similar
images of lakes) to be used for the test of mnemonic discrimination. Children encoded 18 unique scene-
animal-object triads (e.g., lake-sheep-mug). The assignment of an item to a triad was pre-determined
based on the criterion that items with a potential pre-experimental semantic association (e.g., library
and notebook) would not be assigned to the same triad. Following the methods of prior research in this
age range (Ngo et al., 2019a), a three-sentence narrative was pre-recorded for each triad, with each
sentence highlighting one association within the triad. For example, the lake-sheep-mug triad was
accompanied by the following narrative: “Sheep rested by the lake. He was thirsty so he got out his mug
to drink from. The mug looked very nice in the reflection on the lake.” The order of the associations in
each narrative (scene-animal, animal-object, object-scene) was consistent across all narratives. All
narratives were audio-recorded with a child-friendly female voice, and with a fixed duration of 15
seconds. These narratives were used to maximize task engagement, and to increase the likelihood that
attention was drawn to each item within a triad.
Procedure
Participants came to the lab for two sessions on different days. During the first visit demographic
information including date of birth, sex, race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic information were reported
by the child’s parent using Redcap survey software (Harris et al., 2009, 2019).
Autobiographical memory
The procedure for the autobiographical interviews was modeled after those established in prior
literature (Cleveland & Reese, 2005; Jack et al., 2009). Parents provided four positive or neutral non-
routine events that they shared with their children between two days and six months ago (e.g., a trip to
the zoo). Subsequently, two of the events were discussed between the parent and their child, and the
other two were discussed between the child and an experimenter. The order of who the child spoke
with first (parent or experimenter) was pseudo-randomized across participants.
For the two events recalled with the experimenter, experimenters began the conversation by saying:
“Your (parent) told me that you (event) recently. Tell me about that.” The experimenters were trained
to make minimal prompts, limiting their responses to phrases such as: “mmhmm,” “wow!”, “tell me
more”, and repeating child’s responses verbatim. For each event, the conversation continued until the
child indicated that they were finished or responded “no” when asked if there was “anything else?”. For
the two events recalled with the parent, parents were instructed to discuss the events sequentially and
as naturalistically as possible. The parent and child discussed the events without the experimenter
present. All four event conversations were recorded via Audacity (Audacity, 2022).
Querying memory for short cartoons
Encoding. Encoding occurred during the child’s first lab visit and was introduced as a “storytelling
game.” Before watching each cartoon, children saw a still frame from the cartoon and the researcher
introduced the names of the characters and objects relevant to the story. The child watched each
cartoon twice. During the second viewing the child was prompted to narrate the story in the cartoon. All
participants saw the cartoons in the same order.
Recall. During the child’s second visit they saw one frame from each cartoon and were prompted to tell
the experimenter “as much as they can remember” about each story. While viewing the frame
participants freely recalled the story to the best of their ability. Once the researcher asked, “anything
else?” and the child responded “no”, the participant said, “the end” or “I don’t remember”, researchers
asked three questions about each story. Two of the questions prompted children to identify the specific
problem and solution in the story (e.g. “Why doesn’t the hose work?” or “What does Ellie do to fix the
hose?”). The final question for all stories was “What is a good title for this story?”. In total, across all
stories, 17 questions were asked. All phases of the task were recorded via Audacity (Audacity, 2022).
Assessment of mnemonic discrimination, relational binding, and holistic recollection
All children were tested individually in a room with an experimenter present. The task was divided into
separation test (assessing mnemonic discrimination), and the pattern completion test (assessing
relational binding and holistic recollection), administered in a fixed order. The two blocks were
procedurally identical but with completely nonoverlapping stimuli (nine event triads/block). Children
experienced one of three different encoding/retrieval conditions for this task. Seven children encoded
and retrieved block one during their first session, and block two during their second session. Twenty-
four children encoded and retrieved both blocks during their first lab visit. Forty-five children encoded
both blocks during their first lab visit and retrieved them during their second visit. Due to small and
unequal samples in each condition, potential differences between these conditions are not considered
in the factor analysis.
Encoding. Children were invited to play a “story game” about animals who went to places with objects.
The encoding phase consisted of 13 events. The items and events in nine were subsequently tested on
was shown at the beginning of the encoding phase to acquaint children with the procedure, and three
were shown at the end to be used as practice material for the pattern separation test. In each event, a
pre-designated scene, animal, and object appeared simultaneously on the top, bottom left, and bottom
right of the screen, respectively. Each event was presented for 15 seconds with a 0.5-second inter-trial
interval. A corresponding pre-recorded narrative accompanied each encoded event. The same block
order and event order was administered to all children. The encoding phase for each block, including the
example events, took approximately four minutes.
example block. (A) Each block consisted of encoding nine event triads which were comprised of a scene,
an animal, and an object. The triads and the items in them did not overlap between the sessions. Each
event was presented for 15s while a pre-recorded three-sentence audio narrative was played. The event
triads in each session were flanked by four example triads at the beginning and end of the encoding
phase (represented as gray bars). These examples were then used to instruct the pattern separation and
pattern completion tests (instruction indicated by grey bands in B and C). (B) The pattern separation test
consisted of three segments, one for scenes, animals, and objects, each of which contained nine trials
(to test for the items in each event). On each four-alternative forced choice (4AFC) trial, the four options
included the correct target, a similar lure, and two exemplar foils. (C) The pattern completion test
consisted of six segments that each tested the pairwise memory for the three items in each event. Thus,
each segment contained nine trials (one per event). On each 4AFC trial, the cue was presented on top
and the four options for the to-be-retrieved element were presented on the bottom of the screen.
Scenes, animals, and objects are denoted as elements A, B, and C, respectively. Green circles indicate
the correct option and are shown here for visual illustration.
Pattern Separation Test. Children were invited to play the “which one” game wherein the experimenter
discrimination for each item seen in each story with a self-paced four-alternative-forced choice (4AFC)
task. In each block, this test phase was divided into three parts: scene, animal, and object (27 trials per
block, nine items per item category). The order of the blocks and within-block trials were identical for all
children.
In every test trial, children were shown four image options from a given item category (e.g., four scene
images) and were asked to choose the same image that they had seen previously by pointing to it. The
four options included a target: the same image that appeared at encoding (e.g., the same lake), a lure: a
similar exemplar of the target (e.g., a different lake), and two foils: similar exemplars of an unstudied
place (e.g., two lighthouses). The experimenter recorded the child’s selection with a mouse click. The
screen positions of the targets and lures were approximately equally distributed within each block and
across the entire test phase. The pattern separation test phase for each block took on average 5.0 +/-
2.0 minutes.
Note that the test phase for each block was preceded by a brief practice phase that introduced all three
kinds of pattern separation test trials: scene, animal, object. In this practice phase, children were tested
on items from the example events that were presented during the end of the encoding phase.
Pattern Completion Test. The pattern completion task for each block immediately followed the pattern
instructed to choose the item that was previously presented in the same event as the cue. To estimate
holistic recollection (defined in analysis subsection), we tested children on all possible cue-item pairs for
each three-item event (e.g., retrieving the object that belonged to the same event as the animal cue).
retrieval pairs were separated into blocks with nine trials per block for a total of 54 trials per block. To
maintain attention, there was a self-paced break between each block. All subjects were tested in the
same pseudo-randomized block order so that bidirectional test types did not occur in succession (e.g., A
following B , where B and A come from the same event).
options consisted of one target: the correct item associated with the same event as the cue, and three
lures: same-category elements from different events in the same block. The position of the target was
counterbalanced across the test phase. Each item served as a lure an equal number of times across all
trials within each block and across the entire test phase. Given that holistic recollection is based on the
accuracy of test trials that share the same cue (e.g., A and A ) or the same to-be-retrieved item (e.g., B
B C A
and C ), we counterbalanced how often the lures on these trials overlapped in their membership. Across
all nine events in each block, any given two test trials that had overlapping cue items (e.g., A and A ,
B C
where the A’s are the same scene), or tested items (e.g., B and C , again, where A is identical across
A A
pairs), or were bidirectional (e.g., A and B , where A and B are identical) only shared one lure with one
B A
another. For example, for the A test trial for event 1, the lures included the B elements from events 2,
3, and 4, whereas for the A trial for event 1, the lures included the elements from events 3, 5, and 7.
Thus, only one B and one C lure both belonged to the same event (event 3). The pattern completion test
phase for each block took on average 8.0 +/- 2.3 minutes.
As in the pattern separation test phase, a brief practice session preceded the pattern completion phase
for each block. In the practice phase, children were shown an example event and immediately tested
with three example trials where each item served as the cue or as a to-be-retrieved item once (e.g., cue:
scene — retrieve: animal; cue: object — retrieve: scene; and cue: animal — retrieve: object).
Verbal intelligence
To assess age-adjusted verbal intelligence (IQ) participants took the verbal knowledge and riddles
subtests from the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (second edition; KBIT-2; (Kaufman & Kaufman, 2004).
The verbal knowledge subtest is comprised of 60 items. For each item, the child is presented with six
images and is instructed to point to one image based on the experimenter’s prompt (e.g. “Point to the
one that goes with thunder” which is correctly answered by pointing to the image of lightning). The
riddles subtest has 48 items. The first eight items require the participant to point to correctly identify an
object, and the later items are typically questions (e.g. “What is very far away, can only be seen at night,
and twinkles in the sky?” is correctly answered by either star or planet). For each subtest, the first item
queried is determined by the participant's age. Participants are given a 1 for correct responses and a 0
for incorrect or omitted responses. For both subtests, if a participant cannot correctly answer four
questions in a row, they are asked questions from a starting age one level below their actual age. Each
subtest, which increases in difficulty in each section, was terminated after a child provided four
consecutive incorrect responses.
Analysis
Autobiographical memory
manually for accuracy. The transcripts were then divided into the four discussed events. The dialogue
within each event was then divided into utterances, defined as conversational turns containing a verb or
implied verb, such that there was one verb per clause. The child’s utterances were then coded for
memory elaborations using an adapted version of a reliable coding scheme established in the literature
(Reese et al., 1993). Utterances were coded exhaustively for structure in accordance with previously
used coding schemes that measure memory elaborations, repetitions, confirmations, questions, meta-
memory comments, and associated event talk (see (Haden, 1998; Reese et al., 1993; Reese & Brown,
2000), but ultimately only the child’s memory elaborations, which provide new information relevant to
the discussed event, were used in the present analyses (Cleveland & Reese, 2005). A reliable coding
scheme was established on 34 coded transcripts from an unpublished sample of four- to seven-year-
olds, with a Cohen’s Kappa of 0.836 (0.823 for the parent-child events, and 0.855 for the experimenter-
child events), indicating substantial agreement between raters (Cohen, 1960; Landis & Koch, 1977). The
number of memory elaborations elicited by the child were averaged across the two events discussed
with the parent, the two events discussed with the experimenter, and across all four events to yield
three measures of autobiographical memory.
Coding for memory of short cartoons
manually for accuracy. Following previous research on the analysis of narrative ability (Demir et al.,
2014), each participant's free recall was separated into clauses corresponding to a single situation or
event. A clause is defined as a subject (noun phrase or its equivalent) and its predicate (verb phrase and
other accompanying elements such as object or complement).
The answer key to determine each child’s memory for the cartoons was derived from the union of all
unique clauses written by ten adults who were otherwise unfamiliar with the task. The number of
possible correct clauses in each cartoon ranged from 18-28 (23.5 +/- 3.8). Each child received one point
for each of their clauses that was present in the answer key and received no points for repeated clauses
or falsely remembered clauses. These points were summed within each story and then averaged across
all six stories to yield a cartoon free recall score. The transcripts from 19 children were scored by two
different research assistants yielding a between-rater ICC of 0.89.
All recall questions (excluding “What is a good title for this story?”) were scored on a 0-2 scale. A 0 was
given if the answer was false, irrelevant to the story, paraphrasing the question, or the child indicated
that they forgot. A 1 was given if the child’s answer was accurate to the story (provides details relating
to the story) but incomplete (missing a detail to fully answer the question). A 2 was given if the child’s
answer was accurate and complete. The questions from 34 children (44.7% of the sample) were scored
by two different research assistants to establish an inter-rater ICC of 0.90 (0.88-0.92). The scores of all
11 scored questions were averaged for each participant to obtain a measure of question-prompted
memory for the cartoons.
Holistic recollection calculation
Following previous work (Horner & Burgess, 2013; Ngo et al., 2019a, 2021), we sought to determine the
degree to which people remembered (or forgot) all of the pair-wise associations within the same event
while controlling for their overall associative memory accuracy in the pattern completion task. We
therefore calculated two values: (1) the proportion of joint retrieval the data (described below) and (2)
the independent model (described below). The difference between the proportion of joint retrieval
within the data and the independent model yields a measure of holistic recollection.
The proportion of joint retrieval. The proportion of joint retrieval in the data measures, within one
participant’s data, whether remembering (or forgetting) an item (e.g. a scene) when cued by another
item from the same event (e.g. an object) was associated with remembering (or forgetting) the same
item (the scene) when cued by the third item from the event (e.g. the animal). Thus, we calculated the
frequency with which each participant correctly remembered or forgot each possible pair of cue-item
pairs (either A A , a common cue, or B C , a common to-be-retrieved item) from the same event. For
B C A A
each event, this was done separately for all six possible pairs of cue-item pairs, and then these values
were averaged across all events and all pairs.
The independent model. To calculate a measure of the overall likelihood of remembering (or forgetting)
any given cue-item pair, regardless of whether that pair belongs to the same event, we calculated the
independent model based on previous work (Horner & Burgess, 2013). For this calculation, for instance,
the probability of remembering any scene-object pair is deemed independent of remembering any
scene-animal pair. For each participant, we therefore found the average accuracy for one cue-item pair
across all events and multiplied this value by the average accuracy for the other cue-item pair across all
six possible situations with either a common cue or a common to-be-retrieved item, and then averaged
these values across all pairs.
The measure of holistic recollection for each subject is the proportion of joint retrieval in their data
subtracted by the value calculated for their independent model, thus controlling for overall pair-wise
retrieval accuracy in a world in which someone is no more likely to jointly retrieve pairs from the same
event than can be explained by accuracy alone.
Verbal intelligence
The standard score of verbal intelligence (IQ) is based on the summed raw score from each subtest
adjusted by the child’s age in months. The raw score for each subtest is derived by subtracting the total
number of errors from the ceiling item. The assessments were scored and recorded by two separate
research assistants and discrepancies were examined by a third research assistant.
Factor analysis
In sum, the variables subject to the initial investigation of the structure of our data were as follows: (1)
three measures of mnemonic discrimination (the rate of target, lure, and foil selection in the pattern
separation task), (2) relational binding (the overall accuracy on the pattern completion task), (3) holistic
recollection (calculated from the pattern completion task), (4) free recall accuracy (the average number
of correct clauses recalled across the six cartoons), (5) probed question accuracy (the average score
across all memory questions about the cartoons), (6) the number of memory elaborations for the
autobiographical memories averaged over all events discussed.
We note here that our results in terms of factor loading look very similar if we include a more exhaustive
list of variables where we additionally include: (1) the rate of target, lure, and foil selection for the three
item categories (object, animal, and scene), (2) the relational binding accuracy on the pattern
for the autobiographical memories discussed with the parent and the experimenter separately. We first
examined potential correlations between our memory measures and age and IQ, and subsequently
controlled for these variables in all subsequent analyses.
Next, all remaining variables were subject to an EFA. To determine the number of factors to retain, since
Kaiser criterion technique for determining the number of factors to be retained can be problematic
(Zwick & Velicer, 1986), we performed a parallel analysis (Horn, 1965) in which we ran a simulation with
100 replications to determine what the eigenvalues would be if there were the same number of cases
and variables, but the data were random. If the eigenvalues from our real data were lower than
expected due to chance (i.e., those produced from the parallel analysis), then that factor would not be
interpreted as capturing any latent traits present in the data.
After obtaining the number of factors to retain, we performed principle components analysis (PCA) to
determine how each variable loaded onto each factor. Code was written in R and python and is available
Results
We sought to determine the structure of episodic memory in children by analyzing how several
measurable components of episodic memory correlate with one another and load onto latent factors.
Our assessments of memory ranged from lab-based assessments of mnemonic discrimination (a
measure of pattern separation), relational binding, and holistic recollection (a measure of pattern
completion), to completely naturalistic assessments of memories experienced in the real world
(autobiographical memory).
Age-related memory improvements
As episodic memory ability is known to improve between 4-7 years of age (Newcombe et al., 2022;
Newcombe & Nguyen, 2024), we first checked to see if this expected pattern was evident in our data.
We indeed found age-related memory improvements in most of the major components of episodic
selecting the previously seen target item significantly increased with age (r = 0.46, p = 3x10-5) and
likewise the rate at which children selected the similar lure and distracting foil items significantly
decreased with age (lure: r = -0.39, p = 5x10-4, foil: r = -0.45, p = 6x10-5). Similarly, our lab-based
assessment of relational binding, or remembering the associations between items seen together,
significantly increased with age (r = 0.45, p = 6x10-5). However, in line with previous research (Ngo et al.,
2019b), we found that holistic recollection is an age invariant phenomenon within the age range of four
to seven years (p = 0.5). Similarly, our more naturalistic memory measures also improved with age. This
included freely recalled memory for short cartoons (“free recall accuracy”, r = 0.50, p = 3x10-6), accuracy
for short questions about those cartoons (“probed question accuracy”, r = 0.68, p = 2x10-11), and the
number of autobiographical memory elaborations made (r = 0.31, p = 0.007). No measure of memory
correlated with IQ except for probed question accuracy (r = 0.26, p = 0.03).
measures, age, and IQ. The lab-based measures are relational binding, mnemonic discrimination
(target), holistic recollection, mnemonic discrimination (foil), and mnemonic discrimination (lure). The
naturalistic measures are measures of memory for short cartoons tested assessed with probed question
accuracy and free recall accuracy. Our most naturalistic measure of memory is autobiographical
memory, or memory for real world events that occurred outside of the lab. Significant correlations
(p<0.05) are colored according to correlation value and non-significant correlations (n.s., p>0.05) are
colored in grey.
Cross-correlation between variables.
Next, we assessed the bivariate correlations between our measures of episodic memory after controlling
for the potential effects of age and IQ. Since all measures of mnemonic discrimination (for target, lure,
and foil) were highly correlated with one another even after controlling for age and IQ (correlation
magnitudes ranging from 0.62 – 0.96) they are measuring the same underlying construct. We therefore
only examine mnemonic discrimination for the target going forwards, as this measure positively
correlates with the other memory measures.
As it was prior to controlling for age, relational binding between previously seen items remained highly
accuracy is more weakly correlated with relational binding and mnemonic discrimination, but
interestingly, it does not significantly correlate with free recall accuracy for the same cartoons. Finally,
free recall accuracy and autobiographical memory are correlated, perhaps due to the similar nature of
these tasks which involve describing experienced events or stimuli. As was seen prior to controlling for
age and IQ, holistic recollection is not significantly correlated with any other variable (correlation range
participant age and IQ. Significant correlations (p<0.05) are colored according to correlation value and
non-significant correlations (n.s., p>0.05) are colored in grey.
Exploratory factor analysis
The variables included in the factor analysis were the measures of relational binding and mnemonic
discrimination (as assessed by target selection rate), the measures of memory for short cartoons (free
recall accuracy and probed question accuracy), and autobiographical memory. Holistic recollection was
regressed out of all variables prior to performing the factor analysis.
An exploratory factor analysis (EFA) using the principal factor solution factoring method was employed
to examine the factorial structure of the memory measures. The number of components to be extracted
was determined by parallel analysis (Horn, 1965) as this method is thought to be a good detector of
components across differing levels of component complexity (Zwick & Velicer, 1986). Parallel analysis
compares the observed eigenvalues extracted from our data’s correlation matrix to those obtained from
uncorrelated normal variables. We adopted the rule that a factor is significant if its eigenvalue is larger
than the mean of those obtained from the random uncorrelated data. This approach revealed a two-
factor solution explaining 65.6% of the total variance.
The component loadings from a principal component analysis (PCA) with two components can be seen
measures of memory and more naturalistic memory measures. However, probed question accuracy
regarding previously seen cartoons, a seemingly more naturalistic measure of memory, loads strongly
onto both the lab-based memory component (Factor 1) and the naturalistic memory component (Factor
2). Factor 1 explains 39.8% of the variance in the data and Factor 2 explains 25.8% of the variance in the
data. Furthermore, the two factors are very weakly correlated with one another (r = 0.05). Thus,
although lab-based memory measures explain more variance in the data, naturalistic measures of
memory explain an unrelated part of episodic memory.
Memory measure Factor 1 Factor 2
Relational Binding 0.93 - 0.04
Lab-based Mnemonic 0.94 0.01
Measures Discrimination
Memory for Probed Question 0.43 0.31
naturalistic events Accuracy
Free Recall 0.16 0.75
Accuracy
Real-world Autobiographical - 0.16 0.79
memory Memory
of memory (relational binding and mnemonic discrimination). Factor 2 is mostly comprised of
naturalistic and real-world measures of memory such as free recall accuracy and autobiographical
memory.
Discussion
This study examined whether different assessments of episodic memory are measuring the same
underlying construct in children between four and seven years. Children’s memory was assessed with a
range of more traditional lab-based tasks assessing mnemonic discrimination, relational binding and
holistic recollection (Horner & Burgess, 2013; Ngo et al., 2019b, 2021), naturalistic tasks assessing
memory for short cartoons (Furman et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2022), and an assessment of
autobiographical memory (Nelson & Fivush, 2004; Virk et al., 2024). We found that all assessments of
episodic memory improved with age within the range of four and seven years. Holistic recollection is a
notable exception to this trend, likely due to the fact that unlike the other memory assessments, holistic
recollection does not depend on memory accuracy (Horner & Burgess, 2013). After regressing out the
effects of age and IQ, the memory measures clustered into two main components: one captured the lab-
based measures of memory and the other represented autobiographical memory and the free recall of
narratives.
The improvement in memory we saw between four and seven years aligns with previous literature. This
is a dynamic period of development when children acquire the ability to encode episodic memories
(Newcombe et al., 2022; Newcombe & Nguyen, 2024). However, it is not surprising that most of our
measures do not correspond with our measure of IQ. The one exception was memory for the cartoons
assessed through probed questions. Both the IQ assessment and this memory assessment came in the
form of questions and may thus be probing similar qualities about how children answer questions.
After regressing out the effect of age and verbal IQ, some of the measures of memory were still highly
correlated. Notably, the lab-based measures that derived from the same encoding experience –
mnemonic discrimination and relational binding – correlated highly with each other as well as with the
questions asked about the cartoons. However, question accuracy was not significantly correlated with
the ability to accurately freely recall the same cartoons. Memory for the same memoranda was
measured in a different way in these two tasks. On one end of the spectrum, the probed questions
correlate with the lab-based memory measures and verbal IQ. On the other end of the spectrum, free
recall accuracy correlated with our measure of autobiographical memory, our most naturalistic measure
of episodic memory.
The lab-based measures load onto a single factor that explains most of the variance in the data.
Autobiographical memory and free recall for cartoons load onto a second, unrelated factor. Thus,
although the lab-based measures are not indicative of performance on our most naturalistic measure of
episodic memory, namely the real-world assessment of autobiographical memory, this form of memory
assessment is important as it captures most of the variance in memory behavior in our data. The
accuracy with which children answered probed questions about the cartoons loads well onto both
factors and thus proves to be an important bridge between purely lab-based and real-world
assessments of memory.
One possible reason for the two-factor dichotomy is a difference in the way memory was assessed. In
the first factor the tasks more heavily relied on recognition memory; previously seen items were
presented to the children. The tasks comprising the second factor required the children to freely recall
past experiences. Recall and recognition may be distinct and separable memory processes that echo the
distinction between recollection and familiarity are (Yonelinas, 1994, 2002). Recall is similar to
recollection in that it is an all-or-none retrieval process that either allows an individual to call a specific
experience to mind or not. Although recognition tasks can rely on both recollection and familiarity,
these two processes have been found to be dissociable in these tasks, and familiarity can be
independently used to detect previously seen items in these paradigms (Yonelinas, 1994, 2002). There is
evidence that recall and recognition tap neuroanatomically separable brain networks, with recall relying
more heavily on the hippocampus, whereas recognition may rely on cortical regions in the surrounding
temporal lobes (Yonelinas, 2002; Yonelinas et al., 2010). Supporting these theories, a study in four- to
seven- year old children found that the free recall of cartoons had no relation with recognition of details
from those cartoons after accounting for the effect of age (Benear et al., 2024).
Our task in which children were asked specific questions about their memory for cartoons doesn’t fit
neatly into either a recall or recognition paradigm. In this task the questions may have served as a partial
cue for their memory’s retrieval, but the children were also required to recall the answer rather than
recognizing an answer. The fact that this task doesn’t fit neatly into either paradigm may be why it loads
well onto both factors. Future research should explore how lab-based recall tasks and naturalistic
recognition tasks relate.
Autobiographical memory can be assessed in several different ways, and it is thus possible that a
different measure of autobiographical memory would yield a different result. We measured
autobiographical memory as the number of unique memory elaborations that children elicited across
four different events. Although this measurement technique has been utilized in previous literature on
children’s autobiographical memory (Cleveland & Reese, 2005; Jack et al., 2009), this previous literature
has also often accounted for how parents scaffold their children’s recalls (Cleveland & Reese, 2005; Jack
et al., 2009; Reese et al., 1993; Reese & Brown, 2000). Parental support during autobiographical recall
has been shown to account for differences in how children recall their pasts (Jack et al., 2009). This
difference may extend beyond autobiographical memories into other skills such as literacy (Reese,
1995). Furthermore, some measures of autobiographical memory in adults split autobiographical
memory recalls into categories based on whether the details recalled constitute actual episodic
memories or semantic details related to an individual’s knowledge base more broadly (Levine et al.,
2002). It would be interesting for future research to account for measures of parental support of recall
as well as different ways to categorize memory elaborations. Additionally, our measure of
autobiographical memory had no ground truth validation because we weren’t present at the actual
event. It is therefore difficult to know how our measure of autobiographical memory maps onto
memory accuracy. Of course, our more naturalistic measure of freely recalling previously seen cartoons
helps to account for this gap since in this case we can precisely know and control the experience that
children were later recalling.
In sum, we found that episodic memory can be divided into a two-factor structure, supporting the
notion that lab-based and real-world measures of episodic memory may not be measuring the same
underlying construct (Baker-Ward et al., 1993; Neisser, 1982; Virk et al., 2024). This is in contrast to both
what many researchers commonly believe, and what has been found in previous analyses of the
structure of episodic memory (Canada et al., 2022; Cheke & Clayton, 2015; Saragosa‐Harris et al., 2021).
Most of the variance in measurable episodic memory comes from lab-based measures of memory.
Indicating that these kinds of tasks do constitute an important facet of memory behavior that is not
captured in more naturalistic paradigms (Banaji & Crowder, 1989). However, naturalistic tasks measure
a distinct, but important, part of episodic memory. In fact, these tasks may be most indicative of how we
recall our lived experiences (Baker-Ward et al., 1993; Neisser, 1982; Virk et al., 2024). We may see this
division in part due to a dissociation in task structure. Our lab-based measures were tasks of recognition
and our more naturalistic memory measures were tasks of recall. These two ways of probing of episodic
memory have been previously shown to be dissociable and distinct (Yonelinas, 2002; Yonelinas et al.,
2010). Probed questions about past experiences, which incorporate components of both recall and
recognition, bridge an important gap between lab-based memory and more naturalistic measures of
episodic memory.