GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 1
Disentangling the Effects of Human Development and Gender Egalitarianism on the
Gender/Sex Gap in the Five-Factor Model of Personality Traits across Countries
1,2 3 4,5 6 1,6
Arij Yehya , Jérôme Rossier , Dragos Iliescu , Jüri Allik , and Anu Realo
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
Core Curriculum Program, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar
Department of Psychology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Department of Psychology, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
Department of Industrial Psychology, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa
Institute of Psychology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Author Note
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 2
Abstract
Objective The main aim of the study is to disentangle the effects of two contextual
factors—human development and gender egalitarianism—on the increasing size of
gender/sex differences in personality traits across countries.
Method A three-way 2x2x2 factorial design was used to examine the effects of
gender/sex, human development, and gender egalitarianism on the Five-Factor Model (FFM)
personality traits in samples from four countries that vary in their levels of contextual
factors—Burkina Faso (low human development/low gender egalitarianism), Moldova (low
human development/high gender egalitarianism), Qatar (high human development/low
gender egalitarianism), and Switzerland (high human development/high gender
egalitarianism).
Results The level of human development of the country was the main contextual factor
that affected the size of gender/sex differences in Neuroticism, Agreeableness, and Openness
while gender egalitarianism made a significant contribution to the gender/sex gap in
Neuroticism and Agreeableness only in interaction with human development.
Conclusions High level of human development is a necessary but not sufficient factor
influencing the size of gender/sex differences in Neuroticism and Agreeableness—only when
high level of human development is achieved, gender egalitarianism will make an additional
contribution to the widening of the gender/sex gap.
Keywords: gender/sex gap, gender equality paradox, Five-Factor Model personality,
human development, gender egalitarianism
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 3
Introduction
Gender/sex differences in psychological traits such as cognitive abilities, academic
performance, vocational interest, personal values, and personality traits are one of the most
studied and contested topics in contemporary research in psychology. More than 700 articles
reporting meta-analyses on psychological gender/sex differences were published in peer-
reviewed journals between 1950 and 2021 (Eagly & Revelle, 2022). Despite the extensive
research, there is no consensus among the scientific community either on the magnitude or
the cause of gender/sex differences and consequently, on which terminology to use—gender
(pertaining to socially and culturally constructed identities, roles, and behaviors of
individuals) or sex (pertaining to the biological and physical aspects of an individual). Hence,
following a recent example by Eagly and Revelle (2022), we opted to use the hybrid term
‘gender/sex’ in this paper referring to a binary classification categorized as men and women.
Gender/sex differences in various psychological outcomes—including personality
traits—are well-documented (Archer, 2019; Eagly & Revelle, 2022; Ilmarinen et al., 2022;
Schmitt et al., 2017). Across studies and cultures, women usually score higher than men on
most Five-Factor Model (FFM) personality traits, most notably on Neuroticism and
Agreeableness (Costa et al., 2001; Kajonius & Johnson, 2018; Murphy et al., 2021; Schmitt
et al., 2008). Somewhat counterintuitively, the overall gender/sex differences in personality
traits have been found to be larger in countries with higher levels of human development and
gender egalitarianism (Costa et al., 2001; Lippa, 2010; Schmitt et al., 2008). However, it is
unclear what drives the cultural variations in men’s and women’s personality traits, is it
primarily human development or gender egalitarianism—which often go hand in hand—or
both in combination (Costa et al., 2001; Lippa, 2010; Schmitt et al., 2008). The present study
1 We will use the terms of gender egalitarianism and equality interchangeably in this paper while referring to
gender equality (or parity) in the public sphere (e.g., education, economic participation, political empowerment
etc.).
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 4
aims to disentangle the effects of human development and gender egalitarianism on the size
of gender/sex differences in the FFM personality traits in a sample of four countries: Burkina
Faso, Moldova, Qatar, and Switzerland which greatly differ along the abovementioned two
contextual factors.
In the following sections, we will first highlight the main evidence regarding gender/sex
differences in the FFM personality traits and the widening gender/sex gap in personality in
more developed and gender egalitarian societies. We will then proceed with discussing the
main theories that have been put forward to explain these differences before describing how
the present study will contribute to the existing knowledge and to solving the gender equality
paradox.
Gender/Sex Differences in Personality Traits
Nearly 30 years ago, Feingold (1994) presented the first meta-analysis showing that
gender/sex differences in personality traits persist across countries. Since then, gender/sex
differences in personality traits have been extensively studied using various research methods
(e.g., different personality models and questionnaires, self- vs informant-reports, broad
factors vs more specific facets or nuances etc.), statistical tools (e.g., observed vs latent
scores, univariate vs multivariate effect sizes etc.), and large scale samples involving millions
of individuals worldwide (Del Giudice et al., 2012; Furnham & Treglown, 2021; Kaiser et al.,
2019; Mac Giolla & Kajonius, 2019; Murphy et al., 2021). Furnham and Treglown (2021)
showed that known gender/sex differences in personality traits extend across different
personality models and questionnaires, including the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI),
the Hogan Personality Indicator (HPI), the Motives and Values Preferences Indicator
(MVPI), and various NEO Personality Inventories (e.g., NEO PI-R and NEO PI-3) among
others.
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 5
The present study focuses on the FFM of personality (Costa & McCrae, 2008) which is
one of the most widely used models of personality traits. The model presents personality as
consisting of many correlated traits that are hierarchically organized into five broad bipolar
dimensions—Neuroticism (opposite to Emotional Stability), Extraversion, Openness to
Experience (Openness), Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness. The FFM personality traits
have been shown to be linked to diverse consequential life outcomes such as health,
education, career choice, and wellbeing with most of these associations generalizing across
age, gender, and ethnicity (Soto, 2021). As already mentioned above, women typically score
higher than men on Neuroticism and Agreeableness (Costa et al., 2001; Kajonius & Johnson,
2018; Murphy et al., 2021) but also on Extraversion (Lippa, 2010; Weisberg et al., 2011) and
Conscientiousness (Schmitt et al., 2008). Gender/sex differences in Openness have been
found to be less consistent across studies; however, some research indicates that women tend
to score higher on this personality trait than men (Furnham & Treglown, 2021; Kajonius &
Giolla, 2017).
The Gender Equality Paradox
Even though the gender/sex differences in FFM personality traits extend across different
samples and cultures, there is a considerable cross-cultural variation in the size of those
differences. Comparing the size of gender/sex differences across 50 countries, Kaiser (2019)
showed that the countries’ overall gender/sex difference scores, represented by Mahlanobis
distance (D), showed remarkable range of variation. In some countries such as Pakistan,
Indonesia, India, and Malaysia, D scores were less than 1.6 whereas the overall gender/sex
difference scores in some other countries such as Russia, USA, Turkey, and Croatia were
higher than 2.0. Intuitively, one would predict that gender/sex differences in personality traits
are smaller in countries with higher levels of gender egalitarianism and economic growth.
This stems from the belief that gender/sex differences in psychological outcomes might be a
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 6
result of differences in gender roles and gender socialization processes (Butler, 1990).
However, in line with research on other psychological characteristics such as self-esteem
(Bleidorn et al., 2016), subjective well-being (Guo et al., 2022), willingness to take risks and
altruism (Falk & Hermle, 2018), moral judgment (Atari et al., 2020), and basic human values
(Schwartz & Rubel-Lifschitz, 2009), the gender/sex differences in the FFM personality traits
have consistently been found to be larger in countries where people have higher levels of
economic wealth, a longer and healthier life, more equal access to knowledge and education,
and where women and men have the same rights and opportunities (Costa et al., 2001; Lippa,
2010; Mac Giolla & Kajonius, 2019; Schmitt et al., 2008). In addition to human development
and gender egalitarianism, several other culture-level indicators such as higher individualism,
lower power distance, lower pathogen prevalence, and higher food availability have been
found to account for the widening of the gender/sex gap in personality traits across cultures
(Kaiser, 2019; Murphy et al., 2021).
Two main perspectives—social role theory (or more recently biosocial construction
theory) and evolutionary theory—have been put forward to explain how nature and nurture
might shape gender/sex differences in personality traits across cultures (Schmitt et al., 2017).
Both theories describe the role of biological factors, epigenetic effects, direct genetic effects,
and social/cultural effects on the development of human psychological gender/sex
differences.
According to the social role theory, the perceived gender roles within cultures cause
gender/sex differences in psychological outcomes, including personality traits (Wood &
Eagly, 2012). This theory recognizes that certain differentiation in physical characteristics of
the two sexes (for instance, men being physically stronger than women on average and
women’s unique ability to bear children) drive societal gender role beliefs resulting in the
division of labor between genders/sexes based on these differences. This theory predicts that
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 7
psychological gender/sex differences should be larger in countries with larger differences in
gender roles than in countries with higher levels of gender egalitarianism (Butler, 1990).
However, as mentioned above, there is substantial research evidence supporting the opposite
view, with more developed and gender egalitarian countries exhibiting greater gender/sex
differences in the FFM personality traits (Costa et al., 2001; Lippa, 2010; Schmitt et al.,
2008).
One perspective in evolutionary psychology—the obligate sex differences perspective—
argues that the evolved gender/sex differences in personality are purely sex-specific
adaptations and universal across cultures (Schmitt, 2015). It is guided by the assumption that
men and women faced distinct adaptive problems long time ago which resulted in genetic
variations between sexes. Current psychological trait gender/sex differences resulting from
such variation across generations are thus seen as culturally insensitive sex-specific
adaptations (Buss, 1997). Following this assumption, one would expect the gender/sex
differences in personality traits to be similar across cultures; however, this is not what the
existing research evidence shows as indicated above.
The emergently moderated perspective of sex differences within evolutionary psychology
argues that contextual factors play a moderating role in the relationship between genetic and
epigenetic inheritance systems, influencing the behaviors, traits, and other phenotypes of men
and women (Schmitt, 2015; Schmitt et al., 2017). The first premise of this perspective is that
there are biologically predisposed sex differences in psychological traits guided by evolution.
Another important premise is that biological factors (including genetic or epigenetic) are
amplified in more favorable environments meanwhile ecological stress suppresses the effect
of genetic factors on phenotypes. Support for this perspective has come from cross-cultural
studies that have shown that there are wider gender/sex differences in physical characteristics
such as height and sex-drive in more gender egalitarian countries (Lippa, 2009). Even though
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 8
men are taller than women on average due to genetic and biological factors, sex differences in
height are moderated by ecological stress. Poor nutrition, for instance, has been found to have
a height-reducing effect on men leading to narrower gender/sex differences on this physical
trait in certain cultures (Gaulin & Boster, 1992; Schmitt et al., 2017).
In sum, while the gender equality paradox has received a lot of attention and empirical
support over the past decades, prior research has not been able to disentangle the effects of
human development and gender egalitarianism on the size of gender/sex differences in
personality traits—countries with higher levels of economic development usually have better
gender equality and vice versa (Duflo, 2012; Kabeer & Natali, 2013). Hence, little is known
about the unique contribution of each of those variables on the widening gap of gender/sex
differences in the FFM personality traits.
The Aim of the Study
The present study aims to disentangle two country-level indicators—human development
and gender egalitarianism—that have been shown to be associated with increasing gender/sex
differences in personality traits across cultures, using data from Burkina Faso, Moldova,
Qatar, and Switzerland.
In previous research (Guo et al., 2022; Hildebrandt & Jäckle, 2023; Kaiser, 2019; Lippa,
2010; Murphy et al., 2021; Schmitt et al., 2008), human development was measured using the
Human Development Index (HDI), which is based on national indicators including gross
national income (GDP), life expectancy, and education. Gender egalitarianism was assessed
using the Gender Inequality Index (GII), which highlights gender parity in three dimensions:
reproductive health, educational and political empowerment, and labor force participation
(UNDP, 2022). These two indices, HDI and GII are highly positively correlated with each
other at the country level, r(191) = -.91 (UNDP, 2022). In some recent studies (Eriksson &
Strimling, 2023; Mac Giolla & Kajonius, 2019), a more comprehensive index of gender
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 9
equality known as the Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI)(World Economic Forum, 2022) has
been used which measures economic participation and opportunity, educational attainment,
health and survival and political empowerment of women compared to men in a society. The
HDI and GGGI scores have been shown to be correlated at r = .60 across 62 countries
(Bosson et al., 2021). For 143 countries in 2022, the correlation between GGGI and GII is
also (r = -0.31) (Pinho-Gomes & Woodward, 2024). Given the correlation, the outcome is the
same whether we select GGGI or GII. Since GGGI encompasses a more comprehensive
evaluation of gender egalitarianism than GII, we will use it in the present study along with
HDI as a measure of human and economic development.
As mentioned earlier, countries with higher levels of gender egalitarianism have typically
also higher levels of human development (Kabeer & Natali, 2013) and vice versa (Duflo,
th
2012). Switzerland had the highest HDI ranking 7 out of 177 countries in 2005 and on
th th
GGGI ranked 26 out of 115 in 2006. Burkina Faso scored very low on both HDI (176 ) in
th
2005 and GGGI (104 ) in 2006, when the data for the present study were collected.
However, Qatar and the Republic of Moldova are notable outliers to this general trend. Qatar
nd th
ranked relatively high on HDI (42 out of 191) but had a very low score on the GGGI (135
out of 153 countries) at the time of data collection in 2020. Meanwhile, Moldova, one of the
th
poorest countries in Europe, ranked relatively low on human development (99 out of 169
th
countries) but had comparatively high levels of gender egalitarianism (ranking 20 out of
130) on GGGI during the data collection in 2008.
If smaller gender/sex differences in the FFM personality traits in less developed nations
are indeed primarily due to economic hardship which restrains the development of one’s
inherent personality traits, we should find the size of the gender/sex gap in the FFM
personality traits to be smaller among the people of Burkina Faso and Moldova and larger in
both Switzerland and Qatar. However, if gender/sex differences in personality across cultures
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 10
are primarily driven by gender egalitarianism, the gender/sex gap in personality traits should
be larger both in Switzerland and Moldova than in Burkina Faso and Qatar. Finally, if
gender/sex differences in personality are affected by both human development and gender
egalitarianism, the size of the gender/sex gap in the FFM personality traits should be larger in
Switzerland in comparison to other three countries.
Based on the results of previous studies, the hypotheses of the present study are as
follows:
Hypothesis (H1): Gender/sex differences in the FFM personality traits will be
significantly larger in countries with higher levels of human development (i.e., Qatar and
Switzerland) than in countries with lower levels of human development (i.e., Burkina Faso
and Moldova).
Hypothesis (H2): Gender/sex differences in personality traits will be significantly larger
in countries with higher levels of gender egalitarianism (i.e., Moldova and Switzerland) than
in countries with lower levels of gender egalitarianism (i.e., Burkina Faso and Qatar).
Hypothesis (H3): Gender/sex differences in personality traits will be significantly larger
in countries with higher levels of both human development and gender egalitarianism (i.e.,
Switzerland) compared to countries which either score high on one (i.e., Moldova and Qatar)
or none (i.e., Burkina Faso) of the two contextual factors.
Method
The study was pre-registered on the Open Science Framework prior to data collection in
Qatar as well as prior to the corresponding authors gaining access to the secondary datasets
from Burkina Faso, Moldova, and Switzerland. Our data, analysis code, and research
materials are available online .
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 11
Participants
The study combined three pre-collected data sets from Burkina Faso, Moldova, and
Switzerland, in addition to the data collected in Qatar for the purpose of this study. The
inclusion criteria were similar across datasets—participants with known gender, country of
residence and who had completed at least 85% of the questions in the personality
questionnaire were included in the study. The total sample size was 3,803 participants, of
whom 2,100 (55.22%) were women and 1,703 (44.78%) were men. The sample
Burkina Faso
The data from Burkina Faso were collected by Zecca et al. (2012) between 2005 and
2007. Different research groups in Burkina Faso were asked to collect data from about 60
men and 60 women aged 18 to 25 years and 60 per gender aged 26 years or older. The total
sample size was 717; only one participant failed to meet the inclusion criteria of our study.
After data cleaning the sample included 716 participants (44.13% women) with a mean age
of 24.77 (SD = 5.22) years.
The Republic of Moldova
The Moldovan sample consisted of students who were recruited through the snowball
sampling technique. The data were collected in 2008 as part of the validation process of the
Romanian version of the Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R). Participants were
asked to fill in an online version of the personality questionnaire. The total sample included
557 participants of whom 45.42% were women with a mean age of 32.64 (SD = 11.13) years.
Switzerland
The Swiss data also came from Zecca et al. (2012) which included 1,787 participants.
Those who met the inclusion criteria were 1,781 participants (55.42% women) with a mean
age of 45.66 (SD = 28.88) years. The data collection took place in 2005-2007.
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 12
Qatar
University students were asked to complete an anonymous online survey which included
the Arabic version of the NEO PI-R and sociodemographic questions about their age and
nationality. Data were collected between October 2020 and October 2021. Participation was
limited to students aged 18 years and above. The total sample consisted of 1,286 participants.
However, the total number of participants who met the inclusion criteria and were included in
the analysis were 749 participants (72.63% women) with a mean age of 22.86 (SD = 7.02)
years.
Measures
Personality Questionnaire
The Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R) measures the FFM personality
traits Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to Experience (Openness), Agreeableness, and
Conscientiousness (Costa & McCrae, 2008). The questionnaire contains 240 items which are
answered on a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from strongly disagree (0) to strongly agree
(4). The items measure 30 personality facets, which are grouped into the five FFM domains
such that each domain score is a composite of six facet scores (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
Higher scores indicate higher levels of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness,
and Conscientiousness, respectively.
The translated and validated versions of the NEO PI-R were used across samples
depending on the language spoken in the country. In Burkina Faso and Switzerland, the
validated French version of the NEO PI-R was used (Rolland et al., 1998). In Moldova, the
Romanian (Ispas et al., 2014) and in Qatar, the Arabic (Alansari, 2015) versions of the NEO
PI-R were used, respectively. In the current study, the Cronbach alphas of the five domain
personality scales ranged from .69 (Openness) to .84 (Conscientiousness) in Burkina Faso
(median .78 across five domains), from .86 (Openness and Agreeableness) to .91
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 13
(Neuroticism) in Moldova (median .87), from .78 (Agreeableness) to .88 (Neuroticism and
Conscientiousness) in Qatar (median .84), and from .85 (Extraversion) to .92 (Neuroticism)
in Switzerland (median .89), respectively. The mean scores, standard deviation, and
We also examined the measurement invariance of the FFM personality traits across
gender/sex in the combined samples and within each of the four countries. Details on the
methods and results of the measurement invariance analyses are provided in the
Supplementary Material. In brief, the results showed that scalar invariance across gender/sex
Material). For the within country analysis, scalar invariance was also achieved except for
Burkina Faso. In the Burkinabe sample, scalar invariance was nearly met for four FFM
domains, with scores close to the acceptable cut-off values provided by Hu and Bentler
(1999). However, for Openness, the measurement invariance analysis showed invariance
across women and men at the configural and metric levels but not at the scalar level (see
Country-level Indicators
Human Development Index (HDI). The HDI is calculated based on life expectancy at
birth, expected years of schooling, mean years of schooling and gross domestic product
(GDP) per capita (UNDP, 2022). The score ranges from 0 to 1 with higher scores indicating
higher levels of human development. Since the personality data collection in Burkina Faso,
Moldova, and Switzerland took place between 2005 and 2008, and in Qatar in 2021, we
examined HDI across time for these four countries. The average HDI scores of for Qatar and
Switzerland between 2005 and 2021 were high, reaching .86 and .94, respectively.
Meanwhile, Burkina Faso’s average HDI score for during the same time frame was .39,
which is considered low human development. Moldova’s scores ranged from .70 in 2005 to
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 14
.76 in 2021 with an average of .74. Therefore, Qatar and Switzerland were classified as
having high HDI (coded as 1), while Burkina Faso and Moldova, which ranked low on this
index, were coded as low HDI (0).
Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI). The Global Gender Gap (World Economic Forum,
2022) report published by the World Economic Forum evaluates gender egalitarianism since
2006. This index measures gender parity based on economic participation and opportunity,
educational attainment, health and survival and political empowerment. The score ranges
from 0-1 with higher values indicating a lower gender gap (i.e., more gender parity). The
score on GGGI was based on the time of data collection for each country. Burkina Faso and
Switzerland scored .58 and .70, respectively, in 2005 with the former ranking low and the
latter ranking high on this index. The scores increased for both across time reaching .80 in
Switzerland and .65 for Burkina Faso; however, they both still rank high and low,
respectively. In 2020, Qatar ranked low on GGGI with a score .63 and that decreased in 2021
to .62. In 2008, Moldova ranked high with a score of .72 and that score increased to .77 in
2021. Despite the changes in scores across time, the four countries remain similar in terms of
how high or low they are on gender parity. Therefore, Moldova and Switzerland were
classified as having high gender egalitarianism (coded as 1) while Burkina Faso and Qatar,
which ranked low on this indicator, were coded as having low gender egalitarianism (coded
as 0).
Statistical Analysis
We ran a series of three-way analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) separately for each
FFM domain—Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness,
respectively, while controlling for participants’ age which significantly differed among four
samples (F(3,3798) = 307.22 , p < .001). In these 2x2x2 between-subject models, the FFM
domains were dependent variables with gender/sex (0=men, 1=women), HDI (0=low,
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 15
1=high), and GGGI (0=low, 1=high) as independent variables. Following our study aim, we
were primarily interested in (a) gender/sex differences; (b) interactive effects of gender/sex
with HDI and GGGI, and (c) three-way interactions of gender/sex, HDI, and GGGI.
Significance was inferred if p < .05. All analyses were carried out by using the IBM SPSS
Statistics software (Version 29).
Results
each FFM domain.
Neuroticism
After adjusting for age as a covariate, there were statistically significant gender/sex
differences in the score of Neuroticism, F(8, 3793) = 29.74, p < .001, the effect size partial
eta squared ( ) = .008, with women (estimated mean (EM) = 97.35, standard error (SE) =
0.52) scoring higher on Neuroticism than men (EM = 93.18, SE = 0.57). The interaction
effect between gender/sex and HDI was also significant (F(8,3793) = 9.95, p = .002, 
=.003)—the gender/sex gap in Neuroticism was larger in samples from countries with high
HDI (i.e., Qatar and Switzerland) than with low HDI (i.e., Burkina Faso and Moldova)
supporting H1 for this personality trait. The interaction between gender/sex and GGGI failed
to reach statistical significance at p < .05 and therefore, H2 for Neuroticism was not
supported but there was a statistically significant three-way interaction between gender/sex,
HDI, and GGGI on the score of Neuroticism, F(8, 3795) = 5.04, p = .025,  = .001. As can
rather than with lower levels of HDI. However, there were also significant differences in the
size of the gender/sex gap in Neuroticism between the two samples from countries with high
levels of HDI—the gender/sex differences in Neuroticism were larger in the sample from
Switzerland which has high levels of both HDI and GGGI than in the sample from Qatar
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 16
which scored high on HDI but low on GGGI. Thus, high GGGI only seems to play a role in
1). In other words, the gender/sex gap in Neuroticism was largest in the sample from a
country with high levels of both economic growth and gender equality supporting H3 for this
personality trait.
Extraversion
There were no significant gender/sex differences in Extraversion scores while controlling
for age. The two-way interaction between gender/sex and HDI as well as the three-way
interaction between gender/sex, HDI, and GGGI also failed to reach statistical significance at
p < .05 thus providing no support for H1 and H3. However, the interaction between gender
and GGGI was significant, F(8, 3795) = 6.57, p = .010,  =.002, confirming H2. Men (EM
= 109.27, SE = 0.75) scored significantly higher than women (EM = 107.22, SE = 0.62) on
Extraversion in samples from countries with lower gender egalitarianism. Meanwhile, women
(EM = 105.51, SE = 0.60) had significantly higher scores of Extraversion than men (EM =
104.33, SE = 0.58) in samples from countries with higher level of gender egalitarianism
Openness
Gender/sex differences in Openness, while controlling for the effect of age, were
statistically significant with women (EM = 109.88, SE = 0.42) scoring higher than men (EM
= 107.10, SE = 0.46), F(8, 3793) = 20.32, p < .001,  =.005. The interaction between HDI
and gender/sex was also significant, F(8, 3793) = 16.50, p < .000,  =.004. While there
were no gender/sex differences in Openness in samples from low HDI countries (i.e., Burkina
Faso and Moldova), women (EM = 117.04, SE = 0.45) had significantly higher scores of
Openness than men (EM = 111.75, SE = 0.65) in samples from high HDI countries (i.e.,
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 17
the two-way interaction between gender/sex and GGGI nor the three-way interaction between
gender/sex, HDI, and GGGI were significant at p < .05. Thus, H2 and H3 were not supported
for Openness as only human development and not gender egalitarianism was associated with
gender/sex differences in Openness across samples.
Agreeableness
Women (EM = 115.24, SE = 0.42) had significantly higher scores than men (EM =
111.93, SE = 0.46) on Agreeableness while controlling for age, F(8, 3793) = 28.17, p < .001,
 =.007. Samples from countries with higher HDI had a significantly wider gender/sex gap
in Agreeableness than those from low HDI countries, F(8, 3793) = 17.29, p < .001,  =.005,
confirming H1. In samples from high HDI countries (i.e., Qatar and Switzerland), women
(EM = 121.57, SE = 0.45) scored higher than men (EM = 115.67, SE = 0.66) on
Agreeableness while in samples from low HDI countries (i.e., Burkina Faso and Moldova),
the scores of women and men were similar. The interaction between gender/sex and GGGI
was not significant at p < .05 refuting H2 for this personality trait. However, the three-way
interaction between gender/sex, HDI, and GGGI was statistically significant, F(8, 3793) =
10.67, p < .01,  = .003. The gender/sex gap in Agreeableness was widest in the Swiss
sample (high HDI and high GGGI) where women (EM = 125.51, SE = 0.56) had higher
scores than men (EM = 116.46, SE = 0.61) and nearly non-existent in samples from low HDI
countries despite their level of GGGI. However, in samples from countries with high HDI,
the gender/sex gap was still larger in those with high levels of GGGI (i.e., Switzerland) than
in those low in GGGI (i.e., Qatar), thus supporting H3. In sum, the size of gender/sex
differences in Agreeableness was largest in the sample from a country with both high human
in both samples from high HDI countries, despite the countries’ level of gender
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 18
egalitarianism. Women, however, had higher scores on Agreeableness in samples from
countries with both high HDI and GGGI compared to high HDI and low GGGI.
Conscientiousness
There were no significant gender/sex differences in Conscientiousness when controlling
for the effects of age at p < .05). Furthermore, the two-way interactions between gender/sex
and HDI and gender/sex and GGGI, and the three-way interaction between gender, HDI, and
GGGI were all non-significant too (p > .05). Thus, none of the hypotheses were supported for
Conscientiousness.
Discussion
The aim of this study was to disentangle the effect of two contextual factors—economic
development and gender egalitarianism—on the size of gender/sex differences in the FFM
personality traits across countries. Somewhat counterintuitively, previous research has shown
that gender/sex differences in personality are largest in wealthier, more developed and gender
egalitarian countries (Mac Giolla & Kajonius, 2019; Schmitt et al., 2008). The so-called
gender equality paradox, however, does not specify which of the two highly interrelated
factors—human development or gender equality—or their combination is the main driver of
the widening of the gender/sex gap across cultures. In an attempt to decouple the effects of
these factors, four samples from countries with varying levels of the aforementioned
contextual factors (high on both, low on both, or high on one and low on the other and vice
versa) were compared on the size of the gender/sex gap in the FFM personality traits in the
present study.
Similar to previous research (Costa et al., 2001; Kajonius & Giolla, 2017; Lippa, 2010),
we found significant gender/sex differences in Neuroticism, Openness, and Agreeableness
with women scoring higher than men on these three traits in all studied samples when
controlling for the effect of age. For Extraversion and Conscientiousness, no significant
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 19
gender/sex differences were found, replicating some of the previous findings (Kajonius &
Johnson, 2018; Weisberg et al., 2011).
When comparing the size of gender/sex differences in personality traits across four
samples as a function of human development and gender equality of their countries, we found
that samples from Qatar and Switzerland, which both rank highly on HDI, had a significantly
wider gender gap in Neuroticism, Openness, and Agreeableness than samples from Burkina
Faso and Moldova which score low on HDI (UNDP, 2022). Hence, H1 was supported for
three out of five FFM personality traits. Similar findings have been found for other
psychological outcomes such as self-esteem (Bleidorn et al., 2016) and moral judgment
(Atari et al., 2020), for instance, for which the gender/sex cap was larger in countries with
higher levels of economic development. Somewhat surprisingly, though, the two-way
interaction between gender/sex and gender egalitarianism as measured by GGGI (World
Economic Forum, 2022) was not statistically significant at p < .05 for any of these three
personality traits at the domain level. In other words, there were no statistically significant
gender/sex differences in Neuroticism, Openness, and Agreeableness between samples from
countries with high (i.e., Moldova and Switzerland) or low (i.e., Burkina Faso and Qatar)
levels of gender egalitarianism. The two-way interaction between GGGI and gender/sex was
significant only for Extraversion at p < .05, so all in all, our findings do not offer much
support for H2.
However, gender egalitarianism played a significant role in affecting the size of
gender/sex differences in two personality traits—Neuroticism and Agreeableness—in
interaction with HDI, offering support for H3. Namely, the gender/sex gap in Neuroticism
and Agreeableness was significantly larger in the Swiss (high GGGI) than in the Qatari (low
GGGI) sample, even though both countries have high levels of economic and human
development. This finding supports earlier research showing that the widening of the
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 20
gender/sex gap on other psychological outcomes such as attitudes towards homosexuality and
spatial ability was better predicted by economic growth than gender equality measures
(Herlitz et al., 2024; Hildebrandt & Jäckle, 2023).
As far as we are aware, this is the first study that explicitly aimed to disentangle the role
of gender egalitarianism and economic wealth on the widening of the gender/sex gap in
personality traits. This is important as teasing apart the unique effects of economic
development and gender egalitarianism would help shed some light on the nature versus
nurture debate in psychological research on gender/sex differences in personality traits. With
this in mind, we will review the results of the study in light of the two major perspectives—
the social role/biosocial construction theory and the evolutionary theory—when discussing
the gender gap in personality across cultures and its possible origins.
As argued in the Introduction section, the biosocial construction theory states that it is
primarily gender roles that drive gender/sex differences in psychological outcomes including
personality traits (Wood & Eagly, 2012). Based on this assumption, one would predict that
gender egalitarianism plays a major role in explaining the gender/sex gap in personality traits
across cultures: the less gender/sex-equal the country is, the stronger the traditional gender
roles leading to larger gender/sex differences in personality traits. However, this view was
not fully supported in our study as the two-way interaction between gender egalitarianism
and gender/sex was significant only for one personality trait, Extraversion, in which case the
gender/sex gap in personality traits was indeed larger in samples from countries with less
gender equality than in samples from more gender equal countries.
Another proposed explanation of the gender equality paradox is the that respondents in
different cultures may use different frames of reference when self-rating. In cultures with
gender egalitarianism, men and women may compare themselves to people in general and
real differences appear because they use the same frame of reference. Meanwhile, in
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 21
countries with low gender egalitarianism, people may compare themselves only to others of
their own gender/sex, which will tend to eliminate gender differences (Guimond et al., 2007).
Schmitt et al. (2017) argued that if that claim were true, then gender/sex differences in
personality traits and other psychological variables in egalitarian countries are accurate and
should be considered “true” differences. In this study, if that possible explanation was
accurate, then we expect that the widening of gender/sex differences to be solely associated
with GGGI rather than HDI, which was not the case.
Our results are more supportive of a perspective within the evolutionary theory—known
as the emergently-moderated perspective—that posits that gender/sex differences in
personality traits are genetically predisposed and yet sensitive to environmental and
ecological influences (Schmitt et al., 2017). One the one hand, our findings showed that there
were no gender/sex differences in Neuroticism, Openness, and Agreeableness in samples
from countries with low economic development (i.e., Burkina Faso and Moldova), regardless
of their level of gender egalitarianism. On the other hand, the gender/sex gap in Neuroticism,
Openness, and Agreeableness was quite pronounced and significant in samples from
countries with high levels of human and economic development (i.e., Qatar and Switzerland).
From the emergently-moderated perspective of gender/sex differences, a smaller or non-
existing gender/sex gap in samples from less economically developed countries suggests that
the full expression of genetically predisposed traits may be attenuated by stressful ecological
factors in these regions. This is similar to findings in other physical characteristics such as
height, for instance, in which case it has been shown that malnutrition and other stressful
ecological conditions may attenuate gender/sex differences in height across cultures (Gaulin
& Boster, 1992; Schmitt et al., 2017). In more economically advanced countries, however,
the gender/sex differences in physical or psychological traits such as Neuroticism and
Agreeableness are no longer suppressed or moderated by ecological stress, and therefore,
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 22
women and men can express their evolved sex-specific characteristics and the gap between
grows larger. This is further supported by the results of a genome-wide association study
which showed that on a genetic level, men are less prone to neurotic symptoms than women
(Wendt et al., 2023). Thus, it is possible that women are genetically predisposed to have
higher levels of Neuroticism compared to men and presumably this is suppressed within
ecologically stressful environments leading to a narrower gender/sex gap in this personality
trait in less developed countries.
In case of Agreeableness, our results show that with increasing economic growth and
human development, women tend to become more straightforward, sincere, caring for others,
willing to assist, and be humble. Being more agreeable, according to the evolutionary
perspective, may have increased the chance of women to be desirable mates over time and
that to be coded in their genetic material (Lippa, 2005; Lippa, 2010). This also in line with
the results of a more recent study on moral judgments in which women put more emphasis on
care and purity compared to men (Atari et al., 2020). Thus, it is possible that men and women
may have evolved sex/gender differences in Agreeableness which are suppressed under
ecological stress and more accentuated in more prosperous and developed countries.
Our results also indicate that the gender/sex differences in two personality traits—
Neuroticism and Agreeableness—are particularly prominent in samples from both
economically developed and gender egalitarian countries compared to those samples which
are just from economically advanced countries. More importantly though, our findings show
that in the absence of economic development (i.e., in countries with presumably higher levels
of ecological stress), gender egalitarianism does not play an independent role in affecting the
size of the gender/sex gap in these personality traits. It has been shown that inequality hinders
optimal economic development within the country (Santos Silva & Klasen, 2021). Thus, it is
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 23
possible that ecological stress in high HDI countries with low GGGI is higher than countries
that score high on both.
There appears to be an added effect of gender equality on the size of the gender/sex gap
in Neuroticism and Agreeableness only in wealthy societies. Again, this could be interpreted
from the emergently-moderated perspective of gender/sex differences. Previous cross-cultural
studies have shown that in countries with higher gender egalitarianism, women have better
work-life balance (Lyness & Judiesch, 2014) and lower burn-out rates (García-Arroyo et al.,
2019) whereas both men and women have higher levels of life satisfaction (Audette et al.,
2019). Hence, higher levels of gender egalitarianism might further improve living conditions
and daily life in wealthy and developed societies and as such, support the adaptive expression
of evolved gender/sex differences in selected personality traits such as Neuroticism and
Agreeableness.
Limitations
The study does not come without limitations. Given that the data were collected across
different countries in different years using different sampling and questionnaire
administration methods, it may limit the comparability of the results. It is also important to
note that the sample sizes were fairly small, and that convenience sampling was used to
recruit participants, so the results may not be generalizable to a general population. Finally,
our sample of countries for this study fulfilled the criteria of having different levels of human
development and gender equality, but there is no guarantee that the same results would be
achieved with a different set of countries such as Rwanda and Saudi Arabia, for instance,
which similarly to Moldova and Qatar, respectively, deviate from the general pattern and
have high levels of human development and low levels of gender equality, or vice versa
(UNDP, 2022; World Economic Forum, 2022). Future research should examine the
applicability of our findings to a larger set of countries worldwide while also considering
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 24
different types of gender egalitarianism such as liberal egalitarianism, egalitarian familism,
and flexible egalitarianism, for instance (Knight & Brinton, 2017).
Another limitation of the study relates to the issue of measurement invariance. We were
able to demonstrate that scalar invariance across gender/sex groups was reached for most
FFM domains in all four samples combined; however, across samples there was one notable
exception. Openness scores for men and women in Burkina Faso failed to reach scalar
invariance suggesting that the scale interval was different across genders/sexes. Therefore,
our findings relating to gender/sex differences in Openness in Burkina Faso should be
considered with care and some reservation. It should be also noted that only about half of the
studies in a recent review had established scalar invariance of personality measures (mostly
based on the FFM of personality) across gender/sex or age groups whereas none of the
reviewed studies had established scalar invariance across different ethnic or cultural groups
(Dong & Dumas, 2020). This highlights the challenge faced by personality psychologists of
developing measurement instruments that are invariant across age, gender/sex, and cultures
(see also (Funder & Gardiner, 2024; Welzel et al., 2023; Zecca et al., 2012).
Conclusion
Our findings indicate that high level of human development is a necessary but not a
sufficient factor affecting the size of gender/sex differences in the FFM personality traits—
but most notably in Neuroticism and Agreeableness—only when high level of human
development is achieved, gender egalitarianism will make an additional contribution to the
widening of the gender/sex gap. The study is significant because it employs personality data
from countries that have been underrepresented in cross-cultural personality research in the
past such as Moldova and Qatar. Future studies should examine the generalizability of our
findings to other populations and also examine the role of other contextual factors (including
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 25
subcomponents of HDI and GGGI) in helping explain the gender equality paradox in
personality traits across cultures.
GENDER/SEX GAP IN PERSONALITY TRAITS ACROSS COUNTRIES 26