Citation: Dillon, M. R. (forthcoming). Infant Geometry. In S. P. Johnson (Ed.), Handbook of
Perceptual Development. Oxford University Press.
Title: Infant Geometry
Author: Moira R. Dillon, New York University
Biography: Moira R. Dillon, Ph.D., is an Assistant Professor of Psychology at New York
University. A recipient of the National Science Foundation CAREER Award for her work on the
cognitive origins of geometry and its implications for both formal and informal learning, Dillon
collaborates with economists, educators, and policy makers on game-based curricula for school-
readiness in mathematics. Dillon was named a Rising Star by the Association for Psychological
Science, which has also recognized her for her work characterizing infant and machine
intelligences. Dillon’s research everywhere aims to elucidate the foundations of human cognition
and show how it can be harnessed to improve learning across diverse contexts.
Abstract
Geometry is at the foundation of many of humanity’s greatest cultural achievements, from art
and architecture to science and technology. This chapter explores the origins of humans’ unique
capacity for geometry by describing the early emerging geometric sensitivities of human infants.
Initially, infants show limited sensitivities to the geometry of 2D visual forms, discriminating the
relative lengths of a form’s parts but not the angles at which those parts meet, consistent with the
hypothesis that infants differentiate forms by their shape skeletons. Nevertheless, infants’
sensitivities to the geometry of 2D visual forms may become increasingly abstract with their
acquisition of natural language, paralleling the increased geometric abstraction that underlies
toddlers’ developing 3D object recognition and categorization. Such development may ultimately
support informal learning of the foundational geometric building blocks of formal geometry, like
those found in Euclid’s Elements, with concepts like parallelism, perpendicularity, and angle, and
may thus set the stage for formal learning of geometry in school.
Keywords: geometry; visual form analysis; parallelism; perpendicularity; shape skeleton;
Euclidean geometry; object recognition; invariance; language
Geometry is at the foundation of many of humanity’s greatest cultural achievements,
from art and architecture to science and technology. We humans have an intuitive grasp of some
geometric concepts, and, during the past few millennia, at different times and in different
cultures, we have formalized geometry into demonstrations, proofs, or even systems. For as long
as we have called on geometry to help us shape society, great thinkers have sought its origins,
asking whether geometry comes from our cultures, our unique minds, or our experiences of the
external world. While debates over the origins of geometry continue despite compelling — and
contradictory — interventions by the likes of Plato, Descartes, Kant, and Husserl, findings from
a variety of disciplines over the past few decades have demonstrated the role our mind plays in
both formal and informal, abstract and intuitive geometry. Surprisingly, it is the full human mind,
with its combination of both unique cognitive abilities and those we share with other animals, as
well as our species-unique capacity for natural language that together provide the cognitive
foundations for geometric knowledge. More surprising still, perhaps, is how such origins for
geometry have been best elucidated through a study of those humans who may one day become
the next Baudhayana, Mozi, or Pythagoras: human infants. In this chapter, I thus discuss infants’
sensitivities to geometry. I focus primarily on infants’ relatively limited sensitivities to the
geometry of two-dimensional (2D) visual forms in the context of Euclidean geometry and their
developing capacity for geometric abstraction in the context of three-dimensional (3D) object
recognition and categorization with the help of language.
First, I address whether infants’ 2D visual form analysis captures the geometric
invariances outlined in Euclid’s Elements (Euclid, 2007/300 B.C.E.). Euclidean geometry relies
on a specific set of invariances, which apply to a 2D form regardless of whether that form:
moves to a different position in space (translational invariance); is rotated by any degree
(rotational invariance); or is facing either direction (sense invariance). For Euclid, a 2D form is
thus analyzed in terms of its shape, regardless of its position, orientation, or sense.
Understanding the extent to which infant cognition can or cannot analyze forms in a way that is
consistent with Euclid’s invariances is critical to informing pedagogies aimed at capitalizing on
children’s existing capacities to improve their later school readiness in mathematics. Through a
synthesis of the literature on infants’ visual form analysis, I suggest that infants have an invariant
sensitivity to geometric relations of length but not of angle, consistent with their discrimination
of forms by their shape skeletons.
I then delve deeper into the question of angle in terms of two special cases: parallel (0º)
and perpendicular (90º) lines. These two cases are special for Euclid: Both parallelism and
perpendicularity are provided in the Elements as preliminary definitions (Def. 23 and Def. 10).
Euclid’s definition of perpendicularity comes before that of parallelism and is more “perceptual,”
relying on the direct apprehension of angle equality. The definition of parallelism, by contrast,
requires an imaginative leap of drawing out straight lines indefinitely in both directions such that
they never meet (Euclid 2007/300 B.C.E.). Are these two special cases of geometric forms for
Euclid also special for infants? I review the literature on children’s and adults’ sensitivities to
parallelism and perpendicularity in the context of infants’ more general insensitivity to angle. I
then suggest that infants might either show an invariant sensitivity to parallelism but not
perpendicularity or show neither sensitivity. I conclude that even if infants can discriminate
relations of parallelism, this ability would be based on something like their detection of the
constant, shortest distance between parallel lines, not on their detection of angle: Infants are
unlikely to have sensitivities to parallelism and perpendicularity as special-case angles.
Finally, I explore how natural language might allow infants to go beyond their relatively
limited sensitivities to the geometry of visual forms to come to appreciate the invariant, abstract
geometry at the foundation of school mathematics. Here, I start by reviewing the literature on
how toddlers’ perception of the shapes of 3D objects becomes increasingly abstract with the help
of natural language, which supports their categorization of objects of the same shape. I then
suggest that this same process may be recruited for learning about invariant angle in 2D visual
forms. Knowing what role language plays in object categorization provides insight into the
mechanisms that drive geometric abstraction in our everyday lives and, perhaps, may also drive
the geometric abstraction required to learn formal geometry in school.
Together, 2D form analysis and 3D object recognition cover many of our commonsense
notions of geometry when we think about its role in our everyday lives and, in particular, about
the formal geometry some of us learn in school. Nevertheless, this chapter does not cover all our
commonsense notions of geometry or even all of infants’ early sensitivities to geometry. Most
notably, this chapter does not focus on infants’ perception of geometric depth in the navigable
layout. This topic too has played a central role in culture and philosophy, and its nature has
likewise been long debated. For example, in his Dioptrique (Optics; Nolan, 2015), René
Descartes suggested that humans, from infancy, see depth by a “natural geometry,” in which
biological properties of the human eye work with how light reflects off surfaces in the
environment to give rise to a sense of geometric depth. Modern developmental cognitive science
has thrown light on this at once perceptual and philosophical problem. For example, Eleanor
Gibson and colleagues conducted careful experiments with infants and controlled-reared animals
on the visual cliff, describing the processes by which infants and animals come to avoid the deep
side of the cliff (e.g., Gibson & Walk, 1960), and Barbara Landau and colleagues found evidence
for Descartes’ notion by testing the navigation of a young, blind child as well as blindfolded
children and adults (e.g., Landau et al., 1981). For those interested in a recent, detailed review of
work on infants’ perception of geometric depth, I point them to Elizabeth Spelke’s summa, What
Babies Know (2022).
Notably, in my discussion of the perceptual foundations of Euclidean geometry, this
chapter will come into dialogue with a prevailing theory on the cognitive origins of human’s
unique capacity for abstract geometry. In particular, some have proposed that there are multiple
specific, language-like combinatorial systems of thought, each with their own concepts
(semantics) and grammar (syntax), i.e., multiple “languages of thought” (e.g., Quilty-Dunn et al.,
2022). With comprehensive investigations of the geometric sensitivities of adults and children
across cultures as well as nonhuman animals and computational models, Stanislas Dehaene and
colleagues (Dehaene et al., 2022; Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021; Sablé-Meyer et al., 2022) have
proposed a “language of thought for geometry,” which has symbolic, semantic units like right
angle and a syntax with processes like concatenation. With such a syntax and semantics, it
would be rather easy to acquire, for example, the abstract Euclidean concept rectangle, which
concatenates four right angles. Is such a language of thought for geometry at the foundation of
our species’ unique abilities in geometry? In this chapter, I will bring some claims from this
theory into dialogue with what I suggest are the relatively limited geometric sensitivities of
infants and the generative role of natural language in geometric abstraction, the latter of which
would provide a language for thinking about geometry.
Visual form analysis in infancy
Decades of experiments exploring infants’ abilities in their first year after birth suggest
that their analysis of the geometric properties of 2D visual forms appears to capture some, but
not all, of the geometric information essential to Euclidean geometry. As described above,
Euclidean geometry relies on a set of invariances: For Euclid, a 2D visual form is analyzed in
terms of its shape, regardless of its position, orientation, or sense. What invariant geometric
information do infants detect?
At around 7 months of age (when infants’ visual systems are nearly adult-like; Dobson &
Teller, 1978), infants can discriminate planar triangles by their global shapes (Dillon et al., 2020;
Lourenco & Huttenlocher, 2008), and they can do this in a translationally, rotationally, and sense
invariant way. They can even do it when forms are made to vary in size (so that size cues, like
presented in rapidly changing visual displays. For example, Dillon et al. (2020) presented 7-
month-old infants with two simultaneous, dynamic streams of planar triangles within bounding
preference paradigm (Ross-Sheehy et al., 2003), on one side of the screen, the same-shaped
triangle appeared in rapid, successive presentations. At each presentation, the triangle varied
randomly: in its position within a certain distance from the center of the bounding rectangle; in
its orientation from 0°–359°; and in the direction it faced, left or right. A smaller version of the
triangle alternated with a larger version of the triangle, with the larger version having 2x the area
of the smaller version. The other side of the screen presented the same smaller (or larger) triangle
with the same variation, but the larger (or smaller) triangle was replaced with a triangle of a
different shape but the same area. Thus, on one side of the screen, the same-shaped triangle
varied in position, orientation, sense, and size, but maintained its shape, while on the other side
of the screen, there was an additional shape change that occurred with the size change. Seven-
month-old infants looked longer at the stream of triangles that had the additional shape change.
Infants’ longer looking suggests that they detected the shape change after eliminating size cues
and that they did so over and above the simultaneous changes in the triangles’ position,
orientation, and sense.
which rapidly changing displays presented 2D visual forms, like the triangles shown here, which
varied in position, orientation, and sense at each presentation. On one side of the screen, the
triangles also alternated between two sizes, a larger and a smaller version, but maintained the
same shape. On the other side of the screen, the triangles additionally varied in shape, with one
triangle matching the area of the small triangle from the other side of the screen and the other
triangle matching the area of the large triangle from the other side of the screen. Infants’ looking
times across eight experiments using this paradigm suggested that they have invariant
sensitivities to global shape and to relative length but not to angle. Adapted from Dillon et al.
(2020).
Further experiments by Dillon et al. (2020) specified what particular geometric
information was driving infants’ looking to shape changes. For example, since relative length and
angle are correlated in planar triangles (e.g., if you increase the length of one side of a triangle,
the opposite corner angle also gets bigger), infants may have detected the triangle’s shape change
based on either the different relative lengths of the lines that composed it or its different angle
sizes. Across eight experiments with different groups of infants, Dillon et al. (2020) found that
infants could detect relative length changes in 2D forms even when those forms varied in
position, orientation, and sense, demonstrating that infants have an invariant sensitivity to length
relations in 2D visual forms. But, it turns out, infants do not have the same invariant sensitivity
to angle relations: Infants did not detect even large angle changes in 2D visual forms when those
forms also varied widely in orientation and sense. When the same angle changes were presented
in forms varying within limited orientations using the same paradigm, however, infants could
sensitivity to relative length.
This work built on a rich literature exploring similar kinds of shape sensitivities,
including angle perception specifically, in infants as young as three-days-old, and Dillon et al.
(2020) extended this literature to focus specifically on Euclid’s invariances. For example, Slater
et al (1991) presented newborn infants with a visual habituation paradigm in which open, static
figures appeared at widely varying orientations across habituation trials but presented a constant
the same angle size when both figures presented the same, novel individual line orientations
relative to what infants had seen during habituation (Slater et al., 1991). In an additional
experiment, moreover, Slater et al. (1991) replicated this finding using stimuli that controlled for
the spatial extent of figures. Nevertheless, this study and others focusing on infants’ angle
perception (e.g., Lindskog et al., 2019; Lourenco & Huttenlocher, 2008) presented infants with
figures at a constant size, where variations in angle were confounded with size cues, like the
distance between the endpoints of the lines forming the angles or the implied area of the figures
if the endpoints of the lines were connected (Brannon et al., 2006; de Hevia et al., 2014). While
such prior studies may have suggested that infants have a rotationally invariant sensitivity to
angle, they could not rule out the possibility that infants may have discriminated figures based on
some correlated size cue instead of angle. With Dillon et al.’s (2020) additional controls for such
size cues, it seems more likely that infants fail to detect angle in a rotationally invariant way.
Dillon et al. (2020) thus suggests that infants may have an orientation-dependent
sensitivity to angle, one that does not capture the rotational invariance outlined in Euclid’s
Elements. Why might infants show invariant sensitivity to relative length but not angle? Spelke
(2022) suggests that visual form analysis may have evolved to process the shapes of living
things, like plants and animals, based on their underlying shape skeletons. Infants’ intuitive
sensitivities to visual forms might thus emphasize relative length more than angle since the
relative lengths of the skeletons of plants and animals do not change at a perceptually relevant
timescale but do frequently change in angle, as when branches of plants sway in the wind or
animals move across the terrain (Dillon et al., 2020; Spelke, 2022). And, given that plants and
animals typically remain at an upright (and so limited) orientation relative to the ground plane,
any angle changes that do take place within their skeletons would nevertheless still be detectable.
Recent work by Ayzenberg & Lourenco (2022) provides evidence that infants are indeed
sensitive to the shape skeletons of 3D objects. In their experiment, 6- to 12-month-old infants
saw a single, novel 3D object rotating around a vertical axis across a series of habituation trials.
At test, infants were presented with two different novel objects in alternating trials. One object
had the same shape skeleton as the object from habituation but was composed of different 3D
parts; the other object was composed of different 3D parts and had a different shape skeleton
& Lourenco, 2019), and it involved changing the geometry of the objects’ parts from, say,
something uniformly skinny to something fatter and bulbous at one end. Infants nevertheless
looked longer at the object with a different shape skeleton, suggesting that they found that object
more different from the habituated object than the object that had the same shape skeleton, over
and above both objects’ changes in the 3D geometry of their parts. A computational model
accounting for shape-skeleton similarity, moreover, fit infants’ performance better than other
computational models trained on large datasets of objects.
habituation/dishabituation paradigm in which they saw a novel 3D object, e.g., Skeleton 1 with
Surface Form 1, rotating around a vertical axis across a succession of habituation trials. At test,
infants were then shown two other novel objects, one object with the same shape skeleton as the
habituated object but differently shaped 3D parts, e.g., Skeleton 1, Surface Form 2, and another
object with a different skeleton and different parts from the habituated object, e.g., Skeleton 2,
Surface Form 2. Infants looked longer at the test object with the additional variation in shape
skeleton, suggesting that infants detect differences in shape skeletons over and above variation in
the geometry of the 3D parts that compose such skeletons. Reprinted from Ayzenberg &
Lourenco (2022).
Parallelism and perpendicularity as special cases
The work reviewed above thus converges on the following conclusion: While infants are
sensitive to angle changes in visual forms under some conditions, their early 2D form analysis
may be better described by a sensitivity to shape skeletons, not to the geometric invariances
found in Euclid’s Elements. So how is it that we humans come to detect and learn about the
invariant geometry of 2D forms, including invariant angle relations?
One possibility is that infants’ 2D visual form analysis might actually include invariant
sensitivities to some special cases of angle, in particular, those at the foundation of Euclidean
geometry. Sablé-Meyer et al. (2022) propose that parallelism and perpendicularity may be such
special cases. For example, Sablé-Meyer et al. (2021) used an odd-ball task that presented
participants with arrays of planar figures — like squares, parallelograms, and trapezoids — at
did not belong with the rest. For human adults across cultures and for children, but not for
baboons, the more Euclidean were the principles instantiated by the context or deviant figures,
including the presence vs. absence of right angles, the easier was the task (Sablé-Meyer et al.,
2021). Moreover, state-of-the-art convolutional-neural-network models performed on this task
like baboons, while human-like performance was achieved only by a model with an inbuilt
symbolic list of discrete geometric properties like perpendicularity.
Parallelism and perpendicularity are among the definitions (Def. 23 and Def. 10) upon
which the Elements are built (e.g., Propositions 1.27 and following rely on parallelism and
Propositions 1.11 and following rely on perpendicularity; Euclid 2007/300 B.C.E.). Although it
is not necessarily the case that systems of mathematics are organized to suit human psychology,
Euclid’s inclusion of these special cases as preliminaries may reflect their relatively intuitive
status in human perception and/or cognition. We humans have always lived in a world replete
with approximations of parallels and perpendiculars: Parallel trees stand perpendicular to the
ground; and the parallel legs of quadrupedal animals are perpendicular to their bodies and to the
ground. Parallelism and perpendicularity might thus be quite natural extensions to our intuitive
shape sensitivities, which would come to include, by evolution or early learning, parallelism and
perpendicularity from the abundance of parallels and perpendiculars that describe the relations
between the skeletons of plants and animals and the natural environment.
Do infants, then, have invariant sensitivities to special-case angle relations like
parallelism and perpendicularity despite their otherwise insensitivity to angle? In addition to
Sablé-Meyer et al.’s (2021) findings reviewed above, findings from other experiments with
adults and children, including adults from cultures in which there is no formal schooling in
geometry or specialized geometric vocabulary, can support some predictions. For example,
Dillon et al. (2019) showed that educated adults performed better on an angle-discrimination
odd-ball task (in which 2D forms composed of different angle sizes varied widely in orientation)
when they were presented with pairs of parallel or perpendicular lines compared with other pairs
of lines whose angles varied by the same degree: Adults could more easily pick out a 90° angle
among five 87° angles (a difference of 3°) than they could pick out an 87° angle among five 84°
angles (also a difference of 3°). Notably, discrimination thresholds were smaller for parallels vs.
perpendiculars (Dillon et al., 2019).
In addition, Izard et al. (2011a) presented adults across cultures as well as children with a
similar odd-ball task, but in their task, angle size varied continuously across all six forms
lines. Izard et al. (2011a) evaluated whether participants relied on parallelism and
perpendicularity when choosing a deviant form. While adults across cultures picked both the
parallel and perpendicular forms as deviants, young children picked only the parallel forms as
deviants, performing at chance on trials with perpendicular forms until about age 7 years.
task presenting six figures, each composed of a pair of lines. Across figures, the angle relations
between the lines varied continuously, but there was also one pair of lines that was either parallel
or perpendicular. If participants recognized these special cases, then they would be more likely to
choose the parallel or perpendicular lines as the odd-balls. Both adults and children chose the
parallel lines as the odd-balls, but only the adults, across cultures, chose the perpendicular lines
as odd-balls. Adapted from Izard et al. (2011a).
Together, these experiments, which include adults from different cultures, children, and
nonhuman animals, suggest that human infants might at least have a rotationally invariant
sensitivity to parallels. Still, the youngest humans tested in this prior work were 3 years old, and
they were from carpentered societies with manufactured artifacts and so may have already had
some exposure to the symbols and language of formal geometry or a specific kind of perceptual
input. It was thus possible that experience or instruction, instead of intuition, guided their
responses.
Using the same change-detection paradigm as Dillon et al. (2020), ongoing studies in my
lab are addressing whether infants detect parallelism and perpendicularity. If infants do show
invariant sensitivities to both parallelism and perpendicularity, then this would support the idea
that at least some sensitivities to foundational principles of Euclidean geometry are present early
in development, consistent with the theory that there might be an early emerging and uniquely
human language of thought for geometry (Dehaene et al., 2022; Sablé-Meyer et al., 2021; Sablé-
Meyer et al., 2022). If infants show only one or even neither sensitivity, then it would suggest
that these sensitivities only become special, perceptually and/or conceptually, later in
development, raising the question of what mechanisms or experience underlie such specialized
development.
My prediction is that infants will either show an invariant sensitivity to parallelism but
not perpendicularity or show neither sensitivity. Recall that when they are 3 years old, these
children would be expected to discriminate parallelism, but not perpendicularity (Izard et al.,
2011a), and they would continue to be better at parallelism than perpendicularity even as adults
(Dillon et al., 2019). Further, as discussed below, in some instances, language can be used to
detect perpendicularity where it is not needed for parallelism. Moreover, even if infants do
succeed in one or both of these cases, I predict that it would not be due to their having
sensitivities to parallelism or perpendicularity as special-case angles. Parallelism, for example,
can be detected without relying on angle information at all: Parallel lines go in the same direction
and maintain a constant minimum distance from each other. These geometric properties may be
easier to detect over changes in orientation compared with detecting angle. If infants do show an
invariant sensitivity to parallelism, future studies with infants, children, and adults could explore
possibilities for their reliance (or lack thereof) on angle to do so.
As I previewed above, to readers of the Elements, my prediction that parallelism might be
easier for infants to detect than perpendicularity seems backwards. Recall that among the
definitions that open the Elements, the definition of perpendicularity comes before that of
parallelism and is more perceptual (Euclid 2007/300 B.C.E). Euclid begins with a point, which
has neither length nor breadth (Def. 1), and then a line, which has length but no breadth (Def. 2).
Take two straight lines (Def. 4) and have them meet; you get an angle (Def. 8–9). But something
special happens when the two angles adjacent to the meeting point are equal: “each of these
angles is called a right angle, and each of these lines is said to be perpendicular to the other”
(Def. 10). While this is an asserted definition, it relies on the perception or measure of the
adjacent angles’ equality, without ever defining what it means for angles to be equal. When
parallel lines are defined (Def. 23), by contrast, an imaginative leap is required to conceive of
drawing out straight lines indefinitely in both directions such that they never meet. Line
segments, i.e., lines that are seen or drawn, might not meet even if they are not parallel. The
perception of separation is thus decidedly not sufficient for parallelism. Unlike perpendicularity,
which can be apprehended, parallelism requires, on Euclid’s account, something that goes
beyond direct perception.
Given Euclid’s definitions, other geometers in Antiquity therefore sought a perceptual
definition of parallelism too, sometimes defining parallel lines as I do above, as always having
the same, minimal distance (e.g. Posidonius via Proclus and Al-Nayrizi; Mendell, 2015). Such a
definition of parallelism would be perceptually accessible for line segments in a similar manner
to perpendicularity (indeed it depends upon perpendicularity for minimizing distance), even if
the concept of parallelism still required an “indefinite” extension. So, while I predict that
perceptual features of parallel lines, like some measure of equality (for distance), might allow
infants to detect them, it is possible that perceptual features of perpendicular lines, like some
measure of equality (for angle), might actually allow infants to detect them as well (although,
since the equality would be of angle, I maintain my doubts). Infants’ potential use of angle
equality to detect perpendicularity is testable by presenting infants with +-, T-, and L-shapes
where equality is 4-fold, 2-fold, or 1-fold, with the expectation that infants might perform better
with more equal-sized angles. Such a prediction is consistent with Sablé-Meyer et al.’s (2021)
findings that participants’ detection of an odd-ball was greater when there were more such
geometric properties instantiated by target or deviant figures. Finally, a reliance on the equalities
present in parallel and perpendicular line displays might explain how individuals from cultures
without specialized geometric vocabulary, carpentered environments, or many manufactured
artifacts come to pick out parallelism and perpendicularity as special cases in Izard et al.’s
(2011a) task.
Special sensitivities to parallelism and perpendicularity aside, we are still faced with the
question of how infants and children might come to appreciate other geometric information,
including angle, in the translationally, rotationally, and sense invariant way that Euclid requires
to support their formal learning in school. Here I turn to toddlers’ developing 3D object
recognition and categorization for some insights, considering how those processes might become
increasingly sensitive to abstract geometry with the help of language.
Object and word
As outlined above, prior to more significant experience with a natural language that refers
to forms and objects categorized by shape, infants’ sensitivity to the geometry of visual forms
captures some, but not all, of the invariances outlined in Euclid’s Elements. Infants may best
discriminate visual forms by their hierarchically branching skeletal structures (Ayzenberg &
Lourenco, 2022), and their form discrimination prioritizes relative length over angle. How, then,
do infants go from their limited sensitivities to the geometry of visual forms to the richer
geometric sensitivities required to learn formal, Euclidean geometry? How, that is, do infants go
from shape skeletons to something like invariant parallelism, perpendicularity, and angle?
While this question has not yet been answered, one way to begin to address it might be to
consider how geometric abstraction happens in the context of infants’ and young children’s
everyday experiences. As Spelke (2022) points out, there is something unique happening to
many of us humans today relative to our evolutionary past: Now there is an abundance of
manufactured artifacts whose shapes are not best discriminated by shape skeletons. Rather,
manufactured artifacts may be best discriminated by something more like “geons,” which are a
small set of invariant geometric solids proposed by Biederman and colleagues (e.g., Biederman,
1987) to underlie adult, invariant 3D object recognition. Recall that infants in the study of
Ayzenberg & Lourenco (2022) ignored changes in such geometric solids when they successfully
discriminated 3D objects based on their shape skeletons. Spelke (2022) suggests that early
emerging and universal shape sensitivities to skeletons might get co-opted to support modern
object recognition by something like geons in cultures with abundant artifacts. Exploring how
that transition happens — from infants’ intuitive but limited sensitivity to shape skeletons to
toddlers’ learned, abstract and invariant sensitivity to geons — may provide some insight into
how a potentially similar process of geometric abstraction could happen with “artifactual” visual
forms, like those of Euclidean geometry. Like the development of invariant object recognition,
such a transition is likely to be protracted (as learning geometry in school tends to be) and might
be supported by critical interactions between sensitivities to geometry and language. Lessons
from that transition might then be translated into the classroom to support school learning.
Early toddlerhood is a good place to look for evidence for this proposal since it is an
important time for interactions between geometry and language for learning (Pereira & Smith,
2009). Between 18 and 24 months of age, for example, toddlers are acquiring many object
names, in particular for objects that have similar shapes (Gershkoff‐Stowe & Smith, 2004), and
toddlers’ extension of noun labels during this time becomes increasingly driven by shape (Smith,
2003). Toddlers’ attention to shape during this time, moreover, becomes increasingly abstract,
focusing more and more on the invariant 3D geometric properties of an object’s parts, i.e., its
geons (Pereira & Smith, 2009; Smith, 2003, 2009).
Smith (2003) demonstrates this transition by presenting both older and younger toddlers
with different sets of familiar 3D objects at various levels of abstraction. For example, among
versions of pretend ice-cream cones that included or did not include color and texture details,
older but not younger toddlers played with a 3D-volume version of the ice cream cone —
instantiated simply by a sphere attached to the wide end of a cone — pretending it were the real
thing, and they recognized it by name. Further studies showed that this capacity for geometric
abstraction was related to the number of object names in toddlers’ productive vocabulary (Pereira
& Smith, 2009). While prior work has not examined whether the same attention to and use of
increasingly abstract geometry also happens in the context of simple 2D forms presenting
parallel or perpendicular lines or angles of various sizes, this prior work on toddlers’ increasingly
invariant 3D object recognition and its relation to language raises the possibility that similar
processes of geometric abstraction might guide early learning of invariant geometric features of
visual forms in Euclidean geometry.
Consistent with this suggestion, Izard et al. (2011a) noted in their experiments described
above that if children knew the term “right angle” or “perpendicular lines,” which was assessed
after their participation in the odd-ball task, then they were more likely to choose the
perpendicular lines as the deviant. Children’s knowledge of the term “parallel lines,” by contrast,
had no such effect. As anticipated above, this is further reason to think that prelinguistic infants,
were they able to detect either, would detect parallelism but not perpendicularity. Izard et al.’s
(2011a) results with the adults from a society with no formal geometric vocabulary, who
nevertheless chose the perpendicular deviants more often than chance, show that a linguistic
label is not required to form a category for perpendiculars by adulthood. Izard et al. (2011a)
suggest that either children’s learning of the relevant language may be a “catalyst” for their
acquisition of a geometric sensitivity universal among adults or that their language learning
might help them form the category without affecting their sensitivity to geometry, by, for
example, heightening their attention to perpendicular lines simply because such lines have a
name. While this language learning might thus initially be superficial, it might nevertheless pay
off later by directing children’s attention to categories relevant to Euclidean geometry and
thereby “facilitating later conceptual learning” (Izard et al., 2011a). I would add to this
possibility the one I raised in the previous section: Individuals without the relevant geometric
vocabulary may come to apprehend perpendicularity through their sensitivity to the angle
equality present in a pair of perpendicular angles. This still leaves open the possibility that an
appreciation of invariant angle more generally, by contrast, might remain out of reach until one
learns the relevant language to describe it. Similar arguments have been made for concepts of
exact cardinal value for large numbers, which may not be acquired without specialized numerical
vocabulary (e.g., Carey & Sarnecka, 2006; Pica et al., 2004). Such a suggestion for geometry
challenges the idea that infants have a language of thought for geometry that includes all of
Euclid’s invariances prior to the geometric abstraction supported by their acquisition of a natural
language that refers to forms and objects categorized by certain abstract shape properties.
No research to my knowledge has directly addressed the possibility that learning
language referring to parallelism, perpendicularity, or angle leads to their discrimination in an
odd-ball task in children or adults. If it does, then other such language manipulations may even
be causally efficacious in allowing infants to identify such form information. For example, using
a novelty-preference, looking-time paradigm (Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007), Lin et al. (in review)
found that pre-crawling infants could categorize navigable places like fields and canyons based
on their characteristic spatial layouts with, but not without, noun labels, suggesting that young
infants fail to categorize places by their spatial layouts when there is no accompanying language.
This finding, which is exploring a new domain of infants’ sensitivity to geometry, is nevertheless
consistent with one of the main points I make in this chapter: Language facilitates infants’ and
toddlers’ geometric abstraction in a way that helps in their recognition, categorization, and
learning about myriad geometric phenomena. Such methodologies could also be used to test
infants’ ability to categorize pairs of parallel or perpendicular lines, potentially prior to their
ability to detect such forms in a nonlinguistic, change-detection paradigm. Future research is
called for to explore these possibilities.
From lab to life
Children’s later development of geometric reasoning may be marked by their geometric
sensitivities as infants, with superior detection of relative length compared with their detection of
angle. If so, then pedagogies should take this cognitive development into account. In school, the
concept of angle that is taught is essentially rotationally invariant. This matches well the formal
system of Euclidean geometry, which remains (in its updated forms) the system taught in
primary and secondary schools, where many students learn it incompletely (Goldin et al., 2011).
The properties of orientation, relative length, and size are salient early in development and
robustly detected throughout life (Izard et al., 2022). But we might now come to see this
robustness as impairing children’s later learning about angle (Dehaene-Lambertz & Spelke,
2015).
While adults can eventually detect invariant angle (Dillon et al., 2019), the fact that angle
is nonintuitive may explain the difficulties older children and adults have in making explicit
judgments about the properties of angles in planar figures (Dillon & Spelke, 2018; Hart et al.,
2018; Hart et al., 2022). The study of such difficulties, moreover, so far suggests, rather
surprisingly, that across cultures, children’s and adults’ default engagement with angle in the
context of abstract and school-like geometry problems might not actually involve an analysis of
static visual forms — like the ones found in geometry textbooks from antiquity to today. Rather,
we might first engage with invariant angle through a geometric reasoning process rooted in
dynamic mental simulations (Dillon, 2024; Hart et al., 2018; Hart et al., 2022; Huey et al., 2023;
Izard et al. 2011b; Lin & Dillon, 2023). For example, when older children and adults are asked
what happens to the angle size of one corner of a triangle — does it get bigger, get smaller, or
stay the same size — after the triangle’s other two angles get smaller and there are no changes to
the triangle’s side lengths, participants appear to perform dynamic simulations, like triangle-side
extrapolations, to arrive at their response (Hart et al., 2018; Hart et al., 2022). They do not, as
Euclid and others might have guessed, engage a set of rules or concepts about static angles and
forms. In the context of these geometric reasoning problems, such simulations also appear to
provide participants with judgments that merely approximate Euclidean geometry (Hart et al.,
2018; Hart et al., 2022) instead of capturing it exactly. Nevertheless, such simulations might be
our default, informal geometric reasoning process and might even support the acquisition of
certain geometric concepts, including, perhaps, judgments of (approximate) angle equality
without the need for specialized language (Hart et al., 2018; Hart et al., 2022; Izard et al. 2011b).
Simulation may thus be a mechanism for the apparent universal sensitivity to perpendicularity by
adulthood, as described above. We might keep such possibilities about the role of dynamic
mental simulations in geometric reasoning in mind and so ask our students, when they attempt
formal proofs, to first wander the Euclidean plane in their minds.
Being sensitive to angle in an invariant way and identifying the abstract geometric
categories of parallelism and perpendicularity are necessary to learning Euclidean geometry in
school, just as it has been throughout human history. Indeed, legend has it that over the door of
Plato’s Academy, where every academic discipline would be discussed, was the line: “Let no one
ignorant of geometry enter.” The present cognitive account of the difficult, delayed acquisition of
the concept of angle may serve as an explanation for the difficulties and delays we see in some
students in our mathematics classrooms. Determining whether foundational geometric
information for Euclid is already present in infancy or learned through a process of geometric
abstraction supported by language can inform pedagogies that aim to help all young learners
develop these foundational concepts to make sure that Plato’s door is wide open for all.
The sincerity of this sentiment nevertheless remains naive, precipitously making strong
claims about what might or might not work in primary or secondary school classrooms based on
infants’ performance in highly controlled and rarefied lab experiments alone! Harnessing lab
findings, however, to inform randomized controlled trials, conducted over extended periods of
time in the real and complex environments in which children’s learning actually happens,
promises to reveal both the possibilities and limitations of basic science theories to improve
school learning (Bochynska & Dillon, 2021; Dillon & Lawrence, 2023). So far, such
experiments, though limited in number, have begun to fulfill that promise. For example, with
interdisciplinary colleagues, I have conducted three large-scale randomized controlled trials with
nearly 5,000 children living in poor areas of Delhi, India. These trials tested game-based math
curricula we designed based on decades of lab-based research characterizing infants’ and young
children’s early sensitivities to numerical and geometric information. Our findings show that the
cognitive foundations of school-relevant numerical and geometric concepts are universal and can
be strengthened on the long-term and at scale, thereby informing pedagogies aimed at closing
achievement gaps created by socioeconomic disparities (Dean et al., in preparation; Dillon et al.,
2017).
Strikingly, these hope-giving results also might suggest that there is a role for natural
language in the acquisition of school relevant concepts in geometry, as I suggest above: The
games we designed to improve math learning that linked visual representations of numerical and
geometric concepts to the symbols and language of formal arithmetic and geometry have had
longer-lasting effects on children’s math learning than games with either the visual
representations alone or the language and symbols alone (Dean et al., in preparation; Dillon et
al., 2017). The possibility that basic, universal geometric sensitivities from human infancy work
together with human language to support learning has both basic-science and translational
impact.
We may thus find ourselves back at the origins of geometry, albeit with new
understanding and new hopes: Whereas thinkers faulted Euclid for starting with definitions, mere
words, which seemed to lack foundation, we can now see that such words from a natural
language, when coupled with the geometric sensitives we have since infancy, may be the
foundation for abstract geometry and all the technological and cultural achievements we have
built and will build from it.