PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Current Evidence and Future Directions for Social and Societal Resilience Factors in
Response to Societal Challenges and Crises: An Umbrella Review and Expert Rating
1,2 1 3 3
Max Supke , Lea M. Schaubruch , Caroline Cohrdes , Corinna Kausmann ,
1,2* 1,4*
Sarah K. Schäfer & Klaus Lieb
* Both authors contributed equally.
Leibniz Institute for Resilience Research, Mainz, Germany
Department of Clinical Psychology, Psychotherapy and Psychodiagnostics, Technische
Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany
Department of Epidemiology and Health Monitoring, Robert Koch Institute, Berlin,
Germany
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center of Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to. Dr. Max Supke, Leibniz
Institute for Resilience Research, Wallstraße 7, 55122 Mainz, Email: max.supke@lir-
mainz.de
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Abstract
Resilient outcomes are the most common response to societal crises. Resilience factors
represent multilevel psychosocial resources that increase the likelihood of resilient
responses. While resilience research has predominantly focused on individual factors, social
and societal factors have received less attention. This umbrella review aimed to identify and
summarize evidence on social and societal resilience factors linked to mental health
responses during societal challenges in high-income countries. Systematic reviews exploring
these associations were identified through searches in three databases up to June 12, 2023.
Resilience factors were classified as having favorable, unfavorable, mixed, or non-
significant associations with mental health outcomes. Quality appraisal used an adapted
AMSTAR-2-tool. Twenty reviews (samples: 2,402–489,419) reported on stressors like
pandemics, minority stress, and migration. At the social level, stronger evidence supports
the favorable effects of social support, relationship quality, and family support. Societal
factors like adequate housing, access to mental health services, and supportive policies were
linked to resilience outcomes, though evidence remains sparse or heterogenous for many
factors. An expert survey rated social factors as slightly more important than societal ones.
Expanding resilience research to include families, workplaces, and societal factors in
longitudinal studies will enhance the understanding of resilience from a systemic
perspective.
Keywords: social and societal resilience factors; umbrella review; adults; societal crises;
mental health; expert survey
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Current Evidence and Future Directions for Social and Societal Resilience Factors in
Response to Societal Challenges and Crises: An Umbrella Review and Expert Rating
Introduction
Resilience, when defined from an outcome-based perspective, refers to the capacity to
maintain or rapidly restore mental health during or after exposure to stressors. A resilient
trajectory is characterized by an at most brief period of psychological disequilibrium
following adverse life events or challenging circumstances, with mental health otherwise
remaining stable (Kalisch et al., 2017; Kalisch, Russo, & Müller, 2024; Southwick et al.,
2014).
This outcome-based approach to resilience research focuses on the trajectories of
mental distress and positive mental health in response to stressors (Bonanno, 2004; Bonanno
& Mancini, 2012; Frankfurt et al., 2016; Galatzer-Levy, Huang, & Bonanno, 2018). Despite
the psychological burden typically associated with potentially traumatic events, systematic
reviews and meta-analyses conclude that approximately 66% of affected individuals
demonstrate resilient responses. These responses are characterized by consistently low
levels of mental distress or the maintenance of good mental health despite exposure to
stressors. In contrast, approximately 11% of individuals show chronic symptoms, exhibiting
persistently high levels of mental distress. Additionally, 13–21% follow a recovery
trajectory, characterized by an initial increase in distress followed by a gradual decrease over
time. A smaller subset (9–12%) display a delayed response, initially experiencing low levels
of distress, followed by a subsequent increase. Importantly, the severity of the potentially
traumatic event does not seem to significantly influence the distribution of distinct
trajectories, as even more severe events (e.g., displacement after natural disaster or police
officers exposed to life threat) are associated with high rates of resilient trajectories. This
could suggest that psychological, social, and biological factors may play a key role in helping
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
people maintain or regain their mental health even in the face of more severe stressors
(Galatzer-Levy et al., 2018; Schäfer, Kunzler et al., 2022).
The concept of resilience has gained increasing attention as societal challenges, crises,
and stressors become more frequent. Many nations are currently confronted with a multitude
of societal crises like wars and armed conflicts, the climate crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic,
economic crises, and various natural disasters (European Environment Agency, 2021; Inter-
Agency Standing Committee & European Commission, 2024). These crises are often
accompanied by displacement or significant disruptions of living conditions for large
populations, which in turn elevate stress levels and increase the risk of mental health
disorders (Ahmed et al., 2023; Arcaya, Raker, & Waters, 2020; Newnham et al., 2022).
Against this background, the question of how individuals manage to maintain or quickly
restore their mental health in the face of such challenges has gained importance (Leppold et
al., 2022).
This ties in with the societal challenge of how individuals can be supported in
responding resiliently to stressor exposure. Ungar and Theron (2020) propose that resilience
is shaped by the dynamic interplay of biological, psychological, social, and ecological
systems throughout the life course of an individual. Within this context, so-called resilience
factors become crucial. Adopting a multisystemic approach based on Ungar and Theron
(2020), resilience factors can be categorized into individual, social, and societal domains.
Resilience factors are multilevel resources that have the potential to protect individuals from
harmful effects of stressors and thereby increase the likelihood of resilient responses
(Chmitorz et al., 2018; Hobfoll, Stevens, & Zalta, 2015). While resilience research often
prioritizes internal, individual factors – such as optimism, sense of coherence, and beliefs
about perceived control – less attention is given to the social, cultural, and societal systems
that shape individuals’ environments (Schäfer et al., 2023; Ungar & Theron, 2020).
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
The predictive power of individual resilience factors remains inconclusive (Bonanno,
2021; Chen et al., 2022; van der Meulen et al., 2018), as some may not affect stress responses
at all, and others may even correlate positively with mental distress. Moreover, individual
factors often diminish in significance when multiple factors are considered in the same
statistical model for the prediction of resilient outcomes. However, neither individual nor
combined factors serve as reliable predictors of resilient responses. Another challenge is the
lack of conceptual clarity, as there is significant empirical and conceptual overlap among
different individual resilience factors (e.g., self-efficacy and locus of control; meaning in life
and spirituality; Schäfer et al., 2022; Schäfer, Kunzler et al., 2023).
Human development is shaped by the complex interplay between individuals and their
surrounding environments. Ecological theories differentiate between four distinct layers,
which differ in terms of how close they are to the individual (Bronfenbrenner, 1994; Ungar,
Ghazinour, & Richter, 2013). The closest layer, the microsystem, includes factors such as
personal characteristics and emotions (examples for resilience factors in this layer are
optimism [Carver, & Scheier, 2014] or self-efficacy beliefs [Bandura, 1977; Schäfer et al.,
2022]). The mesosystem encompasses elements like intimate partner relationships (e.g.,
relationship quality, being married). The exosystem extends further and includes factors such
as family relationships (e.g., family support) that are outside the immediate sphere of the
individual. Finally, the macrosystem, the most distant level, encompasses systemic and
societal factors (e.g., trust in institutions; Bronfenbrenner, 1994; Ungar, Ghazinour, &
Richter, 2013). Many studies analyzing societal challenges and crises primarily include
factors at the microsystem level into their models, while factors at the macrosystem level
(such as those related to broader societal or cultural systems and environments) are rarely
evaluated as potential resilience factors. Considering social and societal factors and
incorporating them into statistical models may improve the accuracy of resilience
predictions. For example, Hobfoll et al. (2016) highlight that resilience is strongly influenced
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
by a supportive environment and the presence of secure, loving relationships, suggesting
that these factors play a critical role.
In this present umbrella review, we define social resilience factors (e.g. factors from
the meso- and exosystem) as perceived and available resources within one’s immediate
social environment, including elements such as social support, family cohesion, having a
partner, and one's social network size (i.e., structural social support). At the social level,
psychological and public health research frequently examined received and perceived social
support, which is generally associated with better mental health and more resilient outcomes
(Schäfer et al., 2024; Zalta et al., 2021; Zhang & Dong, 2022). While there is considerable
research on the role of social support, and at times an overemphasis on it, other potential
social resilience factors are often overlooked.
Societal resilience factors (e.g., factors from the macrosystem) refer to resources that
are perceived or available at a broader societal level, such as access to green spaces (e.g.,
parks), blue environments (e.g., lakes), community cohesion, job security, and trust in
institutions. These factors have been less frequently studied, and the current state of research
on them remains very sparse (Bodas et al., 2022; Jewett et al., 2021; Haavik, 2020).
Arcaya, Raker, and Waters (2020) stress the importance of social and societal factors
in supporting recovery after disasters. They note that community cohesion, social capital,
and economic investment play key roles in either helping areas recover or leading them
toward decline. Communities recover from crises to varying degrees and with varying
durations, influenced by factors such as socioeconomic status, support from external sources,
and prior experiences with disasters (Bodas et al., 2022; Burton et al., 2014; Saja et al.,
2021). Social cohesion, which includes connectedness and solidarity among different
community groups, also plays a critical role in recovery from crises, such as the COVID-19
pandemic (Jewett et al., 2021).
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
The current project was inspired by a recent systematic review (Schäfer et al., 2024)
that summarized the evidence on the predictive value of individual, social, and societal
resilience factors in the context of societal challenges and crises (e.g., pandemics, economic
crises, natural disasters). This review synthesized findings from 50 studies, revealing that
higher income, higher socioeconomic status, greater perceived social support, better emotion
regulation, and higher psychological flexibility were associated with more resilient
responses following such crises. Yet, most effect estimates were small, and results were
mixed for many resilience factors. Notably, the majority of studies focused primarily on
individual and social resilience factors (i.e., perceived social support), with fewer studies
incorporating social factors other than social support and societal resilience factors into their
models. For this review, we focused on primary studies examining resilient responses in face
of stressor exposure by means of growth mixture modeling (Bonanno & Mancini, 2012;
Frankfurt et al., 2016), a specific methodological approach to study resilience as an outcome.
However, it remained unclear what is known of social and societal resilience factors based
on a larger body of evidence using more heterogeneous methodological approaches.
Objectives
For this purpose, the current umbrella review aimed at summarizing evidence on
social and societal resilience factors at the level of systematic reviews. The inclusion of a
broader range of social and societal factors could enhance the understanding of mental health
trajectories following societal crises and challenges. This umbrella review tried to address
this gap and tried to contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of how various social
and societal resilience factors impact mental health outcomes in the face of societal
disruptions. We focused on societal crises and challenges in OECD member states which are
predominantly high-income countries and characterize themselves as democracies
(Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2021). These commonalities
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
provided a baseline level of comparability, enabling more consistent and meaningful
analyses.
This umbrella review aimed to address the following research questions: 1) Which
societal challenges and crises have been examined in the included systematic reviews? 2)
What types of mental health outcomes have been studied in relation to these challenges? 3)
Which social and societal resilience factors have been examined as correlates of these mental
health outcomes? 4) What associations (favorable, unfavorable, non-significant, or mixed)
between resilience factors and mental health outcomes have been observed? 5) What social
and societal factors do experts in the domains of resilience research, public health, and
family studies consider to be important? Based on these findings, we derive potential future
directions and recommendations for resilience research.
Methods
Protocol and Pre-Registration
This systematic umbrella review followed the checklist for overviews of systematic
reviews developed by Onishi and Furukawa (2016; see Supplementary Material 1). It is part
of a larger project titled "A Systematic Review of Individual, Social, and Societal Resilience
Factors in Response to Societal Challenges and Crises” which summarizes evidence on the
predictive value of individual, social, and societal resilience factors on mental health
outcomes during societal crises (Schäfer et al., 2024). During the data extraction process for
the systematic review in the main project, it became apparent that there is a lack of studies
systematically examining a broad range of social and societal resilience factors. This
research gap was the starting point of this subproject. The overall project was prospectively
Search Strategy
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Three databases were searched from 2013 to present (last update: June 12, 2023),
including Embase (incl. PubMed and EmbaseCore), Scopus, and Web of Science Core
Collection. The primary search contained two clusters with search terms related to 1) the
social and societal level (e.g., social, societal, community, family), and 2) resilience factors
and psychosocial resources (e.g., resilience factor, protective factor, health-promoting
factor). Terms within one cluster were linked using the Boolean operator OR and clusters
were combined using the operator AND (see Supplementary Material 2 for the full search
strategies). Furthermore, scientific discussions and interviews were conducted with experts
in the fields of public health and family psychology to identify key systematic reviews and
relevant resilience factors. Additionally, reference lists of the included systematic reviews
were checked for eligible studies.
Inclusion Criteria
Eligible studies for this umbrella review were systematic reviews (which could include
meta-analyses) that met the following criteria: a) The systematic review focused primarily
on adult individuals (≥18 years) from the b) general civilian population, not recruited from
military or clinical contexts, c) who were exposed to various societal challenges and crises,
d) in OECD member countries (at least 66% of the included primary studies in the systematic
reviews needed to be conducted in OECD countries). Such stressors included pandemics,
wars, armed conflicts, the climate crisis, migration, experienced minority stress, and natural
disasters. e) The reviews had to report on social and/or societal resilience factors (i.e., any
factors discussed as potentially promoting health or resilience; Bengel & Lyssenko, 2012;
Kalisch et al., 2024; Kunzler et al., 2020; Schäfer et al., 2022), with no predefined list of
resilience factors being applied for this review. f) Additionally, associations or relationships
between resilience factors and mental health outcomes, whether related to mental distress
(e.g., depression, anxiety, substance use disorder) or positive mental health (e.g., quality of
life, well-being), needed to be reported.
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Study Selection
After de-duplication with Zotero (Zotero Group, 2023), two reviewers (FS and IW)
independently screened titles, abstracts, and full texts using Rayyan (Ouzzani et al., 2016).
Interrater reliability was substantial, with kappa values of 0.66 for the title/abstract screening
and 0.86 for the full-text review. Discrepancies at both stages were resolved through
discussion or, when necessary, by consulting a senior team member (MS/SKS).
Data Extraction
A customized data extraction sheet was developed for this systematic umbrella review
from all eligible primary studies were extracted by one reviewer and checked by a second
reviewer (FS/IW). Any discrepancies were resolved through discussion or by consulting
senior team members (MS/SKS). Data extraction focused on review characteristics, sample
demographics, types of societal challenges, resilience factors, mental health outcomes, and
the evidence rating for each resilience factor. Additionally, information required for
subsequent quality appraisal was extracted.
The main objective of this umbrella review was to compile a comprehensive collection
of social and societal resilience factors in the context of societal crises and challenges, as
identified from systematic reviews. Resilience factors were classified as either social or
societal resources by one reviewer (MS), and this classification was checked by a second
reviewer (SKS). Any disagreements were discussed and resolved within the review team.
Social factors were defined as resources perceived or available in one's proximal social
environment (e.g., family, friends, work colleagues), whereas societal factors referred to
resources in the broader societal context (e.g., policies, culture, living environment). The
associations between these resilience factors and mental health outcomes were extracted.
Data were collected for two broader outcome categories: mental distress (incl. general
distress, depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, posttraumatic stress symptoms, and stress
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
symptoms) and positive mental health (incl. life satisfaction, mental health-related quality
of life, happiness, and well-being).
Quality Appraisal
Study quality was assessed by one senior team member (MS) using a modified version
of AMSTAR 2 (A Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews; Shea et al., 2017).
AMSTAR 2 is a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include randomized and/or
non-randomized studies of healthcare interventions. It assesses study quality using 16 items,
covering areas such as registered study protocols, adequacy of literature search, and risk of
bias. However, since AMSTAR 2 is only partially applicable to systematic reviews of non-
intervention studies, we followed the recommendation of Puljak and colleagues (2023) to
use a subset of its items – specifically items 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14, and 16.
To provide a better assessment of the quality of non-intervention reviews, we adapted
this approach by incorporating 11 additional items from the PRISMA (Page et al., 2021)
checklist (1 for introduction, 4 for methods, 3 for results, 1 for discussion, and 1 for
availability of data, code and other materials). This expanded approach aimed to account for
critical elements such as the theoretical framework, methodology, results presentation, and
derivation of implications. The final self-developed quality assessment tool (see
Supplementary Material 3) consisted of 18 items. Based on the number of items that could
be assessed per study, we calculated an overall study quality rating, ranging from 0% to
100%.
Data Synthesis
Based on the extracted data, a qualitative narrative synthesis of the included reviews
was conducted in textual and tabular format, detailing the study population (e.g., descriptive
statistics), resilience factors, mental health outcomes examined, and the societal challenges,
stressors, and crises reported.
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Resilience factors assessed at the social and societal levels were documented. For each
factor, we assessed the frequency with which it has been studied and how many systematic
reviews provide evidence for its association with mental health outcomes. The frequency of
specific mental health outcomes (e.g., depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms) mentioned
in the included systematic reviews was also documented. For the purpose of this synthesis,
mental health outcomes were summarized under the term "general mental health" due to the
limited number of reviews available for analyzing the associations of specific mental health
outcomes (e.g., depressive symptoms, anxiety symptoms, stress) with resilience factors. The
frequency of each type of association was counted to identify the direction of the associations
for each resilience factor. Factors with unfavorable effects were considered to be those
resilience factors that increase the likelihood of greater mental distress and symptoms, while
factors with favorable effects were associated with reduced mental distress and fewer
symptoms. If fewer than 80% of the associations extracted from the systematic review
clearly categorized a factor as a factor with favorable or unfavorable effects, the evidence
was classified as mixed. If no significant associations were reported for a specific factor in
the included reviews, these were categorized as non-significant associations.
Implementation of the Expert Survey
Given the diverse perspectives on resilience factors and the limited attention some of
those factors have received in resilience research, expert interviews were conducted. Family
psychology experts were consulted to address social aspects and the proximal environment,
while public health experts provided insights on societal aspects and the more distal
environment. With the help of these interviews, a comprehensive list of relevant social and
societal health-promoting factors was compiled. The review team then evaluated whether
these factors could be considered as potential resilience factors. This list was further
expanded with factors identified from both the included and excluded reviews to generate a
more exhaustive catalog of resilience factors for future research (see Supplementary
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Material 4). As a result, discrepancies emerged between the factors extracted from the
included reviews (Research Question 4) and those identified in the expanded list (Research
Question 5).
In the next phase, around fifty selected international experts in the field of resilience
research, family psychology, and public health were invited to participate in an online survey
resilience factors. Experts were asked to rate the importance of each factor on a scale from
0 (not at all important) to 10 (very important). The survey was conducted between
th
September 11 and October 31, 2023. Additionally, the 9 international Resilience
Symposium in Mainz 2023 was used for participant recruitment. In this survey, participants
were also invited to suggest additional relevant factors. The survey results were analyzed
descriptively, and in the final step, these findings were compared with the extracted factors
from the systematic reviews to identify potential research gaps that merit further exploration.
Results
Search Outcomes
The search for systematic reviews in electronic databases yielded 2,752 eligible
Of the 1,646 records screened at the title/abstract level, 1,574 were excluded. This left 72
entries to be assessed for eligibility at the full-text level. Five additional records were
obtained through citation searching of the included systematic reviews. In total, 20 eligible
systematic reviews were included in this umbrella review.
Study and Sample Characteristics
between 2013 and 2022. The primary studies included in those reviews were predominantly
conducted in high-income OECD countries (at least over 66% of the primary studies
included in the reviews).
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Sample sizes across the systematic reviews ranged from 2,402 to 489,419 participants.
Six reviews focused on adults from the general population, while 14 reviews examined
specific high-risk populations (e.g., healthcare personnel, migrants, asylum seekers, war
refugees, participants from ethnic, sexual, and gender minorities). Overall, many systematic
reviews lacked detailed information on sample sizes, with data on age being reported even
less frequently. Additionally, gender distributions were rarely mentioned, limiting the ability
to draw comprehensive conclusions about the sociodemographic characteristics of included
primary studies.
Results of the Quality Appraisal
quality rating of 68.06% (M = 65.28%, SD = 14.80; range: 33.33%–86.11%). The primary
methodological shortcomings identified across the included reviews were as follows: none
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
reported the sources of funding for the included primary studies (100.0% high risk), and
most did not provide access to data, code, or other materials (95.0% high risk). Additionally,
many reviews failed to include a discussion of heterogeneity (40.0% high risk). Furthermore,
65.0% of the reviews had not pre-registered their methods before the study's conduct (high
risk), and 35.0% did not assess the risk of bias of included primary studies.
Research Question 1: Which Societal Challenges and Crises Have Been Examined in
the Included Systematic Reviews?
Among the 20 systematic reviews included in this umbrella review, 5 reviews (25.0%)
focused on pandemics (solely the COVID-19 pandemic), 5 reviews (25.0%) examined stress
experienced by ethnic minorities, and 4 reviews (20.0%) explored issues related to migration
and seeking asylum. Additionally, 3 reviews (15.0%) analyzed stress experienced by sexual
and gender minorities, 2 reviews (10.0%) investigated the consequences of terrorist attacks,
and 1 review (5.0%) reported on economic crises.
Research Question 2: What Types of Mental Health Outcomes Have Been Studied in
Relation to These Challenges?
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Depressive symptoms were examined most frequently (11 reviews, 55.0%), followed
by general distress/general mental health examined in 8 reviews (40.0%) and anxiety
symptoms assessed in 7 reviews (35.0%). PTSD symptoms and suicidality/suicide were each
assessed as outcomes in 6 reviews (30.0%). Stress symptoms and substance use were
examined in 3 reviews each (15.0%). The relationship between resilience factors and burnout
was analyzed in a single review (5.0%). Well-being as a positive mental health outcome was
examined in 3 reviews (15.0%), and happiness was assessed in one review (5.0%).
Research Question 3: Which Social and Societal Resilience Factors Have Been
Examined as Correlates of These Mental Health Outcomes?
All 20 systematic reviews examined social resilience factors, while only 13 reviews
(65.0%) assessed societal resilience factors. Across the included reviews, 23 distinct social
for the complete list of resilience factors). Various forms of social support, such as
perceived/received support and structural social support, were the most frequently studied
social resilience factors, appearing in 19 reviews. This was followed by being
married/having a partner (12 reviews) and living with family or others (5 reviews). In terms
of societal resilience factors, the most evidence was available for living in rural areas
compared to urban areas (5 reviews), the housing situation (4 reviews), and supportive social
policies (3 reviews).
Research Question 4: What Associations Between Resilience Factors and Mental
Health Outcomes Have Been Observed?
Overall, 139 associations were extracted from the 20 included systematic reviews,
encompassing 83 associations for social resilience factors and 56 for societal resilience
factors. Of these, 93 associations (66.9%) indicated favorable links between resilience
factors and mental health outcomes. Additionally, 30 associations demonstrated unfavorable
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
associations (21.6%), while 8 (5.8%) showed mixed results, and 8 (5.8%) revealed non-
significant associations between resilience factors and mental health outcomes.
household or family income was examined in three reviews (Bekteshi et al., 2020; Bonati et
al., 2022; Ward et al., 2013). All three reviews demonstrated a favorable association between
higher income and better mental health outcomes when facing societal challenges and crises.
In terms of partnerships, having a partner (two reviews: Bonati et al., 2022; Ka'apu et
al., 2019) and higher relationship quality (four reviews: Ciuffreda et al., 2021; Fellmeth et
al., 2017; Glonti et al., 2015; Snijder et al., 2021) were consistently associated with better
mental health outcomes, indicating a factor with favorable effects. The status of being
married was frequently analyzed, yielding mixed results across various mental health
outcomes. Four reviews identified marriage as a factor with favorable effects for seven
outcomes (Bekteshi, 2020; Glonti et al., 2015; Hamway et al., 2020; Ka'apu et al., 2019). In
contrast, three reviews reported mixed findings for three outcomes (Bogic et al., 2015;
Ciuffreda et al., 2021; Fellmeth et al., 2017), while one review found no significant
association with two mental health outcomes (Bogic et al., 2015). Additionally, three
reviews found that marriage was also a factor with unfavorable effects for three mental
health outcomes (Glonti et al., 2015; Lluch et al., 2022; Ward et al., 2013). In the case of
cohabitation, Bonati et al. (2022) found that sharing everyday life with someone during the
COVID-19 quarantine was associated with less general distress and cohabiting was also
protective against suicide in the context of ethnic minority stress (Ka'apu et al., 2019).
However, Fellmeth et al. (2017) reported that cohabitation showed no association with
depressive symptoms among migrants, leading to mixed results overall.
The associations between the social resilience factor of living together with family or
others and several mental health outcomes was examined in four reviews, showing
predominantly favorable associations with better mental health outcomes (Bonati et al.,
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
2022; Ciuffreda et al., 2021; Hajak et al., 2021; Ka'apu et al., 2019). However, the systematic
review by Ward et al. (2013) provided evidence that living in households with five or more
people was linked to increased symptoms of depression when facing ethnic minority stress,
indicating that living together with others may also act as a potential factor with unfavorable
effects for worse mental health depending on the stressor context.
Overview of the Social Resilience Factors, the Number of Systematic Reviews in Which They
Were Analyzed, and Extracted Associations
Social resilience factors No. of No. of Mixed Non- Result
reviews associations Favorable results significant Unfavorable
Socioeconomic situation
Household/family income 3 3 3 0 0 0 Favorable
Partnership
Being married 10 15 7 3 2 3 Mixed
Having a partner 2 2 2 0 0 0 Favorable
Relationship quality 4 5 5 0 0 0 Favorable
Cohabiting 3 3 2 0 1 0 Mixed
Living situation
Living with family/others 5 7 6 0 0 1 Favorable
Work situation
Conflict setting at work 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Social support,
engagement, and
integration
Perceived social support 7 7 7 0 0 0 Favorable
Received social support 7 7 7 0 0 0 Favorable
Structural social support 4 5 3 0 2 0 Mixed
Social integration 2 2 2 0 0 0 Favorable
Social engagement 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Church-based social 1
support 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Social isolation 3 4 0 0 0 4 Unfavorable
Family
Family functioning 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Family involvement 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Family support 4 5 5 0 0 0 Favorable
Social/family relationship
quality 2 2 2 0 0 0 Favorable
Separation from family 2 2 0 0 0 2 Unfavorable
Family conflict 4 4 0 0 0 4 Unfavorable
Family values 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Positive role models 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Social media engagement 2 3 1 1 1 0 Mixed
Note. Factors with unfavorable effects increase the likelihood of greater mental distress and symptoms,
whereas factors with favorable effects are linked to reduced mental distress and fewer symptoms. If fewer than
80% of the extracted associations from reviews clearly categorized a factor as either a factor with favorable or
unfavorable effects, the evidence was classified as mixed. When no significant associations were
predominantly reported in the included reviews, these were categorized as non-significant associations.
A conflict setting at work was examined only in a single review by Lluch et al. (2022)
and was found to be associated with higher burnout symptoms during the COVID-19
pandemic, thereby representing a factor with unfavorable effects.
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Both perceived social support (Bogic et al., 2015; Hamway et al., 2020; Ka'apu et al.
2019; Lluch et al., 2022; McCann et al., 2018; Vigny-Pau et al., 2021; Wesemann et al.,
2022) and received social support (Bekteshi et al., 2020; Esposito et al., 2021; Fellmeth et
al., 2017; Inderbinen et al., 2021; Ka'apu et al., 2019; Reed et al., 2021; Snijder et al., 2021)
were examined in seven reviews each, with all reviews reporting favorable associations. This
suggests that higher levels of social support are consistently associated with better mental
health outcomes across various societal crises and challenges. Similarly, social integration
(Hamway et al., 2020; Wesemann et al., 2022), social engagement (Snijder et al., 2021), and
church-based social support (Reed et al., 2021) were also identified as factors with favorable
effects in the included systematic reviews. In contrast, social isolation was extracted from
three reviews (Lieneck et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2021; Wesemann et al., 2022), revealing
four associations that all demonstrated that increased isolation was linked to poorer mental
health, identifying social isolation as a factor with unfavorable effects. For structural social
support (i.e., social network size), the findings were mixed. While McCann et al (2018),
Lieneck et al. (2021) and Ward (2013), identified a favorable association with better mental
health, Fellmeth et al. (2017) reported that anxiety and PTSD symptoms were not linked to
the number of supportive people among migrants.
In the area of family dynamics, only favorable associations were found for family
functioning (Lieneck et al., 2021), family involvement (Ka'apu et al., 2019), family support
(Ka'apu et al., 2019; Reed et al., 2021; Vigny-Pau et al., 2021; Ward et al., 2013),
social/family relationship quality (Glonti et al., 2015; Ka'apu et al., 2019), and family values
(Bekteshi et al., 2020). In contrast, separation from the family was identified as a factor with
unfavorable effects in the reviews of Hajak et al. (2021) and Jannesari et al. (2020), which
showed a connection to worse mental health. Furthermore, family conflicts were highlighted
as a factor with unfavorable effects, with increased conflict within the family consistently
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
linked to worse mental health in four reviews (Bekteshi et al., 2020; Jannesari et al., 2020;
Ka'apu et al., 2019; Vigny-Pau et al., 2021).
Snijder et al. (2021) demonstrated that having positive role models, who do not use
tobacco, was identified as a factor with favorable effects against tobacco use when facing
ethnic minority stress.
Regarding social media engagement, Ciuffreda et al. (2021) found that contact with
family and friends via social media was associated with both improvements and worsening
of anxiety symptoms during the COVID-19 pandemic; however, having contact using social
media was not significantly linked to depressive symptoms. In contrast, Lieneck et al. (2021)
reported that social media use among college-age students and young adults was associated
with better mental health during the pandemic. The current evidence in this area can be
characterized as mixed.
environment. Concerning living in rural regions, one review reported a favorable effect
(Glonti et al., 2015), another found mixed results (Snijder et al., 2021), one review found no
significant association (Ciuffreda et al., 2021), and two reviews identified living in rural
areas as a factor with unfavorable effects (Ka'apu et al., 2019; Vigny-Pau et al., 2021). This
underscores the mixed and inconsistent evidence for this resilience factor.
Residing in remote areas was identified as a factor with unfavorable effects for
increased suicidality (Ka’apu et al., 2019), and mixed findings emerged for substance use
(Snijder et al., 2021), particularly in the context of experiencing ethnic minority stress.
Living in low-risk environments (e.g., environments with lower rates of poverty and
violence) was identified as a factor with favorable effects in the systematic review by Ka’apu
et al., (2019) and associated with better mental health. A better housing situation (e.g.,
sufficient living space and enough housing options) was consistently shown to be a factor
with favorable effects for five mental health outcomes across four reviews (Hajak et al.,
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
2021; McCann et al., 2018; Snijder et al., 2021; Vigny-Pau et al., 2021). Additionally,
education and employment opportunities (Ka’apu et al., 2019), as well as access to mental
health services (McCann et al., 2018; Snijder et al., 2021; Wesemann et al., 2022), were
identified as factors with favorable effects in the systematic reviews. In contrast, social and
recreational opportunities within communities were associated with increased substance use
in the review by Snijder et al. (2021), highlighting them as a potential factor with unfavorable
effects.
In terms of cultural change processes, both acculturation (Bekteshi et al., 2020) and
enculturation (Ka’apu et al., 2019) were identified as factors with favorable effects, each in
single reviews. For better integration into the host country, mixed results were found in the
review by Hajak et al. (2021), while rapid cultural change was found to be a factor with
unfavorable effects being associated with worse mental health in the review by Ka’apu et al.
(2019).
The identified historical aspects were both found to be factors with unfavorable effects
in the review by Ka'apu et al. (2019). Specifically, historical loss (e.g., loss of culture,
historical trauma, ethnic discrimination, poverty) was linked to increased substance use and
suicidality, while historical oppression was associated with higher levels of PTSD
symptoms.
Tradition and culture in general (Ka'apu et al., 2019) and the role of women in the
community (e.g., being courageous and having strength in family and community settings;
Reed et al., 2021) were associated with better mental health in one review each. Cultural
engagement showed mixed results concerning substance use (Snijder et al., 2021), while
adherence to traditional gender roles was identified as a factor with unfavorable effects for
acculturative stress among Latino immigrants facing minority stress (Bekteshi et al., 2020).
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Shared action goals and trust in institutions, as reviewed by Esposito et al. (2021),
were associated with lower levels of general mental distress, establishing them as two
potential social factors with favorable effects.
In terms of community factors, community connectedness emerged as a factor with
favorable effects being associated with lower levels of depressive and anxiety symptoms, as
well as reduced suicidality in transgender people facing minority stress (Inderbinen et al.,
2021). Additionally, community involvement was identified as a factor with favorable effects
against substance use among indigenous people facing minority stress (Ka'apu et al., 2019).
The review by Reed et al. (2021) demonstrated that racial identity was linked to
psychological well-being and religion was an important factor with favorable effects against
suicidality in African American men facing ethnic minority stress.
Supportive social policies (e.g., giving financial security or access to health services)
were identified as a factor with favorable effects in three reviews (Lieneck et al., 2021;
McCann et al., 2018; Vigny-Pau et al., 2021), covering four mental health outcomes.
Additionally, lower occupational and income inequalities were recognized as factors with
favorable effects against stress in one review (Reed et al., 2021).
Regarding the workplace, work safety measures during the COVID-19 pandemic along
with procedural (e.g., “My organization has a mechanism that allows employees to appeal
decisions”) and distributive justice (e.g., “In general, the rewards I receive are fair”) were
identified as factors with favorable effects associated with better mental health by Lluch et
al. (2022). Additionally, the review by Ward et al. (2013) found that job security was linked
to fewer depressive symptoms in African American men facing ethnic minority stress.
The availability of substances was identified as a factor with unfavorable effects for
substance use in the review by Snijder et al. (2021) and for suicidality by Ka'apu et al. (2019).
Only Snijder et al. (2021) examined substance use policies, which were found to act as a
factor with favorable effects. In the same review, cultural obligations to share substances,
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Overview of the Societal Resilience Factors, the Number of Systematic Reviews in Which
They Were Analyzed, and the Extracted Associations
Societal resilience factors No. of No. of Mixed Non- Result
reviews associations Favorable results significant Unfavorable
Living environment
Rural region 5 6 1 1 2 2 Mixed
Remote areas 2 2 0 1 0 1 Mixed
Low risk environments 1 2 2 0 0 0 Favorable
Housing situation 4 5 5 0 0 0 Favorable
Education and employment
opportunities 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Access to mental health
services 3 3 3 0 0 0 Favorable
Social/recreational
opportunities in communities 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Cultural change
Acculturation 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Enculturation 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Integration in host country 1 1 0 1 0 0 Mixed
Rapid cultural change 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Historical aspects
Historical loss 1 2 0 0 0 2 Unfavorable
Historical oppression 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Culture and traditions
Adherence to traditional
gender roles 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Tradition/culture 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Role of women 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Cultural engagement 1 1 0 1 0 0 Mixed
Religion 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Shared action goals 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Trust in institutions 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Community connectedness
and involvement
Community connectedness 1 3 3 0 0 0 Favorable
Community involvement 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Racial identity 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Policies
Supportive social policies 3 4 4 0 0 0 Favorable
Lower occupational/income
inequalities 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Work
Work safety measures 1 2 2 0 0 0 Favorable
Procedural justice (work) 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Distributive justice (work) 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Job security 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Substance use
Availability of substances 2 2 0 0 0 2 Unfavorable
Substance use policies 1 1 1 0 0 0 Favorable
Cultural obligation to share
substances 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Normalization of tobacco
use 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Marginalization related to
substance use 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Workplace promotes
substance use 1 1 0 0 0 1 Unfavorable
Note. Factors with unfavorable effects increase the likelihood of greater mental distress and symptoms,
whereas factors with favorable effects are linked to reduced mental distress and fewer symptoms. If fewer than
80% of the extracted associations from reviews clearly categorized a factor as either a factor with favorable or
unfavorable effects, the evidence was classified as mixed. When no significant associations were
predominantly reported in the included reviews, these were categorized as non-significant associations
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Ten Social and Societal Resilience Factors Rated as Most Important, Along With the Five
Factors Rated as Least Important by the Experts Participating in the Online Survey
Social Resilience factors Societal resilience factors
10 most important resilience factors
M SD M SD
1. Overall social support 9.07 1.15 1. Financial safety and 8.61 1.20
stability
2. Support from partners (e.g., emotional 8.93 0.92 2. Perceived physical safety 8.36 1.47
support)
3. Relationship quality with a partner 8.74 1.20 3. Legal security/certainty 8.19 1.43
4. Social cohesion and connectedness (e.g., 8.43 1.43 4. Job security 8.04 1.32
feeling a sense of belonging to a particular
social group)
5. Family climate 8.38 1.06 5. Legal protection of 7.96 1.48
minorities
6. Family acceptance (e.g., feeling of being 8.33 1.52 6. Quality of workplaces and 7.79 1.50
accepted by family members) working conditions
7. Family functioning (e.g., how well family 8.26 1.56 7. Effective communication 7.54 1.48
members get along) about crises
8. Social support from family members (e.g., 8.08 1.26 8. Income equality 7.36 2.02
parents, siblings)
9. Higher family socioeconomic background 8.04 1.45 9. Social solidarity 7.28 1.49
10. Family cohesion 8.04 1.66 10. Trust in the legal system 7.22 2.08
5 least important resilience factors
28. Social network size 4.32 1.95 36. Positive role models at a 5.08 1.72
societal level (e.g., athletes,
politicians)
29. Cross-cultural connections (e.g., having 4.23 2.61 37. Collective religious and 4.95 2.68
friends in other countries/cultures) spiritual experiences
30. Number of persons living in a household 3.89 1.74 38. Living in rural areas 4.42 2.02
(e.g., family, friends)
31. Number of family members 3.52 2.01 39. Living in urban areas 4.15 1.90
32. Number of colleagues at the workplace 2.63 1.90 40. Unavailability of alcohol 4.08 2.75
(e.g., alcohol is only
available from specific
shops or for specific age
groups)
Note. Experts (n = 28) were asked to rate the importance of social and societal resilience factors from 0 (not at
all important) to 10 (very important).
the normalization of tobacco use, marginalization related to substance use, and workplace
environments that promote substance use were identified as factors with unfavorable
effects for increased substance consumption in the context of ethnic minority stress.
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Research Question 5: What Social and Societal Factors Do Experts in the Domains of
Resilience Research, Public Health, and Family Studies Consider to be Important?
A total of n = 28 international experts in resilience research, family psychology, and
public health participated in an online survey that assessed the importance of 72 resilience
factors, comprising both 32 social and 40 societal factors. A comprehensive overview of all
factors and their respective ratings is provided in Supplementary Material 4. Here, we
highlight only the ten social and societal resilience factors rated as most important, along
Regarding social resilience factors, experts rated overall social support as the most
important social resilience factor, followed by emotional support from the partner and social
cohesion/connectedness. Next in importance were factors related to family dynamics (e.g.,
family climate, family acceptance, family functioning). The least important factors were
simple measures of social contact, such as social network size and the number of family
members.
Financial safety and stability, perceived physical safety, and legal security and
certainty were rated as the most important societal resilience factors by the participating
experts. In contrast, societal factors such as positive role models at the societal level, residing
in rural areas or urban areas, and the restricted availability of alcohol were rated as the
least important factors.
Additional suggested social factors by the experts include teacher support and the
provision of social support. At the societal level, proposed factors encompass freedom of
speech and expression, the quality of available food in the area, societal openness to
inclusion (e.g., for individuals with mental health conditions, neurodiversity, or disabilities)
as well as racial and gender equity.
Discussion
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
This umbrella review aimed to examine social and societal resilience factors and their
associations with mental health responses to societal challenges and crises in OECD member
states. A total of 20 systematic reviews were identified, focusing on mental health outcomes
in the context of various societal challenges, including pandemics, terrorist attacks,
economic crises, and minority stress. According to these reviews, 58 resilience factors were
examined, comprising 23 social resilience factors and 35 societal resilience factors. Social
factors were rated as slightly more important for resilient outcomes than societal factors by
the experts. However, for many resilience factors evidence is missing.
Depressive symptoms were the most frequently analyzed mental health outcome,
followed by general distress/general mental health outcomes and anxiety symptoms.
Notably, there has been a lack of research on positive mental health outcomes, with only 4
reviews examining positive mental health. Emerging research suggests that positive
dimensions of mental health may independently influence both the onset and progression of
mental health conditions (Margraf, Teismann, & Brailovskaia, 2024). Knowledge about
resilience factors and their associations with positive mental health outcomes is needed.
Accordingly, promoting well-being and cultivating positive mental health have gained
increasing recognition as central objectives in public mental health strategies (Das et al.,
2020; Kobau et al., 2011). Future research should aim to incorporate positive mental health
outcomes such as subjective well-being or life satisfaction into their study designs.
While the number of social resilience factors was somewhat lower compared to the
number of societal resilience factors, there was more evidence available regarding their
associations with mental health outcomes. Overall, it can be noted that while certain social
and societal resilience factors have more substantial evidence (e.g., social support or housing
situation), many others are supported by only limited or isolated findings. This underscores
the need for more primary studies and, in turn, systematic reviews that comprehensively
examine both social and societal resilience factors in the face of societal challenges and
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
crises. In addition, for some key factors, such as being married or living in rural areas, the
evidence is very mixed. Further research is needed to identify the contextual factors that are
likely to explain this heterogeneity.
The examination of the results from the expert survey indicates that, on average,
social factors are rated as slightly more important than societal factors concerning their
importance in achieving resilient outcomes following societal crises and challenges.
According to the experts, social factors – particularly those related to the proximal social
environment such as family and partnerships – play a more crucial role.
Overall, different aspects of social support emerged as the most important factors
with favorable effects, supported by robust evidence as a key social resilience factor. This
finding is consistent in both the data obtained from the included systematic reviews and our
expert survey. Social support remains one of the most extensively researched factors in
resilience studies (Schäfer et al., 2024; Ozbay et al., 2007; Zalta et al., 2021). Future studies
should further investigate the interplay between an individual's need for social support, its
sources, availability, and provision to better understand the role of social support during
societal crises (Melrose et al., 2015). Social isolation also emerged as a factor with
unfavorable effects with strong evidence linking it to poorer mental health, further
underscoring the critical role of social support.
Additionally, it is evident that familial factors have been assigned particularly high
importance by the experts. This aligns with the understanding that, during societal crises, the
family often serves as the central social element to which individuals can turn for support
(Pfefferbaum, & North, 2008, Wang et al., 2022; Witting et al., 2021). Overall, the evidence
from primary studies on familial factors is limited. However, potential factors with favorable
effects with the most substantial evidence include living with family/others and family
support. Having family conflicts appears to be a potential factor with unfavorable effects.
Further research into familial factors is urgently needed, not by the invention of entirely new
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
concepts, but by building on and collaborating with the well-established field of family
psychology and their concepts and constructs. These aspects should be more often included
in primary studies.
While relationship quality generally shows favorable associations, the findings
regarding marital status are mixed. Current research typically considers only marital status
(single vs. married vs. widowed), while relationship quality is rarely addressed. This
approach is problematic, as an unhappy marriage or a marital separation can be a significant
source of stress, while a happy marriage can show favorable associations with better mental
health outcomes (Carr et al., 2014; Pellón-Elexpuru et al., 2024; Prime et al., 2020).
Similarly, the quality of relationships with family and friends has emerged as a factor with
favorable effects, although the evidence for this is currently limited. Future studies should
address this gap, as previous research has frequently focused on the number of supportive
individuals rather than the quality of those relationships.
At the level of societal resilience factors, while there were many potential resilience
factors identified, most showed only one or two associations with mental health outcomes,
indicating that the evidence base is insufficient for most factors. Overall, there is strong
evidence suggesting that a good housing situation, access to mental health services, and
supportive social policies serve as potential factors with favorable effects. Additionally,
while there was considerable evidence available for living in rural versus urban regions, the
findings were mixed and more studies are needed. Interestingly, experts considered living in
rural areas to be one of the least important societal resilience factors.
Financial safety, physical safety, and legal security were identified by experts as the
most important societal resilience factors; however, systematic reviews have yielded only
very limited evidence concerning these factors. This highlights a significant research gap
(e.g., Knapp, & Wong, 2020), as assessing these aspects may pose challenges due to their
nature as national-level factors and they could be difficult to quantify in primary studies
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
being conducted in single countries. One option to assess these aspects could be to analyze
them regionally (based on place of residence and municipal codes) and to link them with
survey data.
Factors related to the living environment, such as the availability of schools, physical
facilities, and the quality of infrastructure, were rated by experts as being of moderate to low
importance. While there is somewhat more evidence regarding these aspects compared to
other societal resilience factors, the overall amount of evidence remains insufficient.
No information could be extracted from included the systematic reviews for some
important aspects, such as social cohesion (e.g., solidarity), which plays a critical role in
recovery from crises like the COVID-19 pandemic (Jewett et al., 2021). It should also be
noted that solidarity, in particular, was rated as an important societal resilience factor by the
experts.
Overall, societal-level factors have been studied only sporadically in both this review
and the existing literature. Therefore, future studies should place a stronger emphasis on the
societal level and its role in fostering resilience during the recovery from societal crises
(Bodas et al., 2022; Jewett et al., 2021; Haavik, 2020; Schäfer et al., 2024). The provided
results offer a good starting point.
Limitations
Our findings must be interpreted in light of several limitations. First, the scope of this
umbrella review was restricted to systematic reviews to ensure a comprehensive and
representative evidence base. However, this approach led to the exclusion of resilience
factors for which only a limited number of primary studies currently exist.
Second, most of the findings are based on narrative syntheses performed in the
included reviews, which allowed for conclusions only about the direction of associations,
without providing insights into the strength or causality of these relationships. More complex
study designs are needed to investigate the interactions and potential causal pathways
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
between social and societal resilience factors and mental health outcomes (Schäfer, Sopp et
al., 2022; Sippel et al., 2024). Furthermore, the methodological approach of this review
precluded an assessment of how well the statistical models in primary studies were
controlled for potential confounders. Data from models that include a larger number of
control variables tend to diminish the explanatory power of individual predictors (Aloe &
Becker, 2012; Bayes-Marin et al., 2023). In the related project based on a synthesis of
primary studies, we observed that the inclusion of more variables and resilience factors in
regression models was associated with less favorable evidence ratings for each resilience
factor. Our results also indicated that resilience factors across all levels exhibited only small
incremental validity beyond sociodemographic variables and other resilience- and health-
promoting factors (Schäfer et al., 2024). Future studies could incorporate factors from
multiple levels (individual, social, and societal) simultaneously to better assess their
incremental predictive value.
Third, the limited number of available systematic reviews and the small number of
associations identified prevented the analysis of differences between mental health
outcomes. For 7 social and 29 societal resilience factors, only a single review provided
information on associations being relevant for this umbrella review.
Fourth, the selection of international experts in the fields of resilience research,
family psychology, and public health for the expert survey may have introduced bias in
assessing the importance of certain resilience factors. This could explain why, for instance,
family-related factors were rated as highly important social resilience factors.
Fifth, the generalizability of the findings from this umbrella review is subject to
notable limitations. The limited number of existing systematic reviews has primarily focused
on a narrow range of societal stressors (mainly the COVID-19 pandemic, ethnic and gender
minority stress). Future research should investigate whether our findings apply to other
societal stressors within the same broader category (e.g., Leppold et al., 2022) and explore
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
whether specific social and societal resilience factors are uniquely beneficial for particular
types of societal challenges and crises. Furthermore, it cannot be assumed that the resilience
factors identified as important resources are equally relevant for all individuals within OECD
member states exposed to a given stressor. Such a variation across cultures was recently
found for the individual-level resilience factor emotion regulation (Chen et al., 2024). For
example, reappraisal tends to be more adaptive in cultures that are short-term oriented,
uncertainty-tolerant, and competition-driven. Conversely, suppression was more
maladaptive in indulgent, individualistic, and competition-driven cultures. The ability to
read and interpret contextual cues that code demands and opportunities of a situation and
enable the selection of appropriate coping strategies (context sensitivity), varies between
individuals but is also shaped by cultural aspects (Bonnano & Burton, 2013). Further studies
are required to determine whether these resilience factors are universally applicable across
diverse contexts. However, based on the previously cited literature, this appears unlikely.
Implications for Future Research
Our umbrella review aimed to provide insights and guidance for future research on
resilience in the context of societal crises and challenges. It highlights the need for more
primary studies and systematic reviews that investigate both social and societal resilience
factors, as these are critical for a comprehensive understanding of resilience responses to
societal stressors. We have compiled a detailed list of potential resilience factors (see
Supplementary Material 4), which can serve as an important resource for future research.
Studies that examine a broad range of psychological resilience factors across different levels
remain scarce (Chmitorz et al., 2021; Pellerin et al., 2022; Schäfer et al., 2023). A
collaborative effort to define and regularly assess a core set of the most promising resilience
factors at different levels could prove beneficial, enabling comparability of resilience factors
across nations and cultures. Furthermore, this approach would help to explore cross-cultural
differences, which have been largely overlooked. The list could also help to ensure that
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
relevant social and societal resilience factors are systematically included in future studies
(Schäfer et al., 2024).
The expert survey results highlight the potentially crucial role of families in
achieving resilient outcomes when facing societal challenges and crises. Family-related
resilience factors are rarely considered in resilience research, representing a notable gap in
the existing literature (Pfefferbaum, & North, 2008; Wang et al., 2022; Witting et al., 2021).
The work environment also offers potential for further exploration. Given the
significant amount of time people spend at work, the role of support from colleagues and
supervisors remains highly underexplored in the context of societal challenges and crises
(e.g., Jordan et al., 2023; Pietrzak et al., 2014).
Regarding societal resilience factors, most studies have concentrated on immediate
environmental factors, such as urban versus rural settings or the availability of essential
facilities like schools and mental health centers. However, resilience factors at the national
level have been less frequently examined (e.g., financial safety and stability, or physical
safety). Future research requires multinational studies to enable comparisons of these
resilience factors at the national level and to enable the linkage of self-reported and
regional/structural data.
Due to the large number of resilience factors across different levels, recent
conceptual frameworks propose that a smaller set of resilience mechanisms (e.g., regulatory
flexibility) might mediate the relationship between resilience factors and resilient outcomes
(Bonanno, 2021; Kalisch et al., 2017, 2024). Kalisch et al. (2024) define resilience
mechanisms as mental, physical, or behavioral processes (e.g., seeking help) that are
activated during acute stress. Resilience factors, such as willingness to seek help or
communication skills, are predispositions or conditions that increase the likelihood of
activating these mechanisms and facilitate optimal coping with stressors. However, research
on resilience mechanisms remains relatively underexplored (e.g., Bögemann et al., 2022;
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Hemi et al., 2023; Kalisch et al., 2024). In particular, there is a significant evidence gap
concerning social and societal resilience mechanisms. Given the critical role that social
support plays in fostering resilient outcomes, it is essential to investigate mechanisms that
promote the establishment and maintenance of social relationships, which contribute to an
overall sense of connectedness (Wulff et al., 2015). Other resilience mechanisms may also
exist at the social and societal level, such as capacities for transformation and adaptation,
decision-making, and community actions (e.g., Jewett et al., 2021; MacDarby et al., 2023;
Saja et al., 2021). However, it remains unclear which social and societal resilience factors
increase the likelihood of these processes occurring (McDarby et al., 2023).
Understanding the dynamics of resilience factors over time is also essential. For
instance, a recent study found that the importance of perceived social support fluctuated
during the first year following exposure to a stressor, with its relevance varying based on the
source of support (Sippel et al., 2024). This highlights the need for longitudinal research to
explore how the significance of social and societal resilience factors evolves as individuals
navigate different stages of recovery or adaptation after stressor exposure.
Conclusion
The aim of this umbrella review was to identify the social and societal resilience
factors examined in response to societal challenges and crises, and to summarize the
evidence on their associations with mental health outcomes. There was evidence for the
importance of both social and societal resilience factors, with several key factors being
identified. At the social level, the strongest evidence emerged for the favorable effects of
social support, relationship quality, absence of family conflict, and family support. At the
societal level, factors such as adequate housing conditions, access to mental health services,
and supportive social policies were linked to resilient outcomes. However, for most factors,
evidence remained limited and/or was mixed including favorable, non-significant and/or
unfavorable effects. The expert survey revealed that while certain social and societal
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
resilience factors, deemed highly important by experts, have received some research
attention, evidence remains limited for many others.
Resilience research could benefit from broadening its scope to include aspects of
families, partnerships, workplaces, and societal factors as critical components for resilient
individual adaptation processes. To achieve this, appropriate modeling approaches and study
designs are necessary. Future large-scale international studies on public mental health should
aim to investigate a more comprehensive set of resilience factors within integrated models,
with greater attention given to both social and societal resilience mechanisms. A core set of
the most promising resilience factors across different levels needs to be identified.
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Declarations
Author contributions
MS: conceptualization (supporting), formal analysis (lead), methodology (lead), data
curation (lead), project administration (lead), writing – original draft preparation; LS:
conceptualization (supporting), formal analysis (supporting), methodology (supporting),
writing – review and editing (equal); CC: conceptualization (supporting), methodology
(supporting), writing – review and editing (equal); CK: conceptualization (supporting),
methodology (supporting), writing – review and editing (equal); SKS: conceptualization
(equal), supervision (equal), formal analysis (supporting), methodology (supporting),
writing – review and editing (equal), funding acquisition (equal), project administration
(supporting); KL: conceptualization (equal), resources (lead), supervision (equal), writing –
review and editing (equal), funding acquisition (equal).
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany (Project code:
LIR_2023_01). We thank Kurt Hahlweg and Wolfgang Schulz, as well as Caroline Jung-
Sievers and her work group, for their valuable discussions on social and societal resilience
factors. Additionally, we would like to thank Franziska Schütz and Isabelle Weber for their
assistance in preparing this review. We thank Thomas Kubiak, Wolfgang Schulz, Kurt
Hahlweg, Ann-Christin Haag, Talya Greene, Tanja Michael, and the Center of Excellence
in Foreign Affairs Resilience, U.S. Department of State for their valuable participation in
our expert survey. We also wish to acknowledge and thank the additional experts who
participated anonymously.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare to have no conflict of interest.
Data availability statement
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises
Data and materials used for this review are accessible at the Open Science Framework
Code availability statement
PREPRINT VERSION: NOT YET PEER-REVIEWED
Running title: Social and societal resilience factors in response to societal challenges and crises