MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 1
Muslim Diversity Study: Quantitative protocol and practical insights on engaging New
Zealand’s Muslim communities
M. Usman Afzali¹𝄒², Jamila S. Badis², Parus Khoso³, Gul e Aqsa⁴, Mazharuddin Syed Ahmed⁵,
Aamina Ali⁶, Afrah Ali⁷, Zarqa Shaheen Ali⁸, Ayca Arkilic⁹, Tuba Azeem¹⁰, Hala Burhoum²,
Zahra Emamzadeh¹¹, Zahra Haidary², Nasratullah Hamid¹², Iman Husain², Fatima A. Junaid¹³,
Mashal Khan², Adepate Mustapha-Koiki¹⁴, Hussain Raissi¹⁵, Farah Shawkat¹, Rizwan Sulehry¹⁶,
Mai Tamimi⁷, Sandila Tanveer¹², Somia Tasneem¹⁷, Kumar Yogeeswaran², Chris G. Sibley¹⁸,
Joseph A. Bulbulia¹⁹𝄒²⁰, and Aarif A. Rasheed²¹
¹Religion Programme, University of Otago
²School of Psychology, Speech and Hearing, University of Canterbury
³College of Education, University of Canterbury
⁴School of Health Sciences, University of Canterbury
⁵Engineering and Architectural Studies, Ara Institute of Canterbury
⁶PsychologyNZ
⁷Independent Researcher
⁸ICL Business School, New Zealand Skills and Education College
⁹School of History, Philosophy, Political Science and International Relations, Victoria University
of Wellington
¹⁰Faculty of Law, Victoria University of Wellington
¹¹School of Language, Social & Political Sciences, University of Canterbury
¹²Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago Christchurch
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 2
¹³School of Management, Massey University
¹⁴Department of Politics and International Relations, University of Auckland
¹⁵The National Centre for Peace and Conflict Studies, University of Otago
¹⁶School of Management, Victoria University of Wellington
¹⁷Department of History, Government College University, Faisalabad, Pakistan
¹⁸School of Psychology, University of Auckland
¹⁹School of Psychology, Victoria University of Wellington
²⁰Department of Linguistic and Cultural Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology
²¹Just Community
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 3
Author Note
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 4
The data described in this study are part of the Muslim Diversity Study, which is
conducted under the New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose. The Muslim Diversity Study - officially known as “A National Longitudinal
Study of Muslim Diversity and Flourishing” is supported by a grant from the Templeton Religion
Trust (TRT-2022-30579). The funders had no role in preparing the manuscript or the decision to
publish it. The authors are grateful to W. Joel Schneider for the Quarto template. Author roles
M. Usman Afzali: conceptualisation, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition,
investigation, methodology, project administration, resources, supervision, visualisation, writing -
original draft, writing - review & editing; Jamila S. Badis: supervision, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing; Parus Khoso: formal analysis, investigation, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing; Gul e Aqsa: formal analysis, investigation, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing; Mazharuddin Syed Ahmed: writing - review & editing; Aamina Ali:
writing - original draft, writing - review & editing; Afrah Ali: writing - original draft, writing -
review & editing; Zarqa Shaheen Ali: investigation, writing - original draft, writing - review &
editing; Ayca Arkilic: writing - original draft, writing - review & editing; Tuba Azeem:
investigation, writing - review & editing; Hala Burhoum: investigation, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing; Zahra Emamzadeh: writing - original draft (strengths & limitations),
writing - review & editing; Zahra Haidary: data curation, writing - original draft (method),
writing - review & editing; Nasratullah Hamid: data curation, writing - original draft (method),
writing - review & editing; Iman Husain: data curation, writing - original draft (method), writing
- review & editing; Fatima A. Junaid: writing - original draft (introduction), writing - review &
editing; Mashal Khan: data curation, writing - original draft (method), writing - review & editing;
Adepate Mustapha-Koiki: writing - original draft (applications & implications), writing - review
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 5
& editing; Hussain Raissi: data curation, writing - original draft (method), writing - review &
editing; Farah Shawkat: data curation, writing - original draft (method), writing - review &
editing; Rizwan Sulehry: data curation, writing - original draft (strengths & limitations), writing -
review & editing; Mai Tamimi: writing - original draft (method), writing - review & editing;
Sandila Tanveer: writing - review & editing; Somia Tasneem: writing - original draft (strengths &
limitations), writing - review & editing; Kumar Yogeeswaran: conceptualisation, funding
acquisition, methodology, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing; Chris G. Sibley:
conceptualisation, data curation, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration,
resources, supervision, writing - review & editing, development and management of the New
Zealand Attitudes and Values Study panel data collection from 2009 to the present; Joseph A.
Bulbulia: conceptualisation, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, resources,
supervision, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing; Aarif A. Rasheed:
conceptualisation, data curation, funding acquisition, resources, writing - review & editing
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to M. Usman Afzali, Religion
Programme, University of Otago, 362 Leith Street, Dunedin, Otago 9016, New Zealand, Email:
usman.afzali@otago.ac.nz
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 6
Abstract
The New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study (NZAVS) is a national longitudinal study that aims
to understand social values and attitudes in New Zealand residents by repeatedly tracking
responses in the same people over time. Prior to the Muslim Diversity Study, the NZAVS has been
considerably undersampling Muslims, with Muslim participation rates being ten times lower than
those of other religious groups. The Muslim Diversity Study seeks to recruit a proportionately
representative cohort of Muslim participants within the NZAVS to involve the Muslim community
in longitudinal scientific research, and to convey results to Muslim community. Our hope is that
by incorporating a broader range of Muslim experiences to the NZAVS, the stories of Muslim
adversity and resilience will be more accurately recorded and understood. Such inclusion will
enrich the scientific study of human flourishing, address the curiosity of the Muslim community
in understanding its diversity, and contribute practical insights that can lead to the betterment of
this marginalised community. Here, we describe the motivations for the Muslim Diversity Study,
explain how we developed the study in consultation with the Muslim community, outline our
methods for data collection, and offer practical guidelines for data collection from a culturally
diverse religious community. In the first instance, this article offers a record of our research with
Muslims in New Zealand. However, we hope this record will prove useful to investigators who
seek to advance the scientific understanding of human flourishing in other settings through the
national-scale longitudinal study of culturally diverse, marginalised religious communities.
Keywords: Muslims, diversity, New Zealand, Muslim Diversity Study (MDS), New
Zealand Attitudes and Values Study (NZAVS)
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 7
Muslim Diversity Study: Quantitative protocol and practical insights on engaging New
Zealand’s Muslim communities
Introduction
Officially known as A national longitudinal study of Muslim diversity and flourishing, the
Muslim Diversity Study (MDS) embraces a community-oriented approach by collaborating with
the Muslim community in order to make decisions about the execution of data collection and for
identifying key questions of interest for the community at large. It is important that such processes
and decisions are recorded in the form of an article so that our findings and recommendations are
shared with the broader public and future researchers in New Zealand and across the globe.
MDS started in 2023 as part of the New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study (NZAVS).
The NZAVS is a planned 20-year-long longitudinal national probability annual panel study of
social attitudes, personality, ideology and health outcomes that began in 2009 and is currently in
its 16th year. It has so far collected data from more than 70,000 New Zealand residents using the
electoral roll (Sibley, 2024). The NZAVS has been instrumental in exploring key issues related to
minorities, including but not limited to discrimination, intergroup relations, identity, distress,
security, and the dynamics and mechanisms behind them.
The NZAVS has been uniquely positioned due to its prestigious reputation (over 300
peer-reviewed publications), longitudinal panel design, large sample size, and a large
multi-disciplinary research team (Sibley, 2024). More importantly, NZAVS has a nationally
representative sample with data from different identity and religious groups (Sibley, 2024),
thereby allowing researchers to compare data from different identity groups. However, the
NZAVS has been undersampling Muslims by ten times lower than those of other religious groups
(Sibley, 2024), which did not allow us to make meaningful inferences regarding Muslim lives and
issues in comparison with other religious groups. Hence, the goal of MDS is to achieve as many
as 650 Muslim respondents (i.e., ~ 1% of the total nation’s Muslim community).
This article has three major parts. After providing the broader context of Muslims and
MDS, we firstly discuss the process of co-designing and adjustments to the NZAVS design.
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 8
Secondly, we present the final design and implemented protocol. Thirdly, we share the summary
of advice and lessons learned in the process.
Muslims in New Zealand
The Muslim community has been expanding in New Zealand. Based on the 2018 census,
New Zealand had more than 60,000 Muslims which has grown to over 75,000 according to the
2023 Census (Stats NZ, 2024). Studies also show that the number of converts to Islam has
recently increased (Arkilic, 2020). The Muslim community is uniquely positioned in New
Zealand: a growing religious minority and a historically stigmatised group that was the direct
target of the 15 March 2019 terrorist attack (Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack
on Christchurch Masjidain on 15 March 2019, 2020; Sibley et al., 2020).
The devastating far-right extremist attack on two mosques took place in Christchurch,
killing 51 Muslims and injuring 40 (Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on
Christchurch Masjidain on 15 March 2019, 2020). Although this attack was widely condemned
(World Leaders Condemn New Zealand Mosque Attacks, 2019) and was unprecedented in New
Zealand (Jacinda Ardern on the Christchurch Shooting, 2019), it was not as surprising to the
Muslim community (A. Rahman, 2019). Leading up to the attacks, many Muslims had regularly
experienced Islamophobia and prejudice (Shaver et al., 2016, 2017; Sibley et al., 2020).
Even as Islamophobia has reportedly increased overseas following these attacks
(Islamophobia After Christchurch Terror Attacks Quadrupled - Australian Report, 2022), the
evidence in New Zealand seems to be mixed. While news articles have reported increased hate
(Frykberg, 2023), the NZAVS findings were indicative of improved attitudes towards Muslims
(Bulbulia et al., 2023; Shanaah et al., 2021) following the attacks. Addressing this discrepancy is
beyond the scope of the current article; however, it is worth noting that most of our research in this
area, primarily through the NZAVS lens, has so far shed light on such attitudes from a
non-Muslim perspective. In other words, we have mostly reported on how Muslims are perceived
by non-Muslim members of New Zealand society, rather than how Muslims perceive themselves.
Although NZAVS studies of anti-Muslim prejudice are scientifically important, systematic
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 9
insights into how Muslims are diversely responding to prejudice, and where Muslims are
diversely found resilience remain unclear.
Muslims have generally faced prejudicial attitudes in New Zealand (Greaves et al., 2020;
Sibley et al., 2020; Yogeeswaran et al., 2019). Until the Christchurch terror attack, news stories on
Islam and Muslims in New Zealand media were mostly an extension of ‘the negative othering
rhetoric’, and the national media tended to link Muslim converts to jihadis (Drury, 2016).
Unsurprisingly, such rhetoric has been found to foster anti-Muslim prejudice (Shaver et al., 2017).
In the aftermath of Christchurch shootings, the New Zealand government introduced
unprecedented counter-terrorism measures such as the prohibition of the sale of all military-style
semi-automatic and assault rifles and creating the Royal Commission of Inquiry into these attacks
(Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Terrorist Attack on Christchurch Masjidain on 15 March
2019, 2020). The Royal Commission of Inquiry presented an 800-page report emphasising New
Zealand’s inclusive and welcoming identity, among other measures (Arkilic, 2021). In addition,
the New Zealand press embraced a more inclusive and positive narrative with respect to Islam and
Muslims (Kabir, 2024; K. A. Rahman, 2020).
In summary, although there have been sporadic reports of increased hate crimes after the
attacks (Wilson & Shastri, 2020), the average sentiments towards Muslims have improved in New
Zealand. The NZAVS, in a series of articles, reported this positive shift in these attitudes toward
Muslims post Christchurch attacks (Bulbulia et al., 2023; Shanaah et al., 2021), and the
psychological response of New Zealand public to the shootings (Byrne et al., 2022).
The Christchurch shootings prompted many New Zealand research groups and institutions
to further study about Muslims and with Muslims, who so far had been a culturally-distinct,
under-researched, minority group. These studies included trauma-focused response
(Sulaiman-Hill et al., 2021; Sulaiman-Hill, Porter, et al., 2024), inclusion, Islamophobia and
wellbeing (Junaid et al., 2024), perceived discrimination among Muslim immigrant youth (Raissi,
2024), the political implications of government decisions (Arkilic, 2021) among others. Given
that the NZAVS had explored perceptions of Muslims and the mechanisms of attitudinal changes
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 10
towards Muslims following 15 March 2019 attacks (Bulbulia et al., 2023; Hawi et al., 2019;
Shaver et al., 2017; Sibley et al., 2020), it was a timely necessity that we expanded our reach to
focus on the experiences of this same group.
In addition, much of the NZAVS work to date with the Muslim community had focused on
conveying information about how Muslims are perceived by the non-Muslim members of New
Zealand society. After receiving strong positive suggestions from the Muslim community to
scientifically explore diversity, discrimination, self-perception, resilience, meaning-making and
flourishing, the MDS was conceptualised in 2022 to address this scholarly and community
knowledge gap. Therefore, MDS is effectively a booster to NZAVS, and uses the NZAVS
questionnaires to collect data from the members of Muslim community in New Zealand.
Media reports pointed out incredible resilience and flourishing of victims as well as the
wider Muslim community post Christchurch shootings (Greenfield, 2019; Oliver, 2024). Limited
research on specific cohorts of Muslims indicated the same (Nasier, 2023; Sulaiman-Hill, Schluter,
et al., 2024). Research on human flourishing has consistently shown that religiosity and religious
service attendance might be associated with various aspects of human flourishing (VanderWeele,
2017a, 2017b). New Zealand Muslims’ overall under-representation in research and resilience in
the face of prejudice and terror produced a critical research gap in the relationship of Muslim
religiosity and flourishing that warranted further empirical investigation. By addressing this line
of inquiry with MDS, we contribute to the science of human flourishing in general.
MDS research aims
MDS aims to investigate the role of religious community engagement in buffering Muslims
against anti-Muslim prejudice, to examine the employment and health challenges faced by
Muslims relative to other religious groups, and to explore the similarities in subjective wellbeing
and psychological distress across religious affiliations, emphasising the protective effects of
community support and religious community-making. In addition, we aim to explore the diversity
of Muslims in New Zealand, assess Muslims’ perceived discrimination in comparison with other
religious groups, unearth predictors of their flourishing and meaning-making, and measure the
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 11
effect of service-attendance and religious-identification on these constructs. This comprehensive
approach enables the examination of both direct relationships and complex mediating pathways
between religious community engagement, experienced prejudice, employment and health
outcomes, and psychological wellbeing. Through this multifaceted investigation, the study seeks
to contribute to our understanding of the Muslim experience in New Zealand and the role of
religious community support in promoting positive outcomes across various life domains.
Part 1: Co-designing
Community consultation
Prior to applying for the research grant, we deemed it necessary to consult with the Muslim
community to gauge interest in the project, and the feasibility of the project for the community.
More importantly, inferring from the culturally-focused research groups, it was important to
co-design the project with Muslims by consulting with the academics and leaders of the Muslim
community. Therefore, the principal investigator (MUA) started engaging with the Muslim
community in February 2022 — one year before the start of the project — to co-design the project.
This consultation continued until November 2022, where MUA reached out to 29 Muslims
in six cities, Auckland, Hamilton, Palmerston North, Wellington, Christchurch, and Dunedin,
from various age groups, genders, and cultural backgrounds. Twenty of these conversations took
place with community leaders, religious scholars, academics, and cultural leaders, while 9
conversations took place with individual activists. The conversations were focused around four
objectives: 1) To assess the feasibility of the project for Muslims, 2) To assess the interest of
Muslims in the project, 3) To get feedback on the survey items, design, and working with the
community, and 4) To inquire if translation of the questionnaire may be needed. The consultation
revealed unanimous agreement among respondents regarding the study’s feasibility and timeliness
for the Muslim community, with expectations of strong interest in participation. The respondents
indicated that the highest engagement would likely come from youth groups,
subsequent-generation migrants, those with formal education, and female participants.
Furthermore, the respondents not only endorsed the significance of the study and its planned
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 12
measures but also pledged their comprehensive support for the initiative.
A few challenges were also identified with regards to the execution of the study: 1) The
participation from Christchurch might not be up to the anticipated levels as after the Christchurch
shooting, people were frequently surveyed and not provided with the findings, which might have
affected their interest to participate in the study. 2) It might not be easy for all prospective
participants to understand the questionnaires due to the community’s unfamiliarity with research
and limitations with fluency in English. 3) The participation from the elderly community (due to
unfamiliarity with research) and Muslim converts (due to distrust of the institutions) might also be
low. 4) Community members might be suspicious and consider the study to have ulterior or
personal motives. Similar challenges have been identified by other researchers who have worked
with the Muslim community in New Zealand (Sulaiman-Hill, Porter, et al., 2024).
The following recommendations on mitigating these challenges were received upon
completing the consultation: 1) To encourage more participation from the Muslim community,
findings should be shared with the wider community in future owing to the diversity it will
present. To be able to share the research findings with the community smoothly and keep them
up-to-date, it was recommended to have a dedicated website for the study. Therefore, instead of
calling it a booster to NZAVS, the project was named Muslim Diversity Study, and a website of
the same name was created. 2) Although many said that the questionnaire needs to be translated
into seven ethnic languages in connection to reducing the difficulty in reaching the diverse
members of the community for the study, they also indicated that a majority of the potential
participants could comprehend the English version easily. 3) It was proposed that we should reach
out to the community via trusted community leaders/members, ethnic and religious organisations,
and mosques, and that for youth engagement, we should go via youth organisations such as
Muslim Student Associations (MSAs) at universities. A family-focused strategy was advised to be
beneficial as starting with the men was implied to be more effective. 4) To assuage the possible
distrust around the motives of the study, the participants must be clearly informed about the
study’s rationale and its benefits to the community, reiterating that it will increase Muslims’
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 13
visibility and raise their voice in research. The long-term value of the study for the community as
a whole as well as their children should also be emphasised.
This process led to the development of comprehensive guidelines that address feasibility,
advice on engagement with the community, the possible challenges, and avenues to enhance
participation. The 29 participants of this pilot consultation form the Advisory Group of MDS and
are being regularly consulted.
Translation
Our consultation with the community revealed that the need for translation of the
questionnaire may be limited to a small subset of New Zealand Muslims, as the majority are
expected to be proficient in English. This finding aligns with the research conducted by the March
15 Project team (Sulaiman-Hill et al., 2021), which found that 71% of participants preferred
English for surveys and clinical interviews.
A critical component of the MDS is the comparison of Muslim scores on the NZAVS with
those of other religious groups. The introduction of a translated questionnaire poses the risk of
not capturing attitudes and behaviours with the same accuracy as the English version.
Consequently, any observed differences in scores between Muslims and other groups could be
attributed to translation bias rather than genuine differences in religious affiliations.
This concern was presented to the Advisory Group, which recommended against
translating the questionnaire. Instead, it was advised to provide the English version to all potential
Muslim participants. This approach offers a methodological safeguard, ensuring that the
conceptual meanings are preserved and not distorted by translation. By maintaining the integrity
of the questionnaire, we can be more confident in the validity of the comparative analyses between
religious groups.
Item retention and religious Context Considerations
The consultation process with the MDS Advisory Group identified six items in the New
NZAVS questionnaire that could potentially appear irrelevant to Muslim participants, given the
questionnaire’s original development within a predominantly Christian and secular context.
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 14
Despite these potential concerns, a substantial majority of the Advisory Group (81% average
across all six items) recommended retaining these items to enable meaningful cross-religious
comparisons in the analysis.
To address potential participant concerns about item relevance, we included in the survey
instructions: “As the survey is designed for the general New Zealand population, there may be
questions that do not necessarily apply to you. Please feel free to skip any questions that you do
not wish to answer.” This approach maintains methodological consistency while acknowledging
and accommodating the diverse religious perspectives of participants.
Part 2: Protocol
Sample size estimation and participants
The NZAVS sample of Muslim cohort was n = 85 prior to MDS (Sibley, 2024). To
enhance the representation of Muslims in NZAVS, we initially aimed to recruit an additional 1500
participants, more than doubling the study’s proportional sampling of the general population. We
were able to recruit n = 582 new participants. This target corresponds to about 1.3% of New
Zealand’s Muslim population based on the 2018 Census (Stats NZ, 2024). Notably, the 2023
Census that took place after the start of MDS shows an increased number of Muslims in New
Zealand (75,138) (2023 Census Population, Dwelling, and Housing Highlights, 2024). Data
collection was concentrated in six major urban centers—Auckland, Christchurch, Hamilton,
Wellington, Palmerston North, and Dunedin—each with a Muslim population of at least 1,000
and currently resided in New Zealand. There were no exclusion criteria. By conclusion of Wave
15, the sample size of NZAVS is 32,857, with further details available online
Materials
We are highlighting measures that are pertinent to the planned papers aimed at
communicating the findings emerging from MDS. The complete list of NZAVS measures can be
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 15
For Likert type scales, the minimum and maximum levels are noted along with the
description: for instance, 1 = Not Important, 7 = Very Important would mean that a score ranges
between 1 and 7, with 1 being the minimum and 7 being the maximum score, whereas (R)
indicates the reverse-scored items. Notwithstanding, we might choose to explore further measures
which will then be elaborated on in the individual articles.
Service attendance and religiosity
1. Do you identify with a religion and/or spiritual group? (Yes/No). If yes, what religion or
spiritual group? (String entry).
2. How many times did you attend a church or place of worship in the last month? (String
entry).
3. How many times did you pray in the last week? (String entry).
4. How many times did you read religious scripture in the last week? (String entry).
5. How important is your religion to how you see yourself? (1 = Not Important, 7 = Very
Important).
6. I identify as a spiritual person. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree).
7. Do you believe in God? (Yes/No).
8. Do you believe in any form of spirit or life force? (Yes/No).
Prejudice
1. I feel that I am often discriminated against because of my religious/spiritual beliefs. (1 =
Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree).
2. People from my ethnic group are discriminated against in New Zealand. (1 = Strongly
Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree).
3. I feel that I am often discriminated against because of my age. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 =
Strongly Agree).
4. I feel that I am often discriminated against because of my ethnicity. (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7
= Very Accurate).
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 16
5. I feel that I am often discriminated against because of my gender. (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7 =
Very Accurate).
6. Intergroup Warmth Ratings: Participants are asked to rate their feelings of warmth toward
different groups using the “Feeling Thermometer Scale” for each group from least to most
reference). Groups include NZ Europeans, Māori, Asians in general, Pacific Islanders,
Elderly people, People with a disability, Refugees, Overweight people, Immigrants in
general, Chinese, Indians, Muslims, LGBTQ+ people, People with mental illness.
Felt belonging
1. I know that people in my life accept and value me. (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7 = Very Accurate).
2. I feel like an outsider. (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7 = Very Accurate).
3. I know that people around me share my attitudes and beliefs. (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7 = Very
Accurate).
Support
1. There are people I can depend on to help me if I really need it. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 =
Strongly Agree).
2. There is no one I can turn to for guidance in times of stress (R). (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 =
Strongly Agree).
3. I know there are people I can turn to when I need help. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly
Agree).
Employment
1. What is your highest level of qualification? (String entry).
2. Are you currently employed (This includes self-employed or casual work)? (Yes/No). This
leads to a four-point nominal response: employed full-time, employed part-time,
unemployed, and not in the labour force.
3. In that job, what is your current occupation? (String entry).
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 17
4. What is the main activity of the business or employer that you work for? (String entry).
5. How long have you worked at your current organization? (String entry: years/months).
6. How satisfied are you with your current job? (1 = Not Satisfied, 7 = Very Satisfied).
7. How secure do you feel in your current job? (1 = Not Secure, 7 = Very Secure).
8. How valued do you feel by your current organization? (1 = Not valued, 7 = Very Valued).
Health
1. In general, would you say your health is… (1 = Poor, 7 = Excellent).
2. I seem to get sick a little easier than other people. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly
Agree).
3. I expect my health to get worse. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree).
4. Do you have a health condition or disability that limits you, and that has lasted for 6+
months? (Yes/No). If yes, please state: (String entry).
5. How often do you have a drink containing alcohol? This is measured using a 6 point
nominal scale (a. Never - I don’t drink, b. Monthly or less, c. Up to 4 times a month, d. Up
to 3 times a week, e. 4 or more times a week, f. Don’t know).
6. Have you ever regularly smoked tobacco cigarettes? (Yes/No).
7. Have you ever regularly used e-cigarettes? (Yes/No).
8. Do you currently smoke tobacco cigarettes? (Yes/No).
9. Do you currently vape or use e-cigarettes? (Yes/No).
10. Access to and satisfaction with GP: Do you have a regular family doctor/GP? (Yes/No). (If
yes) How satisfied are you with the service and care you receive from your family
doctor/GP? (1 = Not Satisfied, 7 = Very Satisfied). Do you think your doctor/GP shares a
similar cultural background to you? (1 = Definitely No, 7 = Definitely Yes). Does your
doctor/GP respect your cultural background when you are discussing health issues with
them? (1= Definitely No, 7 = Definitely Yes).
11. Please estimate how many hours you spent during each of the following things last week
(String entry). Options provided: Working in paid employment, housework/cooking,
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 18
looking after children, volunteer/charitable work, exercising/physical activity, watching
TV/Netflix/movies, travelling/commuting, watching/reading news, using the internet (in
total), using social media (e.g., Facebook), playing video games/computer games.
12. BMI: Calculated by using a person’s weight (kg) divided by square root of height (m) that is
asked separately, using “What is your height? (String entry (metres))”, and “What is your
weight? (String entry (kgs))”.
13. During the past month, on average, how many hours of actual sleep did you get per night?
(String entry).
14. Do you have a health condition or disability that limits you, and that has lasted for 6+
months? (Yes/No). If yes, please state: (String entry).
Subjective wellbeing/psychological distress
None of the time, 4 = All of the time) (Kessler et al., 2010).
Meaning of life
Items are: “My life has a clear sense of purpose” (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly
Agree) and “I have a good sense of what makes my life meaningful” (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 =
Strongly Agree).
Life satisfaction and national wellbeing
Completely Satisfied). In addition, “I am satisfied with my life (1= Strongly Disagree, 7 =
Strongly Agree)” and “In most ways my life is close to ideal (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly
Agree)” are used.
Self esteem
Items are, “On the whole I am satisfied with myself” (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7 = Very
Accurate), “I take a positive attitude toward myself” (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7 = Very Accurate) and
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 19
“I am inclined to feel that I am a failure” (R) (1 = Very Inaccurate, 7 = Very Accurate).
Gratitude
Items are, “I have much in my life to be thankful for” (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly
Agree), “When I look at the world, I don’t see much to be grateful for” (R) (1 = Strongly Disagree,
7 = Strongly Agree) and “I am grateful to a wide variety of people” (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 =
Strongly Agree).
Community making
I feel a sense of community with others in my local neighbourhood (1 = Strongly
Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree).
Intergroup anxiety
I feel anxious about interacting with people from other races (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 =
Strongly Agree).
Rumination
During the last 30 days, how often did you have negative thoughts that repeated over and
over? (0 = None of the time, 4 = All of the time).
Forgivingness versus vengeful rumination
Items are, “Sometimes I can’t sleep because of thinking about past wrongs I have suffered.”
(1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree), “I can usually forgive and forget when someone does
me wrong. (R)” (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree), and “I find myself regularly thinking
about past times that I have been wronged.” (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree).
Matching with other religious groups
The following demographic variables are measures by which we will compare the sample
obtained with population level indicators of Muslim Diversity in New Zealand Public records.
1. Age: “What is your age?” (String entry), and “When is your date of birth?” (String entry).
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 20
2. Education: Measured by an 11-point ordinal scale (0 = No Qualification, 11 = Doctoral
Degree, based on the New Zealand Qualification Framework (The New Zealand
Qualifications Framework, 2016)) from responses to the qualification-related question.
3. Employment: A binary variable is created (0 = Unemployed, 1 = Employed) based on the
responses to the employment item “Are you currently employed?”.
Census Groups: European, Māori, Pacific Peoples, Asian, MELAA (Middle Eastern, Latin
American/African), and Other.
5. Gender: Responses to the string entry item “What is your gender?” will be used to create a
binary variable (Male = 1, Not male = 0).
6. Area-unit deprivation: Measured based on 2018 New Zealand Deprivation Index (Atkinson
et al., 2019) that assigns a decile-rank index (1 = Least Deprived, 10 = Most Deprived)
using participants’ immediate neighbourhood’s aggregate census information. This index is
calculated using component factor analysis of nine variables in weighted order as follows:
proportion of adults who received a means-tested benefit, household income, proportion not
owning own home, proportion of single-parent families, proportion of unemployed,
proportion lacking qualifications, proportion of household crowding, proportion with no
telephone access, and proportion with no car access. Hence, this index reflects nationwide
mean deprivation level for small neighbourhood-type units (i.e., small community areas
consisting about 80-90 people).
7. Socioeconomic status (Occupational prestige): A census-derived occupation-based measure
NZSEI (New Zealand Socioeconomic Index) is used to estimate one’s socioeconomic status.
It uses an open-ended question regarding one’s occupation, which is subsequently classified
in accordance with the Australian and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations
(ANZSCO) Level 3. In case of missing values, the measure is imputed using a combination
of age and education. The measure is assigned scores between 10 = Low and 90 = High.
8. Parent: Measured by assigning a binary variable (1 = Those with children, 0 = The rest) to
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 21
the item: “How many children have you given birth to, fathered, or adopted?”. (String
entry).
9. Partner: Responses to “What is your relationship status?” are assigned a binary variable (1
= Has a partner, 0 = Doesn’t have a partner).
10. Religious identification: Responses to “Do you identify with a religion and/or spiritual
group?” are coded a binary variable (1 = Yes, 0 = No).
11. Political orientation: Responses to “Please rate how politically left-wing versus right-wing
you see yourself as being” are assigned a 7-point scale (1 = Extremely left-wing, 7 =
Extremely right-wing).
12. Residence: Urban or rural residence (a two-item nominal variable) is identified based on the
physical addresses provided.
13. Region of habituation: Whether participants are living in an urban or rural area, based on
the addresses provided, is coded 1 = Urban, 0 = Rural.
14. Race-based rejection anxiety: “People from other races would be likely to reject me on the
basis of my race”. (1 = Strongly Disagree, 7 = Strongly Agree).
15. Big Six personality traits: Six personality traits – agreeableness, conscientiousness,
extraversion, openness, honesty-humility, and neuroticism – are measured using a 7-point (1
= Very Inaccurate, 7 = Very Accurate) Mini-IPIP6 scale (Sibley et al., 2011).
Ethics
The NZAVS was approved by the University of Auckland Human Participants Ethics
Committee on 26 May 2021 until 26 May 2027 (Reference: UAHPEC22576). All participants
granted informed written consent and the University of Auckland Human Participants Ethics
Committee approved all procedures.
Design
The NZAVS is a comprehensive, planned 20-year longitudinal national probability panel
study that began in 2009, focusing on social attitudes, personality, ideology, and health outcomes
of adults in New Zealand. Currently in its 16th wave, the NZAVS employs quantitative measures
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 22
to gather data from adult New Zealanders. The MDS serves as a booster to the NZAVS,
specifically aimed at increasing the participation of Muslims residing in New Zealand. The MDS
Wave 1 corresponded to NZAVS Wave 15 (from October 15, 2023, to October 14, 2024).
Subsequent waves of the MDS align with NZAVS Wave 16 (October 15, 2024, to October 14,
2025), Wave 17 (October 15, 2025, to October 14, 2026), and so on. MDS will examine various
outcome variables to test the proposed hypotheses, including perceived religious and ethnic
discrimination, employment status, job satisfaction, job security, feeling valued by the
organisation, self-rated health, perceived health decline, chronic diseases and disabilities,
psychological distress, meaning of life, life satisfaction, sense of belonging, perceived support,
warmth toward various groups, vengeful rumination, and forgivingness. The predictors variables
include:
1. Perceived religious discrimination
2. Perceived ethnic discrimination
3. Employment status
4. Job satisfaction
5. Job security
6. Feeling valued by organisation
7. Self-rated health
8. Perceived health decline
9. Chronic diseases and disabilities
10. Kessler-6 psychological distress scale
11. Meaning of life
12. Life satisfaction
13. Sense of belonging
14. Perceived support
15. Warmth toward various groups
16. Vengeful rumination
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 23
17. Forgivingness
Research questions
1. Do service attendance and/or prayer practices buffer Muslims against experiences of
anti-Muslim prejudice?
2. What is the relationship between community ties and resilience to anti-Muslim prejudice
among Muslims?
3. Do Muslims face more challenges in employment compared to members of other religious
groups?
4. How do health outcomes for Muslims differ from those of matched members of other
religious groups?
5. How does religious community-making influence subjective well-being, meaning in life,
and psychological distress among Muslims? And, in what ways do these outcomes compare
between Muslims and matched members of other religious groups?
Procedure
Training, Support, and Supervision for the Project Team
The research assistant position was advertised by the University of Canterbury and shared
via social media, emails, and community organisations. The eligibility criteria included at least
tertiary level education in New Zealand, familiarity with research in humanities and social
sciences, interest in working with communities, and experiences of working with Muslim
initial screening and interviews from a total of 95 applicants.
Prior to the commencement of the MDS, a series of comprehensive Zoom training
sessions were conducted to equip the research assistants with the necessary knowledge and skills.
These sessions covered the background of the NZAVS and the MDS, as well as detailed
instructions on the survey questionnaires. Additionally, the training emphasised ethical
guidelines, confidentiality principles, and effective communication strategies for engaging with a
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 24
culturally diverse participant pool. The training also provided guidelines on planning for hiring
participants and promoting community participation in the study. All recommendations from the
co-designing process with the community were included in the training material.
The training programme was tailored to accommodate varying levels of research
experience. For some assistants, this was their first experience in data collection, while others had
extensive research backgrounds. This structured support system ensured that research assistants
were well-prepared and confident in their roles, contributing to the overall success of the project.
Data collection
Research assistants used the snowball approach for data collection. As per
recommendations from the co-designing process, they started reaching out to their primary
contacts first. These consisted of family members and close friends that the research assistants
found the most comfortable to reach out to. Starting in this manner ensured that the research
assistants were put in a real-life situation within their comfort zone. MUA provided them with
consistent feedback and was available to help those that needed practice communicating the
message.
After two weeks, the research assistants were guided to reach out to their secondary
contacts. These consisted of extended families, peers, and classmates. The process of feedback
and support by MUA continued. Finally, they reached out to community organisations. This
gradual extension helped research assistants to build confidence in reaching out and attain
coherence of narrative regarding the study. Research assistants with extensive previous
engagement experience with the community reached out to the community sooner than the rest. In
addition to promotion, the research assistants were available to help participants with
understanding questions, and if needed, were also present when participants completed
questionnaires.
The sample was non-representative, and participants had the choice of filling in the online
questionnaire using Qualtrics, or a paper questionnaire which could be returned to the NZAVS
headquarters in Auckland University using a prepaid postal envelope.
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 25
A runsheet was provided, and different documents and promotional materials such as
individual messages, community messages, flyers, and posters were at the research assistants
disposal based on their needs. We also developed vision and ethics statements that were part of
our MDS introductory letter. In addition, a cover letter was sent to all participants alongside the
information sheet. It was aimed to clearly convey the purposes of MDS to the community, see
appendices A-H for the aforementioned materials. Furthermore, 10 promotional shirts were
designed which the research assistants wore during festivals and community events for the study
promotion.
The social media campaign started at the beginning of 2024 and continued until the end of
Wave 1. Besides regularly posting on a weekly, and later on, a fortnightly basis, we also used paid
promotion to increase the reach of the project.
For the purposes of community promotion, we relied on a combination of community
outreach at local mosques, religious, community, and ethnic organisations, Muslim schools and
businesses, and MSAs (Muslim Student Associations). From available databases and community
contacts, we identified 218 organisations and the research assistants were able to approach
Muslims in 105 of these organisations. Out of these, 80 endorsed and promoted the study.
Different organisations endorsed us in different manners: some allowed us to give speeches to
their audience, while others shared our promotional material online on their social media
platforms, via community message groups (e.g., WhatsApp), and mailing lists. It is worth noting
that some of these organisations did not necessarily belong to the Muslim community (e.g.,
refugee resettlement centres and ethnic community trusts), though they still offered support. In
addition, tens of posters were placed in community facilities (e.g., mosques and libraries) and
hundreds of flyers were handed over after Friday prayers as well as cultural, community, and
religious events and festivals.
In addition to reaching out to organisations, the principal investigator and research
assistants conversed with 28 local and national community leaders, celebrities, religious scholars,
and academics to disseminate information about the study to the communities. As part of this
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 26
recruitment drive, the principal investigator, MUA, also presented 28 talks, presentations, and/or
lectures to Muslim community groups around New Zealand via mosques, universities and
community organisations in the selected cities, explaining the goals of the NZAVS, and how it
would benefit the New Zealand Muslim community to be represented in this ongoing national
longitudinal panel sample. Five additional talks were delivered by the research assistants too.
Ensuring research assistants’ convenience
MDS research assistants came from varied backgrounds. Some of them have had research
degrees and extensive research experience, whereas, for others, it was their first attempt at
engaging in data collection. Some research assistants wanted explicit weekly targets while others
decided their own targets. The principal investigator, MUA, also provided ongoing guidance and
feedback, and was available to communicate with participants via audio and video mediums if and
when needed. MUA conducted fortnightly check-ins with the research assistants and teams in
each selected city to ensure that all their queries were answered, and that they had reliable
guidance and feedback throughout the process.
Web hosting
The MDS website (access from here) provides all key information for the public and will
be updated as progress is made.
Data management
The collected data were anonymised and processed in the NZAVS headquarters, and only
made available to trusted researchers and collaborators. The NZAVS data dictionary, sampling
procedure, sample details and other relevant information can be accessed online
Timeline
until the end of it. In addition, social media marketing has been an integral part of MDS data
collection campaigns. The planned future events, with approximate dates, are indicated too.
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 27
Part 3: Lessons learned - Guidelines for working with the Muslim community
Based on our interactions with the community, we had anecdotal evidence that some
members of the Muslim community might distrust social science research and view it as state
surveillance. We also had anecdotal evidence of increases in such scepticism after the
Christchurch shootings. Hence, we ensured that our approach and methodology addressed these
issues beforehand, and in-line with recommendations from co-designing with the community,
such as building trust, highlighting the importance and benefits of academic research, and
addressing under-representation of Mulsims in research. Our flyers, posters, social media
messages, and individual messages are testaments to this. Based on our interactions with the
Muslim community and feedback from the research assistants, we inferred that the following
elements encourage increased participation of the Muslim community in research:
1. Building rapport: The community trusts religious and community leaders, intellectuals,
academics, and elderly. The first step in any community interaction would be reaching out
to such figures and clearly sharing with them the vision, mission, and need for the project.
Leaders’ endorsement can be extremely influential.
2. Addressing concerns regarding confidentiality and data management: Given that a large
number of Muslims have taken refuge in New Zealand after escaping oppressive regimes, it
is only natural for them to be sceptical of anyone who might ask for data. Therefore, it is
extremely important to ensure that the data are secured. At NZAVS, we adhere to strict
security protocols. Our data are anonymised yet not publicly available, and is safeguarded
with some of the world’s most secure encryption.
3. Being transparent and truthful with the community: Besides building rapport and ensuring
confidentiality, it is extremely important to be transparent and truthful with the community
in terms of deliverables and outputs. Reportedly, in the past, some researchers have
collected data from the community, but the reports were not shared. Being in constant
contact with the community ensures that future research endeavours could take place
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 28
effectively.
4. Reaching out to individuals personally, and not via groups: Our research assistants have
discovered this, especially by the means of targeting their close circles individually and
keeping expanding the reach, as a more effective approach to incur higher response rate as
compared to targeting the community via organisations. Notwithstanding, the group
approach has its own advantages and helps with dissemination of messages.
5. Medium: At the beginning, the focus was on both online and paper questionnaires. Towards
the end, based on the feedback from research assistants, we employed paper questionnaires
only, which resulted in a comparatively higher response rate.
6. Achievable targets: After testing different targets, each research assistant committed to the
completion of a minimum of three participants each week during the final five months.
This, coupled with point 5, enhanced the response rate.
7. Comprehensive promotion and research assistant training and support: We found the use of
social media, website, flyers, and posters effective in engaging the community. Contents of
the website addressing privacy concerns, ethics, vision, and mission were appreciated by
some participants and community leaders. In terms of research assistant training, we
learned that a systematic approach, runsheet, manual, frequently asked questions, and
evolving data collection targets were useful.
Similarly, we learned that the following factors could hinder data collection efforts.
1. Length of the questionnaire: It is measured by the time taken to complete the questionnaire,
and was one of the challenges identified in MDS. This would not necessarily generalise to
shorter questionnaires.
2. Unfamiliarity of participants with scientific research: Generally, it is the subsequent
generation of Muslims that attend the Western education system and become familiar with
the process of research, thereby, being more comfortable with research participation. On
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 29
the other hand, the first generations are less likely to participate. We also have anecdotal
evidence from participants, research assistants, and Advisory Group to infer that the first
generation of Muslims, due to language barriers and other life priorities (settling in New
Zealand, work, lower education) might be less likely to participate. Therefore, the sampling
should be mindful of these barriers and implement appropriate recruitment strategies.
3. Privacy concerns: In general, if the community does not trust the research group, they
would be hesitant to participate. It might sound like common sense, but this is an alert for
researchers to not take this matter lightly. The community might not be very familiar with
the research process, but that does not mean they should be approached in a non-serious or
frank manner. All the potential concerns, including privacy, have to be addressed
beforehand.
4. Political climate: The current political climate and the Middle-East conflict have affected
the population as well as the research assistants. Although we lack empirical data, many of
our team members and potential participants lost their loved ones since October 2023 and
have been grieving. In some of such instances, we tried not to approach affected members
of the community.
5. Language barriers: Our community consultation revealed that most of our potential
participants would comprehend English. This, by design, left out those with limited
language abilities from participation.
We witnessed enhanced participation by addressing these challenges. Some of these
recommendations have been reflected in outputs of the March 15 research group too
(Sulaiman-Hill, Porter, et al., 2024).
Strengths of MDS
MDS represents a significant advancement in knowledge production, addressing the
historical under-representation of the Muslim community in research. While the NZAVS has
made important contributions in this area, MDS is a crucial step forward.
As the first comprehensive, contextually rich study of Kiwi Muslims, MDS uses
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 30
systematic, standardized research methods to explore the decision-making, policy formulation,
and inclusion practices of key social players such as the news media, political parties, and social
action groups. By ensuring a representative sample (with the NZAVS comprising more than 1%
of the target population), MDS aims to enhance our understanding of how these entities interact
with the Muslim community in New Zealand.
The findings of MDS are expected to provide valuable insights into issues like political
perceptions, diversity, discrimination, self-perception, resilience, meaning-making, and
flourishing within the Muslim community. Additionally, MDS will help dispel misconceptions
and improve the general public’s understanding of Muslims, fostering greater social cohesion.
Furthermore, this research lays a solid foundation for future studies on the experiences and
perspectives of Muslims in New Zealand.
Limitations of MDS design
MDS is a quantitative-only study, which was necessary to enable comparison with other
groups in the NZAVS and to serve as a booster for the NZAS. While this focus on quantitative
data limits certain aspects of the study, it provides valuable insights and lays the groundwork for
future qualitative research, which could address emerging questions from the community. Given
the large sample size and the range of variables examining various social aspects, MDS—and the
NZAVS more broadly—offers an unprecedented wealth of data about the lives of New Zealanders.
This richness is demonstrated by 300+ peer-reviewed publications that have emerged from the
datasets.
A limitation of the study is its focus on English-speaking participants, which may restrict
the generalisability of the findings. This approach was necessary for ensuring comparability with
other groups in the NZAVS, but a future qualitative follow-up study could aim to include
non-English speakers and further broaden the scope of the research.
Another challenge was the length of the questionnaire, which may have affected overall
participation and completion rates. However, gathering detailed data on these variables was
deemed essential for enhancing the NZAVS dataset and making meaningful comparisons across
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 31
religious groups.
Finally, because MDS follows the same structure as the NZAVS, some survey items may
not be fully culturally compatible with the attitudes and beliefs of the Muslim community.
However, feedback from the Advisory Group indicated that these items did not need to be
removed, as they were considered important for the overall study framework.
Application and implications of MDS findings
This research enables Muslims in New Zealand to be active participants in shaping their
unique identity. This identity not only encapsulates the diverse ethnocultural societies within the
New Zealand Muslim community, but also allows for the formation of a distinct national identity.
Often research used to drive policy and intervention targeted at New Zealand Muslims is informed
by research undertaken on Muslim communities overseas. Whilst there are many comparable
similarities between Muslims worldwide, their everyday life experiences are heavily shaped by the
society in which a Muslim resides. Furthermore, the strengthening of this identity can facilitate
greater in-group understanding, connection, and belonging to New Zealand.
This research also has the potential for the Muslim voice to have a greater influence on
public perception of Muslims in New Zealand. The visible Muslim voice in many parts of the
Western world is often reactionary to political events, discriminatory experiences, or accusations
of terror. Greater understanding and public discourse of lived experiences of Muslims in New
Zealand, one allows for a more accurate understanding of these experiences, and two, facilitates a
shift in how Muslim voices are ‘allowed’ to participate in society.
This research can also inform international discourse on the experiences of Muslim
immigrants, and their views and beliefs on their country of residence. Stockemer and Moreau
(2021) completed a comprehensive review on studies focused on Muslim immigrants’ sense of
belonging and identity; results reflected this varied greatly depending on the country of residence
at a macro-level, and personal education at the micro-level.
MDS allows Muslim to have an active, data informed input in shaping policies and
intervention targeted at their wellbeing and livelihood. This is especially significant in the
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 32
aftermath of the 15 March terror attacks targeting Muslims in New Zealand. Research highlights
significant long term mental health distress and vulnerability for individuals directly impacted by
the attacks (Sulaiman-Hill, Schluter, et al., 2024).
Insights from the findings could be used as a form of policy advocacy in two ways: first,
by engaging with policymakers to advocate for policies that address discrimination and promote
inclusivity. This could involve working with local governments and organisations to ensure that
the voices of Muslims are heard in policymaking and in organising safety and security initiatives.
Second, by collaborating with law enforcement to create safety initiatives that ensure the
wellbeing of Muslim communities.
Policymakers can use our findings to develop more effective and equitable policies that
better address the needs and rights of Muslim communities. For instance, understanding the
impact of community ties and religiosity on the resilience of Muslim communities can guide the
government in creating support programmes that strengthen these aspects.
Findings from this study can contribute to government strategies that focus on adaptability
and change while engaging with the Muslim community to encourage bonding, bridging, and
linking social capital where possible.
Research also highlights the psychological impact that the terror attacks had on wider
Muslim communities in New Zealand, who viewed the attack to be of a personal nature through a
shared identity with the targeted victims of the attacks (Nasier, 2023). This poses significant
responsibility on the health system in New Zealand to be equipped to meet the ongoing and
long-term needs of New Zealanders impacted by terror. This research can provide valuable
insights into the Muslim community, facilitating the development of interventions that are
effectively tailored to meet their needs.
Practically, the findings could guide the development of targeted interventions aimed at
reducing Islamophobia and supporting the Muslim community in New Zealand. Since
“programmes are the instruments, governments use to implement a policy or achieve a particular
outcome” (Rose, 1991), community-based programmes that strengthen social ties and religious
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 33
practices could be designed to buffer against anti-Muslim prejudice. Insights from the findings
could further pave the way for organising public forums and discussions to bring together
Muslims and non-Muslims to address issues of discrimination, resilience, and community
wellbeing, with the aim of fostering dialogue and understanding.
The findings could also inform policy regarding the need for targeted anti-discrimination
measures. As the research has highlighted the challenges faced by Muslims in employment and
health, targeted interventions to improve these areas for Muslim communities should be
prioritised by the government. Muslims in New Zealand are diverse and the Muslim community
organisations have been actively working with local and central governments to provide advice
and input regarding ethnic communities (Federation of Islamic Associations of New Zealand,
2024; New Zealand Muslim Association, 2024). However, it should be noted that while it may be
regarded as illusory to develop policies, programmes, and practices that purport to be “blind” to
race and ethnicity (Durie, 2005), socio-economic measures addressing discrimination among
Muslims in New Zealand should be tailored to the communities, considering their religious
characteristics alongside their ethnicities or races.
Regarding socio-economic concerns, the practical applications of the study’s findings can
be seen in interventions focusing on employment and economic support, such as creating
programmes that assist Muslims in navigating the job market and addressing the unique
challenges they face. This could include mentorship programmes, skills training, and networking
opportunities. Additionally, partnerships between local businesses and Muslim community
organisations could promote diversity in hiring practices and support entrepreneurs. Culturally
sensitive mental health initiatives that are visible within Muslim communities and tailored to their
cultural and religious needs would also be effective programmes.
Conclusion
MDS is a crucial booster for the NZAVS because not only it addresses the
under-representation of Muslim in NZAVS, but it only helps us answer many questions about
Muslims’ self-perception, meaning-making, flourishing, religiosity, and health outcomes. We
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 34
have provided a preliminary guideline of working with a minoritised religious community in a
culturally sensitive manner. Despite the well-known limitations of observational, quantitative,
survey research, MDS provides substantial values in terms of implications and applications.
Techniques learned from MDS can be applied while working with Muslims and other culturally
similar groups in New Zealand and overseas.
MDS - PROTOCOL AND INSIGHTS 35