P S
REPRINT ERIES OF THE
Dynamics of Human Performance Regulation Laboratory
U H
AT THE NIVERSITY OF AMBURG
Preprint submitted for peer review (December 2024). This paper has not been peer-reviewed.
EFFORT AND BOREDOM SHAPE OUR EXPERIENCE OF
TIME
Wanja Wolff1 , Sena Özay-Otgonbayar1, James Danckert2, Maik Bieleke3, & Corinna S. Martarelli4
1 Dynamics of Human Performance Regulation Laboratory, Department of Movement Science, University of Hamburg,
Germany
2 Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, Canada
3 Department of Sport Science, University of Konstanz, Germany
4 Faculty of Psychology, UniDistance Suisse, Switzerland
ABSTRACT
Situations change over time, and so does our experience of them. For example, a task may initially feel
engaging but can, over time, become monotonous and boring. Similarly, as processing demands increase
or one’s momentary capabilities decline, the same task can feel more or less effortful. The dynamics of
these task-induced sensations matter because boredom and perceived effort shape behavior by driving
optimization of resource utilization. A fundamental resource people do not want to waste is time. Here,
we propose that the sensations of boredom and effort influence how the passing of time is experienced.
Specifically, both states are linked to changes in interoception—the perception of internal bodily
signals—which is known to play a key role in time perception. This proposal offers a framework for
understanding how fundamental regulatory sensations, such as boredom and effort, shape temporal
experience through interoceptive mechanisms. We highlight the insular cortex as a potential hub
mediating the effects of interoceptive signals on time perception, integrating feelings of boredom and
effort, and their influence on the experience of time.
Keywords: boredom, time, time estimation, time perception, time awareness, insula, monotony, effort, interoception
 Corresponding author Data availability Funding
Wanja Wolff No data were collected for this manuscript. This chapter was supported in part by the Swiss National
Dynamics of Human Performance Regulation Lab Competing interests Science Foundation (grant number 10001CL_200468) and
Department of Movement Science, University of Hamburg The authors have no competing interests to the German Research Foundation (grant number
Feldbrunnenstr 70, 20148 Hamburg, Germany declare. 460704829).
EFFORT AND BOREDOM SHAPE OUR EXPERIENCE OF TIME
Situations change over time. Novel tasks or situations can be loaded with processing demands
and require significant effort. With increasing exposure and repetition they can feel void of
meaningful events, generating the feeling of boredom 1. Crucially, both sensations—effort and
boredom—are understood to be powerful modulators of human behavior 1–6. Generally speaking,
effort is thought to signal action costs, whereas boredom signals that one’s current engagement
with the internal and/or external world is not sufficiently rewarding. Reward-based choice
models of human behavior posit that both sensations are taken into account when people try to
orient their behavior in an attempt to preserve limited resources 1,7–9. One fundamental resource
we do not want to waste is time 10–12. More specifically, we do not want to spend our time doing
too much or too little of whatever we are doing. Whenever we feel that we are not getting much
out of the time we spend doing something, we feel that time is dragging on. This can, for example,
be the case if an activity is exceedingly hard or excessively boring. Here, we suggest that the
perception of effort and boredom dynamically affect how the passing of time is experienced.
More specifically, we draw from research on time perception, effort, and boredom to make the
case that effort and boredom increase awareness of bodily states, which in turn makes time
seem to pass more slowly.
Imagine yourself sitting in front of your computer. You are tasked with rapidly categorizing words
according to the color they are presented in. Sometimes the presented color and the meaning
are congruent (the word green written in green color) and sometimes they are incongruent (the
word green written in red color; i.e., the classic Stroop task) 13. You know you will do this task for
one hour with a small break every 5-minutes. In the beginning the task demands all your
attention: Successive words seem to blur into each other, creating a seemingly constant stream
of information and you have your hands full to correctly categorize the color of the words. The
attentional demands of the task feel a bit overwhelming, and you wonder why it takes so long
until the first break relieves you from the task. This was hard, you feel mentally drained, and
although you know it was only five minutes, it felt much longer. In the next block, the task begins
to feel easier, and the words do not seem to appear so rapidly after one another, making
categorization a bit easier. You are absorbed by the task, and you are surprised that the second
five minutes pass so quickly. After 50 minutes, it feels as if the duration the words are presented
in has been shortened even further, and as if the empty time between successive presentations
has been extended. Your attention starts to shift—you start to notice that the chair you are
sitting on is slightly too low and you notice that your thoughts are drifting elsewhere. You also
notice that you have started to commit more errors when categorizing the presented words. In
your mind, you begin to explore other thoughts, sensations, observations. The last five minutes
seem to drag on forever and you feel bored to death.
As this thought experiment illustrates, the very same sensory input—and rules on how to act
upon this input—can create strikingly different feelings: As a function of one’s familiarity with
the input, perceptions of high effort and/or perceptions of high boredom might arise.
Interestingly, the same sensory input can also feel as if it lasted longer or shorter. In the
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.2
beginning, when processing the presented words required the most effort, stimulus duration felt
longer and the ‘empty time’ 14 between successive presentations felt short. Conversely, when the
person becomes bored, the stimulus presentation felt short and the empty time felt long.
Importantly, in both scenarios the total duration of each five-minute block felt longer than in
the middle of the task. This begs the question, why does subjective duration dynamically change,
and how do effort and boredom affect the subjective shrinking or expansion of time?
Before we address these questions, we will briefly define key terms from research on time, explain
how we use them in the present paper, and cover how they relate to boredom and effort. We
will then describe pacemaker-accumulator models as a general cognitive framework for studying
the perception of time and highlight how boredom and effort can affect time perception
according to this model. We next turn to the putative mechanisms that explain how boredom
and effort relate to time perception. To conclude, we will draw from neuroscientific research on
boredom, effort, time perception and interoception, to suggest the insular cortex as a key
junction that links boredom, effort and the perception of time.
Temporal dynamics of ‘empty time’ and ‘loaded time’
Time perception refers to the degree of agreement between objective and subjective time 15. For
example, how accurately one can guess the minutes one has waited in a room 16,17 or how long
one was cycling on an ergometer 18–20. In turn, time perception can be more or less accurate, and
people integrate various bits of information or situational knowledge to assess this. For example,
I know, writing this paragraph cannot have exceeded one hour, because I have started writing
about an hour before lunch break, and so far, no one has knocked to let me know it is lunch time.
Time awareness on the other hand refers to ‘the subjective impression of time passing quickly
or slowly’ 15. So, in contrast to time perception, time awareness does not focus on how long
something actually took, but how long it felt. For example, I think writing this paragraph took me
almost one hour, but this hour felt like it took forever. In turn, time awareness is inherently about
the subjective experience of the passage of time. While the distinction between time perception
and time awareness highlights different aspects of temporal experience 21, we will use the term
time perception throughout this paper for simplicity, unless a statement specifically pertains to
time awareness a.
With respect to the perception of time, we will focus on what can be referred to as ‘empty time’
22 and ‘filled’ or ‘loaded time’ 23: In the introductory Stroop example, the person was presented
with stimuli that appeared with a short interval in between. In this example, the stimulus
presentation would refer to loaded time and the inter-stimulus interval to empty time. In general,
tasks can often be divided in empty and loaded parts. In the context of a typical experimental
task, this distinction is straightforwardly reflected in the stimulus presentation time and the
inter-stimulus interval. However, in everyday life, even though the distinction might not be so
a Interestingly, under certain conditions people might slightly overestimate the amount of time something took (time perception)
but report that time was passing very slowly (time awareness). So, while they are often correlated, the mapping between both
concepts is not one-to-one 16.
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.3
clear-cut, most experiences contain both loaded and empty time. Periods of intense cognitive or
physical work, are akin to loaded time, while moments of waiting or transition represent empty
time.
As the Stroop example illustrated, the perception of how fast or slow loaded time and empty
time are passing is a dynamic process. This perception can shrink and expand over the total
stimulus (loaded time) feels shorter after repeated presentations, then the intervals between
these stimuli (empty time) are likely to feel longer. This is because the objective duration of
stimulus presentation and the interval between presentations is constant, but the time it takes
a person to process the stimuli is dynamic. In our proposal, loaded time is associated with high
processing demands, while empty time is linked to low processing demands. Consequently,
loaded time relates to effort, and empty time to boredom. Research supports the notion that
the duration of a repeatedly presented stimulus feels shorter 24–26. This dynamic of shrinking and
expanding loaded and empty time raises the question of how time perception is understood to
function in general.
Time perception is generally understood through the lens of pacemaker-accumulator models
which offer a cognitive framework for how time perception might function in general. To
understand why the subjective duration of events changes with repetition, we refer to
Eaglemann and Pariyadath 25. They describe time perception of individual stimuli in terms of the
neural effort required to process them and focus on the timing mechanisms of ‘automatic’
sensations in the sub-second range. As many things in everyday life whose duration we judge
are in the supra-second range, we will also refer to Wittmann’s 27 embodied time account. The
embodied time account conceptualizes time perception via the integration of interoceptive
signals processed in the insula, combining affective and cognitive processes. As our proposal is
focused on how effort and boredom, as cognitive-affective phenomena, relate to time perception,
we will restrict our review of the neuroscience of time perception on this body of literature. We
will demonstrate that all three perspectives support the idea that effort and boredom can alter
time perception.
inputs, can feel different when the input is presented repeatedly. More specifically, repeated exposure increases
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.4
processing efficiency of the presented stimuli, thereby causing loaded time to shrink. At the same time, the
subjective experience of the interval between successive stimuli expands, thereby causing empty time to expand.
These depicted dynamics relate to the processing demands of the same sensory input over time and the resulting
shift in the empty time–loaded time relationship. Importantly, this depiction is agnostic of a potential change in
attentional demands during the sequence of events. For example, attentional demands might increase, and
performance deteriorate when empty time grows, as boredom sets in, and the person resists the impulse to engage
in another activity. However, while not directly within the scope of the present paper, such attention and
performance effects would be consistent with the present proposal, as increased processing efficiency is not
necessarily linked to improved performance 28. In addition, with respect to the changing of loaded time, the depiction
does not consider effects, such as the accumulation of fatigue but focuses exclusively on the processing demands
of a stimulus/target. If a person were to become fatigued (i.e., processing capacity is reduced), then the same
processing demands would require relatively more effort for them, causing loaded time to once more, increase. This
implies that the actual dynamics of perceived loaded time would depend on the ratio of how fast processing
efficiency increases in relation to how fast fatigue accumulates.
Pacemaker-accumulator models of time: boredom and effort increase the accumulator’s
count rate
The pacemaker-accumulator models of time perception 22,29,30, suggest that a pacemaker emits
regular pulses that are then counted by an accumulator. Crucially, the accumulator is thought to
only track these pulses when one is actively attending to time 30. A prototypical illustration of
this is a person sitting in a waiting room, bored. With no distractions, the person’s attention is
drawn to the passage of time, allowing the accumulator to count more pulses. As a result, time
may feel like it is dragging on, leading the person to overestimate how long they have been
waiting. Indeed, a number of waiting room studies have found support for the claim that time
drags on when waiting 16,17. Supporting boredom’s role in this, we found a strong positive
correlation between boredom and the perceived slowing of time in a recent waiting room study
16. Interestingly, the correlation was substantially larger if participants explicitly referred to time
awareness and not more generally to time perception. That is, boredom was strongly linked to
how slow the passing of time felt, but less so to the estimation of how much time had elapsed.
Further, a recent study found that participants who had to silently spend time in a boring
environment, such as a seminar room, were more aware of time and felt it passed more slowly
compared to when they spent time in a less boring environment, like nature 31. This finding is
consistent with the idea that being bored while waiting increases one’s awareness of time,
causing the pacemaker to track more pulses in a given timeframe.
Importantly, this example does not only hold for empty time like sitting in a waiting room but
also for loaded time in a high effort scenario. For example, during a cycling ergometer task that
gets progressively harder over time, an athlete’s attentional focus might be primarily concerned
with the seconds ticking down until they can finally stop the exhausting task. Again, time will
feel like it is dragging, and the athlete is likely to overestimate how long they actually cycled.
Supporting effort’s role in time perception, research from sport science has shown that during
very hard physical efforts people estimate that more time has passed than actually has 18,32. With
respect to cognitive effort, research shows that people overestimate how long a task took when
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.5
it had required cognitive effort 33 b.
This implies that empty time and highly loaded time can feel long because attention is either
explicitly directed to the temporal aspects of the situation or the situation produces a high
number of pulses that can be tracked. Indeed, pacemaker-accumulator models further posit that
the pacemakers’ pulse frequency increases as a function of arousal 27. Thus, in high arousal states,
such as the ergometer ride, more pulses should be emitted and tracked by the accumulator, again
creating the feeling that more time has passed. A similar mechanism may explain boredom,
although the relationship between boredom and arousal is more complex. Research suggest that
boredom can occur in both high- and low-arousal states, which could lead to differing outcomes
for pulses emitted by a pacemaker. However, arousal may not be the sole aspect influencing the
perception of time—it may be sufficient that attention is directed toward time, increasing the
pulses counted by the accumulator.
How boredom and effort affect the functional processing of time
In this perspective, we have suggested that effort and boredom shape our experience of time.
This should increase the number of pulses that are tracked in a given timeframe, which is
expected to lead to an expansion of loaded (in high effort) and empty time (boredom) alike.
However, although pacemaker-accumulator models offer a useful framework to describe the
perception of time, a specific modality that represents a physical counterpart to the metaphorical
pacemaker and accumulator has not yet been identified. Here, we turn to two promising accounts
that attempt to explain the functional processing of time and whose propositions are consistent
with our proposal that effort and boredom affect time perception.
Focusing on events in the millisecond range, Eagleman and Pariyadath, propose that subjective
duration is determined by the amount of effort it took to process a stimulus 25. This neural
energy hypothesis is consistent with our introductory Stroop example: The same stimulus starts
to feel progressively shorter when it is presented repeatedly 36 with subjective shortening
accompanied by diminished cortical firing rates in response to repeated stimulus presentation
37. More generally, this implies that after repeated or prolonged presentation of any stimulus,
the environment becomes more predictable, processing becomes more efficient and therefore
less effortful, which in turn makes the stimulus feel shorter. The proposed increase in processing
efficiency is consistent with the large body of research on habituation, finding reduced sensory,
neuronal, and behavioral responsiveness when stimuli are repeatedly presented 38–40. This model
offers a mechanistic explanation for why we experience a shift in perceived stimulus duration
over time: If a stimulus is processed more efficiently and therefore feels shorter, this should
shrink the loaded time and increase the empty time between successive stimulus presentations
(for a tentative explanation of how these changes to time perception on the stimulus level could
translate to changes in overall time perception of blocks/activities that consist of separate
b Although people seem to treat cognitive and physical effort differently 34, similar theoretical frameworks have been used to
explain the processes by which effort signals are integrated and processed by the brain 35. In turn our proposal is not specific to
either form of effort.
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.6
stimuli, see Box 1).
While the neural energy hypothesis 25,36 offers an explanation for why high effort situations are
likely to be perceived to last longer, how does this relate to boredom? The expansion of empty
time is prototypical for boredom (incidentally, the German word for boredom—Langeweile—
literally translates to ‘long while’). As most readers can attest, when we are repeatedly exposed
to the same input, we tend to become bored 41,42. Expressed more technically, it has been
suggested that boredom occurs when the environment does not generate sufficient
informational value, which would indicate suboptimal learning rates and reward prediction errors
that have been minimized because one’s environment has become overly predictable 42–44.
Prototypically this can occur in situations where entropy is low 45. So, as stimuli are processed
more efficiently and feel shorter, empty time expands and one experiences less ‘news’ from the
environment (i.e., minimized reward prediction error, low entropy). But how might boredom now
create the feeling of ‘long while’?
When bored, people increase their motor and mental activity in search for more rewarding things
to engage in 43. Consistent with this, an emerging body of research shows that bored people
display higher rates of non-instrumental movements 46, for example reflected in repeated
pressure changes on the chair one is sitting 47 or off-target gaze behavior 43. This is consistent
with research showing that feeling bored is associated with self-reported restlessness 48 c. In
addition to unspecific motor activity that occurs when bored, boredom is also linked to mind-
wandering, with the link to spontaneous mind-wandering being particularly strong 50. As these
findings indicate, boredom appears to increase attention to one’s internal (bodily and mental)
states, making one notice their own discomfort or that one’s thoughts are drifting away.
Supporting this claim, recent work has shown that people who are frequently bored report
greater attention to interoceptive signals 51. While boredom likely increases sensitivity to
exteroceptive signals as well, here we focus on its link to interoceptive signals and how this
relates to time perception. To do so, we turn to Wittmann’s interoceptive embodied time account
to propose an explanation of how boredom and effort can create the feeling that time is passing
slowly 27.
Box 1 – Perceived total subjective duration as the sum of empty and loaded time
Let’s briefly return to our initial example of the dynamic changes of perceived duration during
a Stroop task: If loaded time and empty time change as a function of processing efficiency and
if time passes very slowly during highly loaded or empty timeframes, this begs the question of
how total duration of any given timeframe is affected by these changes. Put simply, since any
situation consists of a mix of empty and loaded task demands, how is the overall experience of
time shaped by this mix? In our initial example, during the first five minutes, time felt ‘loaded’
c Interestingly, providing people opportunities to engage in fidgeting behavior to reduce boredom does not appear to be effective
49. One reason for this might be boredom motivates the search for rewarding things to engage in and provision of outlets for
one’s restlessness could potentially defeat this very function of boredom.
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.7
because processing and categorizing word stimuli required high amounts of cognitive effort. In
the last five minutes, time felt empty because processing and categorizing the stimuli had
become almost second nature to the person. So, in the first example, most of the five minutes
consisted of loaded time (almost no empty time) and in the second example the empty
time/loaded time ratio was reversed. In both cases time seemed to pass slowly. But what is
the computational underpinning of this observation? We suggest that the experienced total
time is the sum of time perception during empty time and loaded time. While the exact
temporal dynamics of how these periods shift with repeated presentations remain an open
question, research in related areas, such as habituation, often points towards exponential
changes 38 or sigmoidal changes 52. If similar dynamics apply to empty and loaded time, we
might predict that total subjective duration is longest at the extremes—when feelings of either
test this prediction and to better understand the temporal dynamics underlying these shifts.
dynamic changes in empty time and loaded time for processing the chunks that make up the activity. More
specifically, it visualizes how the perceived total duration of an activity might change as a function of the
frequency with which chunks that make up the activity must be processed. At the beginning of an engaging
activity, the novelty requires more effort, making time seem to pass more slowly (see loaded time, blue curve). As
the task becomes more familiar through repetition, the required effort decreases, and time seems to shorten.
However, with further repetition and the onset of boredom, time starts to stretch again (see empty time, red
curve). Total subjective duration of an activity or an experimental block (see black curve) combines both the
loaded and the empty time.
Note. The conceptual model visualizes these dynamics as a sigmoidal function for empty time and loaded time. We have chosen this function
over an exponential function as this does not force empty time and loaded time be infinitively high at the extremes.
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.8
According to Wittmann, the number of interoceptive signals that an agent attends to indicates
how much time has elapsed. Through the lens of pacemaker-accumulator accounts this implies
that various interoceptive bodily signals contribute to our perception of time. As no specific
sensory organ for tracking time appears to exist in the human body, this embodied account—
where multiple interoceptive signals collectively shape the experience of time—provides an
elegant explanation for human time perception. This approach is especially compelling because
sensory experiences inherently possess a temporal quality. To illustrate, one might feel a
moderate degree of discomfort while sitting on a chair (signaled by nociceptor activity) for a
certain amount of time.
But how does the embodied time account relate to boredom and boredom’s effect on how we
perceive the passage of time? When loaded time shrinks and empty time expands (e.g., as one
becomes more proficient at processing environmental inputs 25), boredom is likely to occur.
Boredom is associated with increased interoceptive awareness—such that bodily signals are
more assiduously attended to—and with a drive to seek additional sensory input, thus
generating more interoceptive signals. In addition, boring situations are prototypically
characterized by a lack of relevant/rewarding exteroceptive signals (e.g., interesting things to
hear, see, or taste), further tilting the balance towards heightened interoceptive awareness.
Boredom should therefore impact time perception in two ways: first, because pulses
(interoceptive signals) are tracked at a higher rate when one is bored, and second, because
additional pulses are generated due to heightened interoceptive awareness.
The embodied time account is also consistent with research showing that high effort activities
tend to feel longer than low effort activities 18,32: When time is loaded with processing demands,
interoceptive signals are generated at a higher rate. For instance, as an exercise session
intensifies, an exerciser’s heart will beat more frequently, increasing interoceptive signaling.
Likewise, in the first block of a demanding Stroop task, an overwhelmed participant will focus on
multiple unfamiliar stimulus features, again allowing for more interoceptive signals to be
accumulated by the pacemaker. In both cases, the high processing load should generate more
pulses that can be tracked by the pacemaker, creating the feeling that more time has passed
than actually has d. Notably, interoceptive sense data have relatively low spatial specificity making
their experience more diffuse (compared to vision, for example) 53, and an effort-applying person
is likely to causally attribute the most notable interoceptive changes to the effort they are
exerting. In contrast, the interoceptive changes that are associated with being bored will likely
evade such a causal interpretation by the bored person. The relative amorphousness of feeling
bored is also reflected in the heterogenous findings linking boredom to low, mixed or even high
arousal. Irrespective if the experiencing agent causally attributes interoceptive signals to
heightened effortful processing demands or experiences them as an unspecific corollary of
d Please note, that this might also be described as a speeding up subjective time, as the person estimates to have performed an
activity for more seconds than they actually have. So, relative to chronological time, subjective time has sped up. At least one of
the authors can attest to the agony of this experience when – during a high intensity cycling effort – one thinks the three
minute effort block should be almost finished by now, only to find that one is only halfway through it.
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.9
boredom, both scenarios are expected to change the perception of time in the same direction.
Taken together, the neural energy hypothesis provides a mechanistic explanation for why the
same sensory input can feel longer or shorter. It illustrates how situations can shift from high
effort to boredom as the neural energy required for processing changes dynamically. Building on
this, the embodied time account explains how effort and boredom influence interoceptive
signaling and awareness of bodily signals. Thereby offering a functional explanation for why
effort and boredom can make time feel as though it is dragging on.
How the neuroscience of time perception aligns with effort and boredom research
So far, we have discussed how boredom and effort influence the subjective experience of time.
First, we have examined this conceptually through the psychological pacemaker-accumulator
model of time perception. Second, we have turned to the neural energy hypothesis 25 and the
embodied time account 27,54 to highlight putative mechanisms through which boredom and effort
affect the functional processing of time. Building on this, we will now review neuroscientific
research on insula activity that might offer insights into the mechanistic underpinnings of the
link between boredom, effort and time perception.
The insula has been identified as a key structure for processing bodily, affective, and cognitive
states, and it plays a regulatory role in decision-making by integrating internal and external
information 55. More specifically, and relevant for this perspective, the insula has been implicated
in interoception 56–59, time perception 21,56,60, boredom 61–63, and effort 55,64,65: The human insula
consists of various subregions that differ in lamination and cytoarchitecture 53,66,67. In the context
of this paper, we will only broadly differentiate between functions along the posterior-anterior
axis. The processing from high-dimensional representation into more low-dimensional
multimodally integrated representations appears to progress along a dorsal-posterior to ventral-
anterior gradient 53. Posterior parts of the insula seem to be the key structure for receiving and
integrating various interoceptive signals. These are then passed on to the anterior insula to be
processed for higher order representations 59,66. Simply speaking, posterior parts of the insula
appear to be more relevant for processing raw signals, whereas anterior parts seem to be more
involved for processing these into more abstract cognitive-affective signals/states.
The accumulation of interoceptive signals as a meter of elapsed time has been associated with
activity in the posterior insula 68. A neural mechanism called climbing neural activation where
neural activity gradually increases or decreases during a timed interval, peaking at its end, has
been proposed to underly the tracking of time in the posterior insula 30. Consistent with the
dorsal-posterior to ventral-anterior gradient of increasing complexity, anterior insula activity has
been associated with reproduction of time intervals 68 or the accuracy of duration discrimination
69. These findings are consistent with the view that time perception is embodied and influenced
by internal bodily states 21,54. In turn, feelings that can affect the magnitude of and sensitivity to
such bodily states, such as boredom and effort, could be expected to dynamically affect time
awareness through their effect on insula activity.
So far, only few studies have investigated the neuroscience of boredom (for an overview, please
see 63) with the anterior insula regularly implicated in research that has investigated the bored
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.10
brain. Being bored has been linked to reduced activity in the anterior insula 38. However, when
people tried to reduce their boredom, increases in anterior insula activity was reported 39.
Similarly, another study observed less activity in the anterior insula during boredom (when
compared to states of flow or overload), but relatively stronger functional connectivity between
anterior insula and the ventral striatum 70. One can speculate that boring situations
characterized by an initial lack of relevant things to engage in, are then met by attempts to
address this state by increasing the number of things the person tries to attend to or engage
with. The former state is then expected to be characterized by reduced anterior insula activity,
whereas the latter would correlate with increased anterior insula activity and/or heightened
connectivity with regions that allow for the exploration of viable things to engage in. To the best
of our knowledge, boredom has not been linked to altered activity in the posterior insula. A
speculative interpretation is that boredom's effect on time perception may stem less from
increasing the number of pulses accumulated by the pacemaker and more from directing
attention to these pulses in the absence of relevant exteroceptive information. During periods
of empty time, the anterior insula may become more sensitive to internal bodily states, as
boredom is associated with increased interoceptive sensitivity 51. Since time perception is
influenced by how much attention is paid to its passage, boredom may make available more
attention to focus on internal sensations, such as heart rate, breathing, and posture. This
hyperawareness of bodily states may amplify the feeling that time is moving slowly. In states of
boredom, when prediction errors are low (i.e., there are no unexpected events or new stimuli)
the anterior insula becomes more focused on internal states, further enhancing time awareness.
Conversely, when prediction errors are high (due to surprises or rewards), external stimuli
capture attention, reducing boredom and making time seem to pass more quickly. Indirect
evidence for such a relationship comes from research showing that people with heightened
interoception overestimated time, whereas those with heightened exteroception underestimated
time 71.
The posterior and anterior insula have also been associated with effort in neuroscientific
research 65,72. Consistent with its function as a key hub for interoception, posterior insula activity
has been related to sensations such as pain 73 or tachycardia 74, and the sensing of aversive
states in general 75, all of which contribute to feelings of effort. Further, effort demanding tasks
are related to increased activity in anterior and posterior insula and activity profiles in the
posterior insula have been linked to feelings of fatigue, a consequence of prolonged effort
exertion 65,76. Again, in keeping with the dorsal-posterior to ventral-anterior gradient, anterior
insula activity has been found to play a role in decisions to invest or withhold effort 77,78 or
feelings of fatigue as a more generalized cumulative consequence of exerting effort 65. The
evidence linking effort and insula activity aligns with the idea that effort demanding situations
alter the number and intensity of interoceptive signals that are processed by the insula, thereby
potentially directly affecting how we perceive the passage of time.
Taken together, effort and boredom have been conceptually and empirically associated with
heightened interoceptive signaling or interoceptive awareness, and insula activity has been
observed to increase in response to a wide range of interoceptive signals 59, which may account
for its engagement during both effort and boredom. The extant neuroscientific evidence is
therefore largely consistent with the proposal we have outlined in this paper. Namely, that
Wolff. et al. | December 2024 | p.11
boredom and effort increase awareness to internal bodily states, thereby altering the number of
pules the ‘internal clock’ tracks.
Conclusion
In this perspective, we propose a tentative explanation for why events of the same objective
duration can feel as if they pass faster or slower, focusing on the roles of effort and boredom in
shaping time awareness. We suggest that increasing exposure to a task improves the efficiency
of processing external and internal sensations, thereby altering how ‘empty’ or ‘loaded’ a
timeframe feels. While effortful situations are characterized by a higher share of loaded time,
boredom is characterized by more empty time. Importantly, both sensations contribute to the
feeling that time is dragging. Mechanistically, boredom and effort might influence time
perception by increasing attention to internal bodily states. In line with this argument, both
effort and boredom have been linked to heightened interoceptive signaling and sensitivity,
processes that appear central to time perception through the integration of interoceptive
signals. At the neural level, the insular cortex emerges as a promising candidate region for
understanding this relationship, as it serves as a key hub for boredom, effort, interoception, and
time perception. We have written this perspective through the lens that effort and boredom
alter the perception of time. However, one might also make the case that the relationship
between effort, boredom and time perception we outline here is in the reverse. Disentangling
the causal dynamics among these processes will be critical to advance our understanding of the
subjective experience of time.