Bringing academia within its safe and just space:
reflections on activating scientists
Anne E. Urai, Leiden University, The Netherlands, a.e.urai@fsw.leidenuniv.nl
Clare Kelly, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, clare.kelly@tcd.ie
2024-12-23
Abstract
While academic climate activism is on the rise, most universities and scientific communities
remain woefully underprepared to deal with the ‘wicked’ problems of climate change and
biodiversity loss. Using Kate Raworth’s Doughnut Economics framework, we previously proposed a
vision of academia that respects human and planetary boundaries (Urai & Kelly, 2023), offering a
call to action that starts with culture change in scientific communities. Here, we reflect on the
origin of our ideas and on the process of developing a participatory workshop that aims to catalyze
the process of culture change. To encourage independent dissemination and wider engagement,
we provide a set of best practices for hosting the workshop. Finally, we reflect on the value of such
bottom-up approaches in academia, theories of change, and a vision for a way forward.
Introduction
Setting the stage
Current-day academia can feel like an endless series of crises. Careers are uncertain, working
conditions often precarious; scientists optimize metrics rather than do their best work;
discrimination, bullying and harassment are rife; the pervasive rewarding of ‘geniuses’ diminishes
care- and teamwork; peer review and funding competition stifle creativity; publishers make
extraordinary profits off academic labor; mental health problems abound; and some have
diagnosed a ‘great resignation’ of early-career scientists. Of course, many of these mirror larger
societal trends. We live in a time of uncertainty and political upheaval, and it would be naive to
consider universities’ problems in isolation.
The climate- and ecological crisis may be the most pervasive ‘mother of all crises’, in which
scientists arguably have a special responsibility to act - we hold privileged positions in society
(especially those of us with tenure), we understand data, we educate the next generation, and we
work in influential organizations from where change can percolate. Again parallelling larger
societal trends, there have been increasing calls for activism and advocacy by scientists
(Dablander et al., 2024; Dupont et al., 2024; Dyke & Monbiot, 2024; Finnerty et al., 2024; Gardner
et al., 2021; Stephens, 2024). Many feel compelled to act because of their own emotions of worry,
anger, and despair (Artico et al., 2023); others may be motivated to preserve the conditions
necessary to sustain their own discipline, since there can be “no research on a dead planet”
(Thierry et al., 2023). Scientists frustrated with the status quo can choose amongst strategies of
exit, voice, or loyalty (Hirschman, 1970): some leave academia to pursue climate action (Owens,
2022), while some use their voice from within (Szalinski, 2024); others choose to switch their
research topic (Szalinski, 2024) or join efforts to reduce the climate footprint of their own work
(Byrne, 2024).
Yet, despite data suggesting that an overwhelming majority of academics want to do more
about climate change (Latter et al., 2024), “business as usual” and “climate silence” (Thierry et al.,
2023) predominates for most universities and academics As such, they can be considered “agents
of unsustainability” - responsible for upholding the status quo, or worse, reproducing and
perpetuating environmentally destructive paradigms and activities (McGeown & Barry, 2023).
This may be partially due to the “professionalization of academia” (Menand, 2010) where work is
counted as billable hours and separate from the rest of our life, and partially because the current
structures and norms of academia do not encourage critical activism (Bod et al., 2020). Indeed, a
recent representative survey of UK academics found that a majority experience an
attitude-behaviour gap whereby multiple barriers prevent them from doing more on climate
(Latter et al., 2024). Foremost were high workload, uncertainty about what actions to take, a lack
of agency or power, and inflexible university processes. Given this unmet demand for action
amongst a silent majority, we believe there is considerable potential to normalize climate action
within academic discourse, similar to the culture change that has recently occurred around
diversity and inclusion, open science, and research integrity (van ’t Veer & Fried, 2024).
In this and our previous work (Urai and Kelly, 2023), we are mainly targeting the large group of
worried but inactive researchers and academics, who feel too tied up into the system to kick
against it - although those who are already active may find solidarity in our work too. Applying the
nomenclature of the technology adoption life cycle (Rogers, 2003), we identify these as the ‘early
majority’: often (but not always) young academics, who are motivated and able to incorporate
activism into their academic identities - but have yet not done so. Without elaborating on the links
between various types of academic activism (e.g. climate, diversity and inclusion, rigorous
scientific practice, open science), we will here only observe that normalizing these conversations is
a necessary element to reforming our institutions. Here, we speak from positions and expertise as
neuroscientists - that is, from ‘within’ the natural science community, rather than as external
experts on e.g., the sociology of organizational change (see (Stein, 2024) for a taxonomy of
university sustainability responses). This work aims to provide concrete and actionable ways for
academic communities to see culture change as part of a holistic academic enterprise - and to act
in it.
Mindful of the enormity of this challenge to activate academics, we do not believe a fatalistic
‘universities are all doomed anyway’ is true, nor helpful. To counter a ‘crisis narrative’ that rarely
inspires climate action (Maibach et al., 2023), we can highlight a positive picture of the agency,
motivation, and creativity of scientists and the great changes that have taken place in scientific
practice over the past decade, such as the (slow) inclusion of previously underrepresented groups,
and increasing acceptance of the view that science is and has always been political (Thompson,
2022). As aptly summarized: “As academics we are human, that is, we are embodied,
intersubjective beings despite the fact that we often pretend we are not” (Kenny, 2021).
Envisioning academia’s Doughnut
Within this setting, and in our own roles as (increasingly) activist academics, we used Kate
1; (Urai & Kelly, 2023). This allows us to see academia’s various crises as symptoms of general
failures to stay within our own safe space: to provide a safe and just human foundation, and to
respect our human and planetary ceilings. To address these, we proposed seven ‘lessons’ to inspire
academics into action. See Urai & Kelly (2023) for the theoretical analysis.
Here, we will describe a workshop that we subsequently developed, aimed at activating
communities and individual academics. We start with a personal reflection on the development
and provenance of these ideas, highlighting the role of chance encounters and personal
interactions and experiences. We then propose a set of best practices for hosting the workshop to
bring about change. Finally, we reflect on the impact and challenges of the workshop and its
implementation. Those who are interested in hosting their own workshop can jump straight to the
how-to in Section 2.
See Urai & Kelly (2023) for theoretical analysis.
1. Shaping the doughnut:
personal reflections on the history of ideas
Anne: Ideas need a receptive mind to land in. In my case, the idea of the economy as a doughnut
failed to land on its first try. My Goodreads book tracker tells me I read Doughnut Economics
(Raworth, 2017) in May 2020. I do not remember this - perhaps since that month I was also newly
pregnant, stuck at home during the brutal first waves of Covid-19 and rising BLM protests in the
US, and applying and negotiating academic jobs back in The Netherlands. Two years later, I came
across a webinar with Raworth1, organized by Scientists Rebellion NL. Now settled into my new
family, scientific and activist life, scientific practice was on my mind - how could I hope to combine
my roles as a neuroscientist, mentor, teacher, and member of the academic community while also
working to address the climate crisis? I vividly remember listening to the webinar on a lunchtime
run, repeatedly stopping to look at the slides, and taking notes on applying these ideas to science
itself. My sense of ‘Why didn’t I think of that?’ speaks to the clarity, simplicity and power of
Raworth’s ideas. I was especially struck by her insistence on the power of visualizations: “At the
heart of mainstream economic thinking is a handful of diagrams that have wordlessly but
powerfully framed the way we are taught to understand the economic world—and they are all out
of date, blinkered, or downright wrong.” (Raworth, 2017).
with the idea of writing a short blog post about it. In parallel, I had come into contact with a group
of neuroscientists2 looking to incorporate climate and sustainability more directly into their work.
With Clare Kelly, I started informally discussing the idea of writing a short essay based on my
ideas. As we talked and wrote, it became clear that we were not writing an essay, but rather an
analysis and a call to action.
Clare: My realisation that academic life itself acts as a barrier to climate action came about largely
as a direct result of my own experiences as an early-to-mid career academic. Having returned to
Ireland in 2015 as a tenure-track assistant professor, I felt under relentless pressure to “produce” -
papers, funding, students - and to be an inspirational teacher, and a good college citizen, fulfilling
various service roles. I felt like a cog in an unstoppable and unforgiving machine, utterly powerless
to do anything other than focus on growing my h-index, my lab, and my CV, while trying to maintain
the increasingly tenuous belief that “someone else” was handling the climate and biodiversity
crisis. Activation and transformation for me came through security and community. Security (and
privilege) came in the form of tenure and promotion. Community happened largely through
chance. In the process of embarking on an effort to launch a new class on the Psychology of the
Climate Crisis (inspired by (Aron, 2019)), and through my involvement in our university’s Smarter
Travel Committee, I connected with a group of colleagues advocating for climate action within the
university. Thanks to invaluable conversations with these comrades, their support and solidarity,
and my newfound job security, I felt licensed to bring concern for our planetary crisis into all of my
2 The group was founded in the aftermath of a petition to decarbonize the world’s largest neuroscience
roles in the university. I also realised that the isolation, and unreasonable demands, expectations,
and norms that had prevented me from engaging with the planetary crisis in a meaningful way
were also likely to be impeding many of my colleagues.
Anne and I had participated in a conference symposium together and continued to interact
in the ClimateActionNeuPsych Slack channel2, established to enable psychologists and
neuroscientists to connect about climate action. In a discussion about a call for essays, I mentioned
wanting to write about how the excessive demands and time poverty created by modern academia
posed a barrier to climate action. When Anne said she had been grappling with precisely the same
thing and had begun to think about how Kate Raworth’s Doughnut Economics model could be
applied to academia, I jumped at the chance to work with her. I was familiar with Doughnut
Economics from my teaching - the application of Raworth’s framework for rethinking academia
instantly made sense to me.
notebook). Bottom: positioning various items on the doughnut’s inner and outer rings (autumn 2022, Anne’s office).
In early 2023, our article, Rethinking academia in a time of climate crisis, was published in the journal
eLife (Urai & Kelly, 2023). We chose this outlet specifically to target the life sciences, where eLife is
highly visible and known to explicitly address scientific practice and culture. Beyond sharing our
article on social media, we had not given much thought to what would happen afterwards. After
received several emails from people who had already incorporated these principles into their
institutions’ policies. The BOKU (University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences) in Vienna
sampled the opinions of their community on the current and desired state of each of our ‘seven
lessons’ (link). A colleague of Clare in Ireland had our image printed as a floor mat, for students and
Kelly, showing Kate Raworth's Doughnut Economics (top) and our Doughnut Academia (bottom), right.
Later that Spring, Anne received an email from Dr. Fernando Racimo, author of a like-minded
article in eLife about Scientists Rebellion that appeared just before ours (Racimo et al., 2022),
inviting her to give a workshop based on our paper at the Globe Institute in Copenhagen.
Copenhagen’s Globe Institute: the first Doughnut Academia workshop
Anne: I adapted Raworth’s ‘Doughnut Unrolled’ materials (DEAL, 2023), which Dr. Racimo had
pointed out to me, to fit our focus on academia. These center around the concept of unrolling the
doughnut into a ceiling and a foundation, as well as a local and a global angle (combining them into
‘four lenses’). A full description of the structure and goals of this first workshop is in Box 1.
In preparation for the workshop, an email conversation highlighted an issue that often arises
pink, sugary doughnut. I emailed back, indicating that the Doughnut Economics Acton Lab (DEAL)
principles of practice recommend that: "The Doughnut is a powerful visual with a playful name. Do be
playful in your visualisations, but don't show just a sugary snack. Try and focus on the Doughnut as a
visualization from our paper - in my opinion, a better starting point that does not hide the power of
these ideas under a layer of sprinkles.
Advertisement: the first Doughnut Academia workshop
In this workshop, participants will develop:
● A deeper awareness of the severity of the climate crisis, and our roles and
responsibilities to take action as scientists and academics.
● Familiarity with Kate Raworth's Doughnut Economics model (2017) as a new theoretical
framework, that enables society to meet human needs while living within planetary
boundaries. Building on this, an understanding of the proposed doughnut model adapted
to academia, according to which universities should provide a good and fair social
foundation for academic life while respecting both human and planetary boundaries.
● An ability to analyze current academic norms through a doughnut lens, to identify and
rethink unhelpful practices and institute new ones.
● New knowledge, motivation, and allegiances that will support concrete steps towards
the "academic doughnut" and climate action - both in their local context and as part of
the global scientific community.
For example, through moderated activities participants will be asked to:
● reflect on their roles and interactions in their institutions;
● identify ways in which they can bring a doughnut lens to these roles and professional
activities;
● to reflect on structures that support unsustainable practices;
● to identify ways to build or join solidarity networks;
● and to share learning and support.
The workshop will be relevant to all academics, regardless of background or seniority. There are
no pre-requisite skills or knowledge, other than being a human working/studying in a university
or other scientific institution. That said, academics with secure (tenured) and administrative
positions have the greatest responsibility for some of the actions we recommend - this session
would have the greatest impact if more senior academics in an institution/community attend.
Materials
these materials as a living document, which can be adapted for individual workshop settings and
improved over time. Make sure to check the page for the latest version!
For this workshop, we adapt the materials from DEAL, especially the ‘Doughnut Unrolled’
workshop template (Doughnut Unrolled: Community Portrait of Place | DEAL). When more fully
formed, we also intend to share our materials back with the DEAL (Doughnut Economics Action
Lab) community: Tools | DEAL.
The main slide deck to guide our workshop is at Doughnut academia (see below for an
outline of a potential 3-4 hours workshop). In preparation of an in-person workshop, organizers
can print A0-size posters of these canvases. You will also need a stack of colored post-it notes
(red, green, blue, orange, yellow, purple). A virtual workshop can be done using DEAL’s Miro
boards.
Workshop structure
A half-day long workshop can start with a lecture to outline the ideas in our paper (Urai & Kelly,
2023). For example: Growing Up in Science - How to be a scientist in a world on fire? (April …
is a webinar where we present our work in a virtual session. Our slide deck includes DEAL’s Get
Animated videos which present the main messages from Raworth’s book in an appealing and
succinct form. For audiences more familiar with both Raworth (2017) and Urai & Kelly (2023),
these videos can be skipped (by hiding these slides) to shorten the explanatory lecture.
The hands-on part of the workshop then introduces the ‘Unrolled Doughnut’, which separates
the circular space into 4 lenses (local/global & foundation/ceilings). This introduction should
take about an hour.
Unrolling the Doughnut. See also the canvas that can be printed. Adapted from DEAL.
For each lens sequentially (starting with local ceilings), participants then split into small groups
to form a ‘Community Portrait of Place’ where they 1. decide on a dimension and 2. map out that
dimension’s portrait. In the DEAL’s original workshop, these dimensions can be e.g. food, water,
recycling, clean air; in our academia-focused workshop, we propose to use dimensions from our
lecture’s Seven Lessons (e.g. casualization, pressure to publish, lack of climate action, open
science, trust in science). It may help to ask each subgroup to focus on a
dimension ahead of time, and explore it through each lens.
When mapping the dimension’s portrait, sticky notes can be used to
identify current challenges, good examples of change already underway
(qualitative) as well as targets and indicators (quantitative).
After each lens has been mapped and the results brought back in a plenary discussion (30
minutes total per lens, meaning about 3.5 hours into the workshop including breaks), there is
one more final round of interactive activity. First, based on the mapped out portrait of their
place (e.g. a university department, scientific community), participants identify dreams, visions
and possibilities for what they imagine the future could be. Lastly, they suggest concrete goals
for actions to take, and (ideally) find a support and accountability group amongst themselves.
We feel that creating an explicit social expectation that some plans will be carried out may lower
the chance of the workshop being a one-off event that never leads to concrete change.
Box 1. The advertisement of the first ‘doughnut academia’ workshop, June 2023, in Copenhagen’s Globe Institute.
The Copenhagen workshop was a mixed success. Around twelve people attended, half of whom
were already members of the Globe Institute’s sustainability committee. After the head of the
university’s sustainability management gave an overview of the organization’s emissions reduction
targets and process, and I briefly outlined our theoretical framework (Urai & Kelly, 2023),
participants split into two groups. I followed the structure proposed by the DEAL tools: each group
worked with a canvas, showing the four lenses. They were asked to choose a topic (such as flying
less, open science, climate education) and map out the topic using post-its of various colors: red for
challenges, green for good examples, blue for targets, orange for indicators, yellow for dreams and
possibilities, and purple for pledges.
There were two main challenges with this structured format. First, since the doughnut
academia framework aims to present a holistic view of many challenges faced by current-day
academia, participants struggled to settle on one issue to focus on. A lot of time was spent
deliberating this, so after about half an hour I helped the groups by selecting a specific topic for
them. Second, the ‘Portrait of Place’ mapping with the various colors was too complicated for this
short workshop, especially given the heterogeneous audience. Participants spent more time trying
making substantive progress. Also, even after choosing a topic per group, the conversations
naturally turned to various other initiatives. By the end of the workshop, ideas for action ranged
widely: from a journal club on data re-use, institutional policy to facilitate train travel, to starting a
committee to evaluate research project merits vs. environmental costs (following a model of a
human or animal ethics panel).
canvases with post-its for mapping the institute’s ‘Portrait of Place’. Faces have been blurred of participants who
were not reachable to give consent for their photo to be included.Photos by Fernando Racimo.
I have mixed feelings about this meandering of conversation topics. On the one hand, the
Doughnut emphasizes the connectedness of various symptoms, and academics new to activism
benefit from a holistic view of their institutions (and their institutions’ embeddedness in various
global systems) before deciding on their personal course of action - finding their leverage points
(Meadows, 1997). On the other hand, activism tends to be mostly limited by people power, and I
of them would actually get done. This ambivalence reflects the vagueness of the goals of the
workshop: should it simply inspire and make people think, or get participants to start on a concrete
new project? We reflect further on the tension between these goals below.
CCN, Oxford: the workshop matures
The second workshop, which we hosted together, took place two months later at the Cognitive
Computational Neuroscience conference in Oxford, UK. It was a bigger success. Two main
features distinguish it from the Copenhagen workshop. First, the audience was much larger: given
the venue, we could host around 70 people (and it was oversubscribed). Second, the event was
part of a scientific conference, and as such drew an audience of people working in the same field,
but from various countries and universities around the world. To improve upon the challenges in
Copenhagen, we changed the format by (1) removing the structure of the ‘four lenses’ and the
various colored post-its and simplifying participants’ tasks, (2) pre-specifying topics for discussion,
and (3) inviting a facilitator to help guide each group’s discussion. This ensured that at least one
person per subgroup could speak from a relative position of expertise on the topic, and could
structure the conversation for participants new to the topic.
moderates the group discussions. See here for images of the mapping exercises. Photos by Clare Kelly.
It was electrifying to see a room packed with neuroscientists, some sitting on the floor, at 5pm
after a full day of neuroscience content - after all, the pub was a readily available alternative. Clare
gave an opening talk introducing doughnut academia and emphasising the urgency of climate
action, justice, and the need for activism within the academy. After a short break, participants
picked a topic to focus their workshop activities on: Institutional advocacy, divestment & fossil-free
research (with Anne Urai); Teaching, outreach and climate communication (with Clare Kelly); Advocacy
and activism outside the university (with Ionatan Kuperwajs and Wei Ji Ma); Workplace organizing &
unions (with Jessica Thompson); Sustainable conferences & flying less (with Tsvetomira Dumbalska &
Eleanor Holton); Change from the bottom up (with Dan Goodman). For future workshops, we
strongly recommend adapting the specific topics so as to match each facilitator’s experience or
expertise (although we should note that though the facilitators do not need to be authoritative
experts in the traditional sense). We simplified the exercise into three stages: mapping (the current
situation, targets), planning (identifying possibilities for action, and arranging these on axes of
difficulty vs. impact) and planning (pledging actions to take in the next month). This blog post by
Eleanor Holton, one of the moderators, details the outcomes and notes for each group and topic.
Feedback from workshop participants
“I am now pushing for a unifying Center for Climate Action at NYU. I think your workshop was a
big motivation.” - Wei Ji Ma
We both felt a great sense of vulnerability in hosting this workshop for an audience of close
colleagues, including colleagues from Anne’s own research group. Although activism in spaces of
open science, diversity and scientific practice is increasingly normalized within our field of
research, opening up about our identities as academic climate activists felt like showing parts of
ourselves that colleagues didn’t yet know. There is a pervasive sense that to scientists, activism
implies that one is not a serious or committed researcher (Finnerty et al., 2024). After all, shouldn’t
we find our science so important that we make it the only thing we work on? In trying to openly
embrace our activist identities (and being open about the struggles we face), we very much hope to
serve as role models for others who may hesitate to get involved.
Leiden University Green Office
Anne: After CCN, a local workshop with self-selected participants (i.e. a sample of those with an
interest in climate action) was easy to host: the majority of the few dozen participants were
already active in a number of sustainability-related roles within and outside the university. The
approach of having people self-divide into topic groups worked well, and I pitched the idea of
having attendees host the same workshop for their own colleagues (in their department or at a
conference). There was interest, but developing a workshop manual for people to self-host is still a
work in progress: one participant remarked “I’d have to do a fair bit of background reading to
speak with such confidence about climate science, which is not my field of expertise.” Participants’
hesitation to host their own workshop has been one of the main reasons to provide more
structured guidelines for future hosts (Section 2).
NVP Brain and Cognition workshop
Anne: I proposed a special session on climate action at the NVP brain and cognition conference, the
gathering of several Dutch hundred cognitive neuroscientists that takes place every other year in
Egmond aan Zee. This session was open to all conference participants, and drew around 120 out of
450 participants. It didn’t help that it was planned at the end of the second day, an ideal moment in
the program to visit the beach or relax before dinner. Based on inputs from two colleagues (one of
whom attended the previous Oxford workshop), I scaled down this workshop’s ambitions - in a
way, foregoing the holistic view of the Doughnut. Instead, I focused on the climate crisis
specifically, and the actions we can take as neuroscientists - following a previous paper targeted at
this audience (Rae et al., 2022). Based on both audience questions (“we’re all doomed anyway, why
would our actions have any effect”, “how can I speak about the climate crisis when it’s not my field
of expertise”) and committed actions (making the conference meat-free, teaching a course on the
psychology of climate change) I think this choice was the correct one. For scientists very focused
on their field and without previous experience in any sort of climate action (or other type of
academic advocacy), going from nothing to the full doughnut (rethinking everything we do) would
have been too big of a jump. Having chosen to stay very concrete for this workshop was a
successful example of ‘meeting people where they are’. At the same time, interacting with
academic activists for the last year(s), I felt a bit disappointed with the modesty of the ideas and
actions that my psychologist colleagues suggested.
After these and several other (sometimes shorter) workshops (e.g., at the University of Galway
and Queen’s University Belfast), we have now settled on a workshop format which we detail
below. The goal of this next section below is to make it easy for others to host their own workshop
with minimal preparation work. Only by making the materials easily usable can we hope to spread
these workshop ideas beyond our own small sphere of influence.
2. Hosting your own workshop: best practices and guidelines
If you have read our paper or participated in a workshop and feel inspired to act, you may consider
hosting your own workshop - in your department seminar series, at a conference special event, or
for your university community (perhaps together with your local Green Office). Here are some
starting points.
1. Prepare.
Get a sense for at least your time, space, and audience.
Time. Here are some rough suggestions for how to structure your session. If you have just 15
or 30 minutes, we suggest you stick to a talk (e.g. this one of ~15 minutes; slides available here).
Make sure to leave the audience with ideas and resources to start exploring on their own. If you
have 45 minutes or more, you can consider a talk + interactive session. A full workshop needs at
least 1.5 hours, and up to ~3 hours with a motivated audience, allowing plenty of time for informal
discussion at the end. If you do this, allow 30-45 minutes for a longer talk, and follow up with the
interactive part below.
If you can, try to schedule the session such that it can be followed by informal socializing:
lunch or end-of-day drinks are ideal. This way, while some people may leave after the official
session ends, those interested in discussing more have a platform to do so (and can give you
valuable feedback on how they experienced the workshop).
Space. A talk can be in any room or online. For an interactive session, people will need to sit in
groups to discuss, so a lecture hall is suboptimal (but better than nothing, of course). If you can
prepare the room in advance, arrange for small groups (ideally 4-8 people) to sit together with
some paper, pens and post-its on tables or on the floor/wall. If you don’t have enough space for a
separate talk (lecture) setup and workshop (small group) setup, asking people to move their chairs
around halfway is a good transition between the two parts of the session.
Audience. Find out how many people, and what kind of people will be in the room. The
‘discourses of climate delay’ taxonomy (Lamb et al., 2020) - see also this comic adaptation and
these cartoon drawings - is helpful to orient yourself on what kind of responses you may expect.
So far, we have given workshops to a number of different types of audiences, which we will denote
type A ‘preaching to the choir’, type B ‘tell me more’, and type C ‘what am I doing here?’. These
approximately map onto categories 4, 3 and 2 from (Aron, 2019).
In general, it helps to meet people where they are: offering a range of actions fitting with each
individual’s preferences and abilities is most likely to get them engaged, and sustain this
engagement through small wins (Özden, 2024) that create a sense of agency. The ‘Talk’ section
below gives more pointers to adjusting your slides and message to each audience.
The easiest workshops to give are to type A: those already thinking or working on
sustainability and explicitly interested in your session - for instance when an open event is
organized by a university’s sustainability office or green team. In these cases, you will not need to
convince people that climate is worth working on; rather, your job is to show connections between
sustainability and other aspects of academic governance (open science, workload etc), to allow
people to connect and build community, and to have them formulate specific goals and projects
more clearly.
Slightly harder workshops are type B ‘tell me more’ audiences, where people sign up for a
sustainability talk that is part of a larger conference in their scientific field (in our case, mostly
neuroscience). This means that they are open to hearing what you have to say, but they are not yet
convinced that climate is either within their responsibility or their reach. This group may benefit
from a less holistic talk, and focus more on concrete actions that align with their primary identity
as (neuro)scientists.
A type C ‘what am I doing here’ audience can be found in e.g., a departmental seminar series
where you use a session to discuss this topic, or a committee meeting with university leadership.
This can be a very powerful setting to break established social norms, but also risks
disengagement, pushback, and social friction. Stay close to the (physical) science, and perhaps ask
a few sympathetic colleagues for their input beforehand.
For any type of audience, consider what kind of community they form and what else you know
that can make the talk more relevant for these particular people. If everyone is from one university
or department, make your talk concrete by showing examples of existing initiatives (and past
successes) in their workplace. If people form a more loosely connected scientific community
across institutions, consider focusing on action items that are relevant to that community (like
changing how it hosts conferences or collects data) and point people to places where they can find
allies in their local contexts. Similarly, if your audience is from a particular career stage, integrate
this into your suggestions for specific actions that are available to them. If you anticipate specific
concerns or challenges, prepare for those with back-up slides or address them head-on.
Lastly, consider if you are able to host this workshop alone, or need others to act as
facilitators for the group discussion. Especially with large audiences (in which people may come
from very different backgrounds and be interested in very different kinds of discussions), it is very
helpful to ask a few trusted colleagues to help moderate and facilitate the hands-on part of the
workshop.
2. Read the room.
Even if you know (some) people in your audience, read the room before you start. Some of these
questions can be done in small-ish in-person groups using the ‘fist to five’ technique: everyone
raises their hand, and gives a numerical answer by raising between 0 (not at all) and 5 (very much)
fingers. For bigger groups or online audiences, use an interaction tool such as WooClap, Socrative,
Slido or Menti; some example audience prompts are included in the public slide deck.
Suggestions:
- ‘How worried are you about the climate crisis? Why?’
- ‘What emotions come up when you think about the climate and ecological crises?’
- ‘How much do you already do - in your personal life, in your political life, and in your
professional life? What do you do in each of these roles?’
- ‘What do you want to get out of today’s session?’
3. Talk.
Give a short lecture to get everyone on the same page. Be mindful of where your audience comes
from, and where you’d like them to go. Do they need to be convinced of the realities of climate
change (unlikely, but possible)? Or do they feel like it’s someone else’s problem to solve (much
more common)?
The three audience types identified above can help prepare your talk, even if you don’t
know the background of every person in the room. For a type A audience, keep the general
introduction about climate relatively short (since this audience already knows the facts, cares
enough to show up, and are highly motivated to act). Focus instead on the different roles everyone
plays, bridging between communities that are represented amongst the audience members, and
centering on new connections and opportunities for leverage points within an organization or
community.
For a type B audience, we recommend preceding the holistic framework of academia’s
doughnut with a more tangible, concrete overview of scientists’ different roles (as consumer,
citizens, educators, institutional participants) and various concrete areas in which they can act
(Aron et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2022). In our experience, for a type B audience it is most important to
build a sense of empowerment and community, where small wins (e.g. encouraging their colleagues
to take the train instead of flying to a conference) can build confidence and appetite for more
ambitious action (Özden, 2024).
Lastly, a type C audience may not be immediately enthusiastic (or sometimes overtly
irritated), but don’t underestimate the power of being the first to bring these topics up for
discussion in a particular social setting like a lab meeting. To change people’s beliefs and behavior,
they need “simple, clear messages, repeated often, by a variety of trusted and caring messengers”
(Maibach et al., 2023) - your talk may not encourage everyone to action, but you are crucially
contributing to people’s exposure to the topic from a trusted messenger. There can often be
unexpected allies in such audiences, and a social tipping point (Centola et al., 2018) might be closer
than you think.
In general, stick with what you know (e.g. read the IPCC summary for policymakers or watch one
of the many great online videos summarizing the state of the climate crisis). This slide deck can be
repurposed (with many hidden slides to mix and match; see also these infographics by Dr. Abi
Perrin). Some recorded talks can be found here as preparation material. If you feel very unsure of
what to say, consider inviting a local (climate) scientist to give a short introductory talk, or watch
an online talk together with your colleagues. We have found it most powerful to complement the
scientific facts and graphs with our own emotional responses to them, being open about our own
journey to activism and engaging the audience where possible. Accept that some people may be
confronted with the reality of the climate crisis for the first time, and need some time to learn
more and let these ideas sink in. If possible, you can encourage people to connect with you at a
later time to discuss more.
4. Dream.
Now comes the active part of the workshop, which should last at least 30 minutes to be effective.
It can last up to several hours, for instance with multiple rounds and breaks in between. If your
time is shorter than this, you may instead wrap up after your talk. I recommend dividing people
into groups of 4-7 people, ideally seated together around tables with writing materials (large
flip-over sheets of paper with a few pens and post-its are perfect). Have people group together
around prespecified topics, either pre-specified or collected from the room on the spot. See the
section ‘CCN, Oxford’ for suggestions; it can help to list a few obvious topics on a slide, and ask if
there are others that people suggest.
How do you get people to dream big, while at the same time empowering them to take
concrete actions? The sweet spot between big visions and small steps is different for everyone:
there are certainly differences based on cultural context, academic field, career stage, and the
broader setting and atmosphere of the workshop. The original Doughnut Unrolled toolkit starts
very concrete, with mapping out current targets, indicators, challenges and progress before
identifying gaps and articulating our dreams and vision. On the other end of the spectrum, asking
participants to start with a visioning exercise can be very powerful (Meadows, 1994). What kind of
science would they like to see? What would the ideal university community look like?
In general, we have found a happy middle ground in the stages of
dreaming-planning-acting, each in 5-10 minutes, where people start by thinking big and agreeing
on their shared vision. They then map out different ways to get there; these actions could be
have just generated to set a concrete commitment. The doughnut academia slide deck has
concrete examples for guiding the audience in this way. One thing that we recommend avoiding, or
at least constraining, is a focus on challenges. There are so many of these that groups will spend a
large proportion of their time on the easy task of problematizing, and much less on imagining
alternatives and identifying actions, which are more difficult tasks.
What do you do while people are discussing in groups? With a very large group, you may
have asked colleagues to act as facilitators for topics that they are comfortable discussing
(although they need not be experts) - in which case you can join a topic discussion group of your
choice. If the workshop is small (and you are hosting it alone), walk around and spend some time
with the groups that seem stuck or dominated by a few voices. You can encourage those groups,
for instance, to draw or write what visions or facts they all share, and move from there. Groups
with a lot of energy and great ideas can be left alone.
5. Act.
With around 10 minutes left, start walking around the groups and guide discussions into the ‘act’
round. This means you ideally get people to make concrete pledges - for instance, ones that they
intend to act upon in the next month. In the past, pledges have included ‘understand fossil fuel
policies at my institute’, ‘incorporate more climate examples into my teaching', ‘share with
colleagues how fun and exciting it was to travel by train for 2 days’, to ‘mainly be a killjoy with
friends and family’.
Close the workshop by a central round, in which people share back to the group - creating
not just a sense of community, but also using social support as an informal commitment device.
First, have each person or each group (depending on audience size and time) centrally report back
what was discussed, and concrete actions they intend to take. Then, have people fill out their
pledges digitally (e.g. use this feedback form); this has the benefit of making pledges more concrete
and allow you to follow up. Hopefully, the session can naturally evolve into informal socializing to
further brainstorm and connect.
6. Circle back
After the workshop, follow up with your audience and with the broader community. First, try to
remember to actually email everyone a month later to ask them whether they succeeded, and if
they would like to share anything about the experience. Second, contact us to let us know what
workshop you did and how it went - we will continue to work on improving the materials and
increasing their reach, for which feedback is greatly appreciated. We love to hear from you.
3. Reflections on activating scientists
Taking a step back from the specific ideas and workshop discussed so far, we will end by reflecting
on the larger role of these efforts and materials in fostering academic culture change. This section
takes the form of a Q&A, drawing on questions and reflections we have encountered and asked
ourselves over the years.
Q1: Let’s first discuss some of the choices made in your paper (Urai & Kelly, 2023). In the original
Economic Doughnut, the inner and outer ring are clearly separable into social and ecological
rings, and populated by pre-defined quantities: the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals on the
inside and the planetary boundaries on the outside (Raworth, 2017). In your Academic
on the other ring (for instance, community can be seen as the opposite of individualism and
competition). How did you decide what items should go on both rings of the Academic Doughnut?
A: Indeed, it was not easy to decide what should be listed on the inner and outer rings of
right) shows Anne’s first notes on these ideas, listing items that didn’t make it into the image (for
instance, open access and time to think, but also power imbalance & misuse). We brainstormed and
gathered feedback from many colleagues, ultimately collecting a large list of potential foundations
and ceilings, which we then tried to group together into a handful of meaningful summary terms
After publishing the paper, we became aware of the Mertonian norms (or values) of science
(communalism, universalism, disinterestedness and organized skepticism), widely used by sociologists
of science, to specify the institutional values that science should uphold (Hosseini et al., 2024;
Merton, 1979). These four may have served as a starting point for our doughnut, complemented
by ceilings specific to our current times: climate crisis, career uncertainty, and structural
incentives that put pressure on individuals to act against the goals of academia and our planet (van
promises of current-day science, there may be many other ways of drawing the Doughnut. If you
work on your own version, please let us know or share on the DEAL platform.
Q2: What theory of change does the workshop speak to? How do you know this will create the
change you want?
A: We do not pretend to know what exact strategies are most effective - if we knew what worked,
we wouldn't be in this position! Yet, there are a few principles that underlie our approach, which
we discuss in no particular order below.
Social norm change does not spread uniformly through a population, but starts with a small
group of frontrunners (also called innovators, or the committed minority) who establish new
practices that then inspire early adopters, the early and late majority, and finally get laggards on
board (Aron et al., 2024; Judge et al., 2024; Rogers, 2003). The role of our workshop is to inspire
those frontrunners to form or join communities that they can sustain, and to then increasingly
bring more people on board by making new practices easy, normative and rewarding (and finally
willing’ who are eager to make a change. As Margaret Mead is thought to have said: “Never doubt
that a small group of thoughtful, committed, citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing
that ever has” (Aron et al., 2024).
Social systems can exhibit periods of gradual change followed by rapid ‘tipping points’ of
punctuated cultural evolution (Ehret et al., 2022; Engler & Engler, 2016; Milkoreit, 2023).
Empirically, if around 25% of a population consistently adopts a new norm, and there is an
incentive to coordinate, the whole population tends to switch (Centola et al., 2018). Academic
communities’ fluidity may make the proportion of ‘early adopters’ hard to quantify: the population
can be small (a research team or department) and embedded in larger, overlapping networks (a
university to a whole research field), and people frustrated with the status quo may be the first to
leave the system (Hirschman, 1970). Yet, even if we don’t know exactly how close our academic
communities are to changing certain social norms, we can learn lessons from behavioral science of
social change. Specifically, we should focus not on lone individuals, but on groups of people who
can mutually reinforce each other and then build ‘wide bridges’ (multiple people who connect
between two communities) to inspire the next group (Centola, 2018).
In parallel with building bottom-up culture change is institutionalization at all levels - from a
professor normalizing train travel to conferences with their group, to universities cutting ties with
fossil fuel industries. We see policy and institutionalization as important targets for academic
activism and advocacy (especially by those in tenured and management positions): but for policies
to be accepted and implemented, they need to have broad support that only bottom-up
discussions and widespread culture change can create. Rather than argue over the dichotomy
between individual-level and systems-level change (Chater & Loewenstein, 2023), we find it more
useful to ask where individuals can best use their skills, position, and energy to change the systems
they inhabit.
Q3: What pedagogical approaches does the workshop apply?
A: The workshop design described above is aligned with the framework of transformative learning
(Mezirow, 1996, 1997). This recognises that we all have frames of reference (worldviews,
assumptions), grounded in our life’s experiences, that shape our perception and delimit our
imagination of what is possible. Transformative learning empowers us to question and change the
ways we perceive and think about the world. Fundamentally, our work supports participants to
reflect on, question, and rethink the assumptions, norms, and values of current-day academia - and
to then take action to bring academia within its safe and just space. By engaging participants in
exercises of future visioning (Comelli et al., 2024; Veland et al., 2018), critical reflection and peer
interaction (key elements of transformative learning), the workshop provides a space for
participants to collaboratively identify leverage points (Meadows, 1997) to change the systems in
which they are embedded.
Part of this process will inevitably involve embracing challenging discussions, particularly
for audience types B and C. Getting more comfortable with being uncomfortable is a challenge, but
it is vital for processing the emotions evoked by the climate crisis and for enabling sustained
climate action. As Mezirow puts it, “We do not make transformative changes in the way we learn
as long as what we learn fits comfortably in our existing frames of reference” (1997 p. 7).
Depending on the audience, the workshop can also take a step beyond transformative
learning to employ elements of transgressive learning (Lotz-Sisitka et al., 2015) - supporting
participants to engage in disruptive thinking aimed at overcoming the status quo and co-creating
new norms. Finally, our approach draws on pedagogies of hope (Finnegan & d’Abreu, 2024) to
foster a sense of agency to effect change at the individual and systems levels, and to encourage
networks of solidarity and support.
Q4: The goal of the workshop seems a bit vague. Should it simply inspire and make people think,
or get participants to start on a concrete new project?
A: Both, but it will really depend on the person. Our goal is to both ‘bolster the believers’ (people
who are not yet convinced they need to act) by inspiring them to learn more, and to enhance the
motivation and efficacy of those already convinced they should act (Aron, 2019). However, belief
and action go hand in hand and can be mutually reinforcing: while most participants are likely to be
seeking concrete actions, they may also become inspired and connect with people who share their
concerns and goals. Getting started with small actions that build a sense of empowerment may be
a crucial motivation for wanting to engage further, and builds a sense of community that people
want to dedicate their time to (Özden, 2024).
We fully realize that this workshop can reduce intellectual barriers, but not necessarily
practical ones (like lack of time and institutional support) that are crucial obstacles to collective
action (Dablander et al., 2024; Dupont et al., 2024). Yet, our confidence is bolstered by many
historical and current examples of academic activism and culture change (Racimo et al., 2022), and
an increasing unease with the status quo we observe amongst our colleagues and students.
The workshop purposefully does not steer to specific actions, but lets people choose from
a large set of themes (Rae et al., 2022) and to collaboratively propose and negotiate their own
actions. Since we are leveraging people’s intrinsic motivation to critically look at the complex
systems they are part of, we do not think it is useful to be overly prescriptive. That said, we do
encourage people to consider not just their climate footprint but also their climate handshake: the
positive effect they have on others and ultimately on their community at large. This can be thought
of as a climate action R-value, analogous to the reproduction number used in epidemiology (and
etched into public consciousness after the COVID-19 pandemic). The potential climate handshake
of an individual depends on their different roles (Nielsen et al., 2021). It is important to present
these actions as parallel, not sequential: people who do not make certain lifestyle choices (like
flying or eating meat) should still feel empowered to join their institutional divestment group. In
future workshops, in addition to analysing actions along axes of difficulty/effort and impact, it may
be helpful to present example actions along axes of personal-professional and
individual-collective, emphasizing the large space of different forms of climate action (Dupont et
al., 2024).
Q5: What is the consequence of framing academia as being in crisis, or perhaps even in
‘polycrisis’? Is such doom-and-gloom messaging helpful, or may it prevent people from acting?
A: Across the climate movement, approaches range from incremental change within current
systems, to radical reform and transformation (including overthrowing existing structures of
capitalism, neoliberalism and managerialism). In the academic setting, these ends of the spectrum
can be distinguished as mainstream and critical sustainability narratives (Stein, 2024). We
obviously have opinions, and our paper proposes a holistic rethinking of many interlinked
problems. Yet, the workshop recognises that participants will be starting from different places,
and aims to be welcoming to many types of actions - from the individual or incremental to the
collective or radical (Dupont et al., 2024).
While a narrative of crisis may turn some mainstream audiences away, we feel that most
academics (especially audience types A and B) will recognize at least one of the problems that
Doughnut Academia touches upon. On the one hand, the interconnected nature of various crises
may make them feel unmanageable and overwhelming. On the other hand, their connectedness
means that you can start in one of many places and end up somewhere meaningful, and that
“everything that we can save is worth saving” (Solnit & Lutunatabua, 2023). As scientists, we aim to
steer our audience towards actions that have the most impact (for instance, focusing on
institutional policy rather than personal lifestyle changes), while inspiring a broad range of people
to contribute their unique skills and perspectives to the biggest crisis of our time.
Q6: If we succeed in “fixing” academia (bringing it within its safe and just space), how do you
know that academics will take action on climate - what if they just go and play golf?
A: The truth is that we don’t, and that many may well go and play golf (although golf courses will be
increasingly threatened by the climate crisis). We have both encountered colleagues who do not
agree that they or the university bear any responsibility to respond to the planetary crisis. Many
others are reluctant to engage with an issue that is seen as political, and adhere to the belief that
science somehow stands outside politics. There is particular nervousness about the implications
that an understanding of the planetary crisis entails, specifically around climate justice and
critiques of capitalism, economic growth, and corporate partnerships.
Although encounters with such colleagues can be disheartening, research suggests that
the overwhelming majority of academics do care and do want to act, but experience significant
barriers to doing so (Dablander et al., 2024; Finnerty et al., 2024; Latter et al., 2024). The
encouragement and positive feedback from workshop participants tells us that there is value in
working towards bottom-up culture change, enabling our scientific communities to dismantle
barriers to climate action and working towards a safe and just space for academia.
Concluding remarks
Following our publication of a framework for ‘Doughnut Academia’ (Urai & Kelly, 2023), we
developed a hands-on workshop aimed at removing obstacles for academics to get involved in
climate action. The workshop materials will continue to evolve, and are accessible at
Acknowledgements
We are indebted to the many colleagues and allies who inspire us to pursue activism and advocacy
within and outside of academia. Adam Aron first showed us hands-on academic climate action
many years ago, and has been an inspiration ever since. Fernando Racimo first invited Anne to host
a workshop at Copenhagen’s Globe Institute, encouraging me to turn these ideas into action. A
workshop hosted by Sarah de Rijcke, Marja Spierenburg and Esther Turnhout provided a critical
catalyst for Anne to write up the background of the doughnut workshops. Anna van ‘t Veer
pointed us to the Mertonian norms of science. Georgia Turner provided helpful suggestions to
make the workshop more tailored to specific audiences.
AEU is supported by a Veni grant from the Dutch Research Council, VI.Veni.212.184.