Experts’ discourses of children in the context of datafication
of education
Pekka Mertala, Janne Fagerlund, and Lauri Palsa
University of Jyväskylä, Department of Teacher Education
PL 35, 40014 Jyväskylän yliopisto, Finland
pekka.o.mertala@jyu.fi
Abstract
This study investigates expert discourses on children in the context of the datafication of
education in Finland. Drawing on interviews with 25 experts from education policy,
educational technology, and data justice sectors, the present research identifies four key
discourses: the “agentic child” as an active participant in data practices; the “juridical
child” requiring protection under data laws; the “citizen-child” prepared for future
societal roles through data literacy; and the “learning child” benefiting from personalized,
data-driven pedagogy. These discourses reveal a complex, multifaceted
conceptualization of children, shaped by ethical, legal, and pedagogical considerations,
highlighting the interplay between childhood agency, rights, and education in a data-
driven society.
Keywords:
Datafication, education, children, discourse, expert
Introduction
Youth, growth, and childhood and all such things have many things that are
formless and somewhat confusing. And things, which have remained
somewhat unnamed (Data justice J)
Describing childhood as “formless,” “confusing,” and “unnamed” could hardly be further
removed from the precision-oriented language around data and datafication, in which
“artifacts in the world are turned into data through extraction, measurement, labeling,
and ordering” (Crawford, 2022: 127). Nevertheless, these two contrasting discursive
spaces—child and data—are regularly brought together in public and scholarly
discussions regarding the datafication of education. In these discussions, precise and
organized data is typically promised to help teachers better understand the messy and
unorganized child (e.g., Couldry and Yu, 2018; Garner, n.d.; Mertala, 2024; O’Neill et al.,
2022; Perttola, 2018).
In this study, we examine experts’ discourses on children in the context of the
datafication of education, which, as defined by Jarke and Breiter (2019, p. 1), “comprises
the collection of data on all levels of educational systems (individual, classroom, school,
region, state, international), potentially about all processes of teaching, learning, and
school management.” In the present paper, the definition of the datafication of education
is expanded to include teaching children about data1: one objective of contemporary
education is argued to be preparing students to “live with datafication” (Pangrazio and
Sefton-Green, 2023), typically operationalized as different forms of data literacy
education (see Fagerlund et al., 2024a).
Discourses about children and childhood matter because they “represent a wide range
of ideas about who children are and can be, as well as how they should and could live
their lives” (Smith, 2015: 21). As the use of the words “are” and “should” suggests,
discourses possess normative and performative power (Fairclough, 2004). This makes
the study of experts’ discourses particularly significant in the educational sector. Experts
represent a powerful group whose views are often considered in decision-making: “a
person is considered an expert if she or he possesses an institutionalized authority to
construct reality,” as Meuser and Nagel (2009: 9) neatly put.
Research on experts’ discourses is especially relevant to emergent phenomena, which
are under constant negotiation. In many countries, the datafication of education is in an
emerging stage and in search of best practices and policies. Take Finland, the empirical
context of this study, for example. School lockdowns in 2020 resulted in widespread
concerns about learning loss (Mertala, 2021), a discussion further accelerated by
declining scores in cross-national assessments such as PISA (Hiltunen et al., 2023),
ICILS (Fagerlund et al., 2024b), and TIMSS (Hiltunen et al., 2024). The use of data-
generating educational technologies, such as learning analytics (potentially combined
with children’s register data), has been proposed as a solution to these issues, with large-
scale development projects funded by the government and municipalities (EDUCA,
2024; DigiOne, n.d.). At the same time, concerns about children’s privacy and their right
to data literacy education are regularly raised by public administrators (Salomaa & Palsa,
2019) and researchers (Silvennoinen et al., 2024). This suggests that the discursive space
of children and the datafication of education is multivocal. By "discursive space," we
mean a heuristic tool used to describe and structure the variety of discourses about a
given phenomenon (Kalalahti and Varjo, 2019).
1 Here we draw on Mertala’s (2020) definition of digitalization of education as the disruption of materials
and methods (i.e., the use of digital devices and software) and the contents (i.e., including coding in
curriculum) of formal education.
To better understand the variety and nature of the discourses on children and the
datafication of education, this paper asks the following research questions:
1. What kinds of discourses do experts express about children in the context of the
datafication of education in Finland?
2. What kind of discursive space do these discourses form?
Discourses of Children and Childhood: Theoretical Underpinnings
Outside of fields like pediatric medical science, positivistic developmental psychology,
or econometrics, childhood is often approached as discourse—a body of
representational practice (Ryan, 2016). Taking a discursive stance means that “child” and
“childhood” are considered matters of continuous negotiation and reproduction in a
particular society at a specific historical time (Alasuutari and Karila, 2010). An illustrative
way to exemplify the “negotiable” nature of a child is to consider the division of the child
either as a being or a becoming. Social scientist Uprichard (2008: 304), drawing on a
plethora of literature, summarizes their differences as follows:
The ‘being’ child is seen as a social actor in his or her own right, who is
actively constructing their own ‘childhood,’ and who has views and
experiences about being a child; the ‘becoming’ child is seen as an ‘adult in
the making,’ who is lacking universal skills and features of the ‘adult’ that
they will become.
The view of a child as becoming was (and is) common in developmental psychology,
especially in the phase and stage theories by figures like Jean Piaget, as well as in
“traditional” sociology (see Johnsson, 1995; Matthews, 2007). In the 1980s and 1990s,
the idea of childhood as (only) a natural phase of life (Alasuutari and Karila, 2010) was
contested by proponents of the “new sociology of childhood” (e.g., Jenks et al., 1998).
They argued that children are social actors capable of making sense of and affecting their
societies (Matthews, 2007). However, the introduction of new ways of seeing the child did
not lead to a “Kuhnian paradigm shift,” and the two views still coexist (see Ryan, 2016). In
fact, Uprichard (2008; see also Matthews, 2007) states that neither approach is
satisfactory in itself, but that they can be used together in complementary ways.
Discourses about the child are not restricted to those of being and becoming. Another
well-known example involves the discourses of “the evil Dionysian child,” “the innocent
Apollonian child,” and “the responsible Athenian child” (Jenks, 2005; Smith, 2012). These
general discourses are typically refined when children’s discourses are explored in more
specific contexts. Research on discourses of children and digital technology, for
instance, has identified various detailed imaginaries, ranging from a “Dionysian”
dangerous technology user to an “Apollonian” vulnerable victim and a digitally
disadvantaged needy child, to name only a few examples (e.g., Dong and Mertala, 2021;
Mertala, 2019; Selwyn, 2003). According to Selwyn (2003), the dangerous child is actively
and aggressively using technology, potentially harming both themselves and others.
Examples of the vulnerable victim discourse, in turn, include concerns about how
technology use may detrimentally affect children’s physical (e.g., myopia, poor posture)
and mental health (Dong and Mertala, 2021). The digitally disadvantaged needy child,
who lacks access to digital technologies (Mertala, 2019), closely resembles the “child in
need” discourse common in social policy (Moss et al., 2000).
There is evidence suggesting variation within the discourses of children in the context of
the datafication of education. In their analysis of edtech corporate discourses, media
scholars Couldry and Yu (2018) noted the existence of a discourse of a “responsible
student,” which aligns with the image of the Athenian child. Responsibility, in the context
of datafication, refers to the child’s obligation to generate data by using digital technology
like learning analytics: if data is the key to better learning, then data generation becomes
a responsible action.
The responsible child discourse provides insights into how the datafication of childhood
has been naturalized within commercial discourses, where surveillance is constructed
as inherent to childhood itself and even necessary for the health, development, and
learning of the child (Couldry and Yu, 2018; Macheroni, 2018). However, at the same time,
the intensifying dataveillance during childhood is also seen as highly problematic. Joseph
Savirimuthu (2020: 310), a legal scholar, has asked “whether the political act of
integrating the lifeworlds of children into the technological infrastructures of the personal
data economy and framing of legal responsibilities to be owed by data controllers through
data protection rules and principles is truly empowering.” In other words, for Savirimuthu
(2020), the datafied child appears disempowered and in need of juridical protection, thus
representing another kind of discourse.
The Present Study
The research reported in this paper is part of the broader The Research of Council funded
research project Movement for Data Literacy, which examines the datafication of primary
education in Finland. The data for the study was collected as part of the project's first
work package, the objective of which was to map the macro-level discourses surrounding
the datafication of Finnish primary education.
Data and Participants
The data consists of research interviews with 25 experts representing the fields of
educational policy (n=7; e.g., members of public administration), educational technology
(n=8; e.g., technology company representatives), and data justice2 (n=10; including
researchers and non-governmental organizations addressing data from a societal
perspective). The combination of these domains was believed to provide multivocal data
offering a holistic view of the macro-level discourses of the datafication of education. The
interviewees were selected via preliminary screening (e.g., organizational websites,
news, white papers) as well as snowball sampling.
The interviews took place between November 2023 and February 2024. Four interviews
were held face-to-face, while 21 interviews were conducted remotely via Zoom. Author 1
conducted seven interviews, and Authors 2 and 3 conducted nine each. All interviews
were recorded and transcribed. The length of the interviews varied between 47 and 122
minutes, and the total amount of data is 31 hours and 18 minutes / 227427 words. The
data was pseudonymized and stored securely in an online space (Nextcloud) on the
university’s servers. To protect the anonymity of the experts, they are referred to with a
code that combines the domain (educational policy, educational technology, or data
justice) with an alphabet.
The interview process applied the principles of semi-structured expert interviews
(Meuser & Nagel, 2009). Instead of asking each participant the same questions in the
same order, a detailed manual consisting of themes to be addressed during the
interviews was created (DiCicco-Bloom and Crabtree, 2006). The main themes,
Main Theme Description
Exploring datafication, including the production, collection, and use of digital data
General
as part of an ordinary school day, as well as broader administrative, educational
perspective on
technological, and policy perspectives. Participants' views on related developments
datafication
were also sought.
Perspectives on the knowledge and skills required for datafication. Participants
Skill needs were asked whether specific competencies are necessary for students, education
professionals, or others.
Views on the current state of datafication in schools, examined at various levels
Current situation
(e.g., classroom practices, administration, education policy, or the educational
in schools
technology sector).
Background of the Participants’ perspectives on how the current situation arose: what factors or
current situation elements contributed to the present state of datafication.
2 Data justice is a broad term that generally refers to ethical, non-discriminatory, and transparent
generation and use of data in different areas of human-life (Dencik et al., 2019)
Main Theme Description
Assessments of the benefits or challenges associated with school datafication,
Evaluation of the
analyzed across different levels (e.g., classroom practices, administration, policy, or
current state
the technology sector).
Participants’ views on potential future scenarios for datafication and the factors
Future
likely to influence them.
Participants were invited to share additional insights or perspectives not covered by
Open floor
the structured themes.
two rounds of pilot interviews. In four interviews, additional materials from the
participants’ organizations’ websites or other resources were used to support more
concrete and contextualized discussions.
Interviews began with a warm-up chat, which was not recorded. Although research
notifications and privacy notices were provided to participants upon first contact, the
recorded interview started by confirming that the participants had read, understood, and
accepted these documents. If a participant had not read the documents, they were
reviewed and accepted before proceeding. Before addressing the main themes, we
asked participants to discuss their current and past work and its relevance to the
datafication of education.
Analysis
An abductive approach was employed for data analysis. This approach rejects the idea
that the researcher’s observations and interpretations could be purely inductive and
acknowledges the inclusion of guiding theoretical threads in the analysis process
(Grönfors, 2011). The primary theoretical threads in this study were the discourses of
children as beings and becomings (Uprichard, 2008), evil, innocent, and thoughtful
(Smith, 2012), and needy or rich (Moss et al., 2000). Additional threads included the child
as a subject entitled to data protection/regulation (Savirimuthu, 2020) and the child as a
responsible student (Couldry and Yu, 2018). However, unlike in deductive analysis,
following a theoretical thread does not mean taking the theory as given or using the
analysis process solely to test it. Instead, theory-informed codes and categories were
refined, reformed, and expanded through inductive interpretations.
The qualitative analysis software ATLAS.ti (version 23) was used for open coding. All parts
of the interviews discussing children and data were marked, accompanied by short
memos outlining initial interpretations. After coding, the excerpts were analyzed
horizontally (reading all thematically similar excerpts) and vertically (reading all coded
excerpts from an individual interviewee) to gain an overall understanding of the
discourses. The interpretative process is illustrated through one example excerpt3:
Well, especially, something like school dropout prediction, it requires quite
a few different data sources to combine, starting from social services, so it
is of course a bit challenging in terms of data protection [...] that if it gives
the teacher a better idea of how the teaching group is progressing, where
perhaps [they] need to intervene (Data justice C).
From this excerpt, the following interpretation was made: A child with a specific
background—which can be deduced from data sources, including registry data from
social services—is profiled as a potential school dropout. Thus, the child is seen as a
needy (Moss et al., 2000) becoming (Uprichard, 2008), whose future societal
opportunities depend on data-informed interventions by the teacher. This vignette was
coded as representing a citizen-child discourse, where the goal of datafication in
education is to prepare children for the future by addressing disadvantages arising from
socioeconomic background. The participant also reflected on children’s juridical rights
regarding data collection, sharing, and profiling (Savirimuthu, 2020), suggesting the
presence of a juridical child discourse. In this view, childhood is seen as valuable in its
current state (being, Uprichard, 2008) and deserving of protection (innocence, Smith,
3 Some narrative soothing (Polkinghorne, 1995), such deleting repeated words, is done to improve the
narrative flow of the data excerpts
2012). Additionally, the excerpt discussed children collectively rather than as unique
individuals. Through this process, we identified four discourses related to children and
datafication: the agentic child, the juridical child, the citizen-child, and the learning child.
These will be explored in detail in the following sections, along with the discursive space
they form.
Findings
We begin this section by addressing research question 2, which provides an overview of
These are not mutually exclusive categories. As the reader will notice (by observing the
pseudonym codes in the data excerpts), individual experts often described children and
the datafication of education through different discourses. Thus, metaphorically
speaking, they moved (to varying extents) across the discursive space.
Discourse Agentic Child Juridical Child Citizen Child Learning Child
Main
temporal
dimension of Being Being Becoming Becoming
the discursive
space
Main
ontological
dimension of Individual Collective Collective Individual
the discursive
space
Relationship
between
Participation Protection Preparation Personalization
children and
datafication
Children as an age-
A child as a unique Children as an age- based collective of
subject who is an based collective “future adults in-the- A child as a unique
active participant in who, due to their making” for whom subject whose
school’s data legal rights as formal education learning processes
policies and minors, are entitled should teach data and pathways must
Summary of
practices, either by to be protected by literacy and provide be personalized via
the discourse
utilizing data for adults against data-informed data-informed
personal or unnecessary and interventions if the pedagogy to
communal benefits potentially harmful child is at risk of maximize their
or by resisting data data generation and societal exclusion learning potential.
generation. use. through school
dropout.
The Agentic Child
In the agentic child discourse, children are seen as active subjects in relation to the
datafication of education. Agency is described as participation in negotiations about the
school’s data practices, rather than mere compliance. Thus, the agentic child is
dominantly an individual being—a social actor in their own right (Uprichard, 2008).
Examples of agency are divided into two strands: resistance and utilization.
Agency in resistance frames the child as someone who can opt out of using data-
generating technologies or manipulate the data generation process so that the resulting
data becomes unusable or meaningless. One participant described how even a single
student's refusal to participate could disrupt the system, highlighting children’s ability to
undermine the utility of data through intentional non-compliance or manipulation:
Let's just say that I would predict that in a classroom environment where
there are a lot of other things, so if in principle even one student is of the
opinion that she does not want to use this, and then you have to come up
with an alternative [...] I could also believe that when you go to the [data]
produced by the children themselves, so when adults are quite good at
thinking and manipulating and messing around, so children can equally
think and manipulate and mess around about [data]. (Data justice G).
Agency in data utilization describes goal-oriented, self-initiated choices and actions
involving data, through which the child seeks personal or communal benefits. One
participant envisioned children using self-tracking technologies, such as sports watches,
to bring their own health and activity data to annual meetings with the school nurse. This
would enable the nurse to provide more personalized feedback based on the child’s
unique data: "Could it be that the student has her own data, and she can show the nurse
the annual report, that this is my set for this year?" (Technology U). Another example was
provided by Technology Z who proposed that children could use digital portfolios to
present teachers with a more comprehensive view of their skills and accomplishments.
This approach would allow children to showcase abilities developed outside the school
setting, offering a fuller picture of their competencies:
I myself have sometimes thought that when a pupil is assessed at school,
she could probably give evidence of her own competence in other settings
than school. Because they may have abilities and skills, but for one reason
or another, they are not able to show them at school. Then if it could, let's
think of it this way: if the pupil is a captain of a sports club, for example, when
she has been selected as a captain, she has certain qualities. But if she
cannot show those qualities at school, then could she somehow
demonstrate her own competence? Or even in 4H club activities or scouting
certain things. That would be useful at school too.
The Juridical Child
In the juridical child discourse, childhood was primarily described as an age-based
collective where all children are subject to the same legislative regulations. References
to documents such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) were common.
While children were often described as beings who possess rights regarding their data—
such as the right to understand their data rights or to provide consent for certain systems
(“to make a person, a child, a learner understand what my rights are”; Data justice C;
“Then, with the consent of the learners, they can also be asked if they want to introduce
such a system”; Policy M)—the ultimate objective of regulation was to protect children.
Protection was approached from two perspectives: data minimization and data
management. In the first perspective, a foundational concern prompting the need for
protection was that technology companies and other agencies might generate and
collect more data than necessary for supporting children’s learning and well-being.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of adults, such as educators and policymakers, to
monitor and control the generation, handling, and sharing of children’s data. In the data
excerpt below, the interviewee discusses this topic with an implicit reference to the
principle of “data minimization,” which states that “a data controller should limit the
collection of personal information to what is directly relevant and necessary to
accomplish a specified purpose” (European Data Protection Supervisor, n.d.):
"In my opinion, we must monitor what is in the best interests of the learner
and what is really relevant to their well-being in the long term. And also to
protect children. In a certain way, even if a company or an agent thinks it is
great that data are collected from a wide range of sources and everywhere,
we should always consider the child's right to privacy and the right not to
collect any data other than what is necessary. And after that, how that data
is handled, what rights there are to give the data away. (Policy M emphasis
added).
The imperative for regulation was not restricted to commercial actors such as technology
companies and data brokers. Stakeholders also questioned how children’s data was
managed within schools themselves. For instance, one participant pondered whether it
is always in the best interest of the child to have their data transferred from one teacher
to another when starting a new grade or changing schools. This participant implicitly
referred to GDPR’s "right to be forgotten," which gives individuals the right to request that
organizations delete their personal data:
...whether it would be better for pupils to have the right to start with a clean
slate, so to speak. And in some cases, it might be good to have a fresh start
in a new environment. There would be no baggage, but the interpretations
are made from 'who I am now' and not from 'who I have been' in the past. In
other words, who owns the data, and do the student or students have the
right to be forgotten? (Technology Z; emphasis added).
On the other hand, children were also seen to have limited capacity to make informed
decisions regarding the lifespan of their data. Thus, they require protection not only from
external actors but also from their own actions, such as opting out of data generation and
collection—a choice they might later regret. The tension between protecting children’s
right to express their views and safeguarding them from potentially harmful decisions is
neatly illustrated in the following excerpt. Here, the participant first frames children as
beings, emphasizing the importance of respecting their right to be heard, referencing the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (particularly Article 12). They then
contemplate the appropriate age at which children can make sustainable and
responsible decisions, thereby shifting the perspective to view children as becomings.
This excerpt exemplifies how the interviewees' narratives moved across the discursive
space:
However, we should think about hearing the child. If you think about the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and all the things that should take the
child and her opinion and views into account. So, at what point, when, is the
child old enough to decide in a certain way? [...] And then, if the data is
destroyed for some reason, and then you realize 10 years later that it would
have been good to have this data, because now I understand that I would
have needed it. (Data justice I).
The Citizen-Child
In the citizen-child discourse, children were predominantly described as a collective of
becomings, future adults in-the-making. The purpose of datafication in education was
framed as preparing these children for the future by providing them with essential skills
and addressing societal disadvantages. Regarding skill development, children were
described as needing to learn about data and datafication—what data is, how data can
be used, and how datafication affects people—to become fully functioning members of
society in the future. Experts frequently commented that data literacy should be
recognized as a set of “civic skills” (Policy L) and “core competences” (Policy Q) that all
citizens should possess. As Data justice G explained:
If we think about Finnish politics, everything is aimed at ensuring that we
have good and qualified workers who produce tax money, so I can see that
digitalisation is being thought of and hoped that we will have qualified and
competent people who can cope in today's world, or who will cope in the
world of the future.
The data excerpt above also illustrates how participants “moved” across the discursive
space. As the reader may recall, a different quote from Data justice G was used to
exemplify the resisting form of the agentic child discourse ("I could also believe that when
you go to the [data] produced by the children themselves, so when adults are quite good
at thinking and manipulating and messing around, so children can equally think and
manipulate and mess around about [data]"). In other words, Data justice G, like many
other participants, did not approach children and datafication in education through a
single discourse only.
Furthermore, comparing the excerpts above highlights how experts either aligned with or
distanced themselves from certain discourses. In the first quote, Data justice G takes a
direct and personal stance toward the agentic child discourse by stating, “I could also
believe” in the agency of children. On the other hand, in the second quote, by saying, “if
we think about Finnish politics, everything is aimed at” and “I can see that digitalisation
is being thought of and hoped that”, the interviewee distances themself from the
competence-focused discourse of the citizen-child, identifying it as being driven by
politicians, for example.
In tackling disadvantages, the citizen-child discourse also drew on the view that some
children, due to disadvantaged backgrounds (e.g., low socio-economic status,
immigrant background), were generically at risk for school dropout and future social
exclusion. In this framing, citizenship—understood as full membership in society—was
seen as something these children would not achieve unless proactive, corrective, data-
informed measures were taken in schools. As Technology R put it: "It is of high importance
that we identify at-risk students already before problems arise." Technology V elaborated
on this idea, envisioning a “national data program” to proactively screen for potential
school dropouts:
[The data] would certainly be used to identify drop-outs. So we could sort of
see if we should put a little bit more money into potential drop-outs,
because then it will come back many times over if we get them on the right
side of the fence, as it were, and everything should happen in early stages.
The Learning Child
Lastly, the child was also represented as a learner whose educational path needs to be
personalized to improve the efficiency of education. The learning child was
predominantly seen as an individual whose unique needs, strengths, and desires must
be considered in formal education. Since data generated in the present was perceived as
especially beneficial for children’s future, children were primarily described as
becomings. Occasionally, children’s needs were explicitly framed as learning difficulties,
as illustrated by Policy K:
In a way, I just think that it [data] should guide the provision of support. If we
really simplify things, then quite a lot of pupils who are now in some way
symptomatic may have dyslexia or mathematical learning difficulties...
More commonly, however, personalization focused on tailoring the content, pace, and
forms of learning individually for each child, regardless of any formal diagnoses. For
instance, the following excerpt suggests that each child possesses a unique,
temperament-based learning style that educational data technologies, referred to as
“intelligent agents,” could identify and adapt to, thereby offering personalized tasks and
content:
If I as a learner have a profile accumulated over a lifetime of my learning
style, how hard a challenge I like to get, how I deal with disappointments and
failures. So when I go to high school or university, I can directly put it [the
learning profile] there, so that the intelligent agent who offers me learning
tasks, based on it [data], directly knows how to act in the way that is most
useful to me. That would be quite reasonable. (Data justice C)
Some experts criticized the traditional, curriculum-based approach to teaching, which
allows little or no flexibility for children. According to Technology R the idea that all
children must learn the same material at the same time and pace is unsustainable: "But
do I want to learn on Wednesday, 14 January 2024, when the teacher opens the book on
photosynthesis?" Instead, they argued that data should be used to provide children with
their own personalized learning assistants:
The lesson begins. Each student takes their own 'Netflix of learning,'
welcoming you with 'Hey, welcome [student's name], last time you learned
about photosynthesis. Do you have any questions about it? Do you want me
to help you with that? Do you feel you understand what photosynthesis
means?' And I say, 'I don't really understand it yet; can you tell me a little bit
more about it and what I need photosynthesis for?' Whereas another
student in the class might ask, 'This is quite simple for me, tell me more,' in
a kind of way. And a third will ask, 'What does photosynthesis mean in
Finnish? I don't understand the word flower; what is a flower in Finnish?'
(Technology R)
Discussion and Conclusions
The objective of this study was to explore and describe experts’ discourses of children in
the context of the datafication of education. To collect multivocal data, we interviewed
25 expert stakeholders from the fields of education policy, educational technology, and
data justice. Through an abductive analysis process, we identified four discourses: the
agentic child, the juridical child, the citizen-child, and the learning child. In the following
sections, we reflect on our findings in relation to the cultural, temporal, and scholarly
contexts in which they were generated. We then discuss the potential implications of
these discourses and outline the study’s limitations.
Locating the Discourses Within Broader Cultural, Temporal, and Discursive
Contexts
Discourses do not emerge in a vacuum; they are always bounded by historical and
contemporary contexts. For instance, explicit and implicit references to official
guidelines and regulations, such as the GDPR and the United Nations’ Convention on the
Rights of the Child, were evident in the juridical child discourse. Similarly, the discourse
emphasizing the need for children to learn about data to become responsible and
employable citizens resonates with discourses around media literacy (Uusitalo, 2015)
and computing education (Mertala et al., 2020), as well as the objectives of data literacy
education on a global scale (Fagerlund et al., 2024a).
The idea that data could be used to identify and support children from disadvantaged
backgrounds reflects Nordic welfare ideology, which prioritizes social equality and aims
to reduce disparities through universal measures, such as free education (Klette, 2018).
The disadvantaged citizen-child discourse may also have been amplified by findings from
recent large-scale assessment studies, such as PISA (Hiltunen et al., 2023), where
students from higher socio-economic groups significantly outperformed those from
lower ones. These results, which have garnered substantial attention in Finnish media
and public discussions (e.g., Vashko, 2023), likely influenced this discourse.
The four discourses constructed in this study also relate differently to “general”
discourses of children and childhood. The citizen-child discourse, for example, aligns
with the “child in need” discourse (Moss et al., 2000), portraying disadvantaged children
as requiring data-informed interventions to prevent social exclusion. The agentic child
discourse, particularly when discussing resistance through data manipulation,
resonates with the “Dionysian evil child” discourse (Jenks, 2005), as it frames the child
as acting against established norms and practices. Conversely, agency as self-initiated
utilization of data aligns with the “Athenian responsible child” discourse (Smith, 2015),
portraying children as responsible actors leveraging data for personal benefit. This image
mirrors the “responsible student” described by Couldry and Yu (2018).
The Athenian child was also present in the learning child discourse. While children
frequently use digital devices in schools for purposes beyond learning, such as gaming
or watching YouTube (Högrström et al., 2024; Lakka, 2024; McCoy, 2020; Paakkari, 2020),
the learning child discourse emphasized a wholehearted orientation towards learning. In
contrast, the juridical child discourse closely resembles the “innocent Apollonian child”
discourse (Jenks, 2005), portraying children as requiring adult protection from intense
data collection and its unintended consequences (see also Savirimuthu, 2020).
However, the view that children also need protection from their own potentially harmful
decisions—such as opting out of beneficial data generation—introduces elements of the
Dionysian child into the juridical child discourse.
The portrayal of children through different and even contrasting archetypes within and
across discourses underscores the complex and “unstable” (Olson & Rampaul, 2013)
nature of both the discursive construction of children and childhood itself. As Uprichard
(2008, p. 303; emphasis original) notes, “children and childhood are always and
necessarily ‘being and becoming.’” Similarly, they are always and necessarily Apollonian,
Dionysian, and Athenian. Children undergo significant physical, cognitive, and social
changes during childhood, with their characteristics also varying momentarily due to
factors such as excitement, tiredness, or emotional distress. Resistance to school norms
is, in fact, a crucial part of a child’s independence process. Therefore, while
contradictions within a single discourse may initially seem counterintuitive, they
arguably provide a more truthful representation of children—and people in general—as
creatures of paradox.
Discourses as Constructors of Reality: What Can We Expect to Witness in the
Future?
At the outset of this article, we argued that the normative and performative nature of
discourses—particularly those of experts (Meuser and Nagel, 2009)—contributes to
shaping social reality (Fairclough, 2004). Here, we reflect on what the identified
discourses might mean for the future. Negotiations often involve seeking consensus and
making compromises. Therefore, discourses that are harmonious or mutually supportive
are more likely to be approved by different stakeholders and, consequently, represent the
most probable future scenarios. Indeed, some of the identified discourses formed a
rather cohesive whole, drawing on the same “general” childhood discourse. For instance,
the (Athenian) agentic child who generates and utilizes data during both school and
leisure time aligns with the (Athenian) learning child benefitting from personalized
learning analytics powered by data accumulated throughout the course of their lives.
Discourses that emphasize the importance of ubiquitous data generation are likely to
gain traction in the current zeitgeist. Not only is the cross-sectional datafication of
education (i.e., the combination of registry data and learning data) embraced by
governments and technology companies (e.g., EDUCA, n.d; Mertala, 2024), but there is
also growing interest in the scholarly sphere in idiographic learning analytics, which
develops insights about individual students through longitudinal data analysis (Saqr,
2023). Thus, drawing on Gee (2015), discourses that emphasize the importance—or even
the necessity—of datafication for education and children can be conceptualized as the
“Big ‘D’ Discourse,” a larger discursive context within which various “small ‘d’
discourses,” like the ones introduced in this study, are examined.
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research
While this study has provided novel insights into the discourses of children in the context
of the datafication of education, it is not without limitations. Participants may have
restricted their responses to what they perceived as socially desirable—a common issue
in qualitative research (Bergen and Labonte, 2020). Social desirability reflects the current
status quo, which can shift over time. For instance, in May 2024, Finnish media reported
a leak of 150,000 primary and secondary students’ personal data. Had our research been
conducted a few months later, visions of national data programs might have appeared
socially awkward.
Additionally, while our participants represented diverse fields (education policy,
educational technology, and data justice), this list is not exhaustive. Nor should “official”
experts be the only voices heard. Research on parents’ and children’s perspectives on
the datafication of education remains scarce (e.g., Martens et al., 2023; Pangrazio et al.,
2023). Furthermore, little research explores how macro-level discourses manifest in
everyday schooling. Finally, as datafication is a global phenomenon, comparative studies
are needed to identify which discourses are universal and which are contextualized.
Discourses that “travel” across contexts should be critically examined, as they are often
decontextualized and furthest from the realities of childhood.