Quantifying belief in the rationality of others: the Faith in Reason scale
ff
1 2 3
Tom Sta ord , Junyan Zhu , & Katharine Dommett
1 ffi
Department of Psychology, University of She eld, UK
2 ff
Munk School of Global A airs and Public Policy, University of Toronto, Canada
3 ffi
Department of Politics and International Relations, University of She eld, UK
Working paper 2024-12-31
What we believe about other people matters. It is not enough that others are trustworthy,
reasonable or well-intentioned. Successful coordination, as well as individual wellbeing, benefit
when we also perceive others as trustworthy, reasonable or well-intentioned. While standard
measures of trust and benevolence exist, there is no standard measure of the generalised belief in
the rationality or reasonableness of other people. Here, we present the development and testing
of a scale to directly measure this attitude. Using a representative sample of 1869 UK adults,
we test dimensionality and consistency of the scale items. We show that the refined, six-item,
scale is associated with, but not entirely determined by, generalised trust in other people. Our
ff
“Faith in Reason” scale shows large individual di erences, but the average tendency is slightly
on the side of endorsing, rather than rejecting, sentiments such as “The typical person is often
irrational”.
Introduction reasonably used as a standard against which to judge human
reasoning.
All our dignity consists then in thought. By it
Mercier and Sperber’s (2011) Argumentative Theory of Rea-
we must elevate ourselves, and not by space and
son provides an interactionist, rather than individualist, ac-
time which we cannot fill. Let us endeavour then
count of human reasoning, which emphasises the social con-
to think well; this is the principle of morality.
/ text in which human reasoning evolved. This account sug-
Pascal (1669 1910)
gests, among other things, the importance of dialogue based
ff
argumentation in changing beliefs (Brand & Sta ord, 2022;
Rationality
ff
Karadzhov, Sta ord, & Vlachos, 2022) and the validity of
The nature of human reason is a perennial topic. The human incorporating social factors like the status, trustworthiness or
potential for rationality has often been praised, just as the costs expertise of a source of information in the reasoning process
ff
of failing to reason well have been condemned. It matters how (Eiser, Sta ord, Henneberry, & Catney, 2009).
rational we are, and it also matter how rational we believe
ourselves, and each other, to be. Criteria of reason
An influential account of human reasoning is provided by So rationality is not a unitary concept, nor one around which
the heuristics and biases programme (Kahneman, Slovic, & there is consensus on the definition of, despite the way it
Tversky, 1982), which uses the ideal of economic rationality is often evoked in discussion (and particularly in discussion
as a standard against which to define actual human reasoning. of its negation e.g. “they are being irrational”). That said,
From this perspective human reasoning appears riddled with core features of rationality have been proposed, and it may
ff
biases, but much of this e ect is due to the adoption of the be possible to test these as aspects of the ‘folk theory’ of
standards of utility theory, formal logic and statistical reason- rationality that exists in the common understanding.
ing against which to define error. Critics have questioned the
Two primary criteria are ‘correspondence’, where beliefs are
appropriateness of these standards (e.g. Gigerenzer & Gaiss-
aligned with reality (in the form of the state of the world or
maier, 2011). The logic of controlled experiments allows re-
their behaviour), and ‘coherence’, where beliefs are aligned
searchers to isolate and emphasise quirks in human reasoning,
with each other (i.e. consistent, but see Sommer, Musolino, &
ff
while backgrounding reason-responsiveness (Sta ord, 2014).
Hemmer, 2022). For more on correspondence and coherence
Accordingly, the psychology literature may overemphasise the
see Dawson and Gregory (2009).
ff
role of error, bias and motivated reasoning (Sta ord, 2020).
The debate has been so heated in the cognitive sciences that Another criteria of rationality which can be identified is in-
‘Rationality Wars’ (Samuels, Stich, & Bishop, 2002) have sight into your own beliefs and how they guide behaviour.
been declared over the definition of rationality that might The rhetorical power of certain celebrated demonstrations
TOM STAFFORD1, JUNYAN ZHU2, & KATHARINE DOMMETT3
of irrationality (e.g. Nisbett & Wilson, 1977) relies on the by generating a misinformed populace, but by generating
surprise that people can act, supposedly, unaware of the causes a populace that believes others are misinformed or unrea-
ff
of their behaviour (but see Sta ord, 2020). sonable (Karpf, 2019). Alarmism around misinformation
may potentially lower trust in institutions (Hoes, Clemm von
Finally, susceptibility to influence is a key aspect of ratio-
Hohenberg, Gessler, Wojcieszak, & Qian, 2022), increase
nality (Mercier, 2020). This can be positively construed -
skepticism about democracy (Jungherr & Rauchfleisch, 2022;
to be rational is to be responsive to reasons, persuadable by
Nisbet, Mortenson, & Li, 2021), or foster calls of tighter
evidence and so on. And it can be negatively construed - to
media regulation (Lee, 2021). Altay and Acerbi (2023) have
be irrational is to be gullible, or stubborn in the face of good
shown that the threat of misinformation is directly related to
reasons to change your mind.
the perceptions of others’ gullibility.
ff
Third person e ect. There is an established literature of
So core features of rationality include coherence, correspon-
ff
the perception of media influence on others (Perlo , 2002;
dence, susceptibility to influence and insight into causes of
ff
Sun, Pan, & Shen, 2008). The ‘third person e ect’, pro-
ones actions. The extent to which these features form a co-
posed by Davison (1983), is the phenomenon whereby many
herent whole in the minds of the general public, and can
people believe others are more susceptible to influence than
meaningfully be asked about is a primary question of this
ff
themselves. The third person e ect was proposed as a root
paper.
cause of censorship instincts and this has been confirmed
by subsequent empirical investigations (Feng & Guo, 2012;
Consequence of a lack of faith in reason
Olshansky & Landrum, 2020).
Investigating folk conceptions of rationality is not just interest-
ff
Two caveats around the third person e ect. Lyons (2022) has
ing in its own right, individual’s beliefs about the rationality
ff
recently argued that - for many people - a third person e ect of
of others may be important for a number of other core beliefs
greater media influence on others rather than the self will be
and behaviours.
an accurate perception. Chung and Moon (2016) have argued
ff
Second order e ects of disinformation. The generalised
ff
that the driving factor in many so-called third person e ects
belief that others are well informed and reasonable is founda-
is the perception of others (as highly influenced), rather than
tional to democracy. Recent concerns around misinformation
the discrepancy with first person perception per se. For recent
ff
may have second order e ects, undermining democracy not
reflections on the concept see Mike Schmierbach and Sun
(2023).
Generalised trust value of democracy
Thanks to all who provided feedback during the development of
Generalised trust is the belief that, ‘most people can be trusted’
this project: Sacha Altay, Will Jenning; Hazel Gordon and others
(Brehm & Rahn, 1997; Paxton, 1999). It is reflected in
in the Data & Decisions Lab Group; three anonymous reviewers
standard items in long running time series surveys such as
and the meta-reviewer for the 2024 Cognitive Science conference;
the World Values Survey (Inglehart & Team, 2023) and the
readers of the Reasonable People newsletter.
General Social Survey (General Social Survey Team, 2023).
For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence to any Author Accepted Generalised trust is an aspect of social capital, broadly con-
Manuscript version arising. ceived (Putnam, 2000) and as such as an important aspect of
Document prepared with RMarkdown (Allaire et al., 2020)
wellbeing and the health of society (Cohn, Maréchal, Tannen-
and papaja (Aust & Barth, 2020). CRediT (Contributor
baum, & Zünd, 2019). Given the recognised importance of
Roles Taxonomy) autogenerated using Tenzing (Holcombe, Ko-
generalised trust, it is natural to ask how other beliefs feed
vacs, Aust, & Aczel, 2020). Template is available here
into this belief. Why do we trust others? Do we trust them
/ ff /
github.com tomsta ord rmarkdown_apa
intellectually as well as morally? Do we think other people
This work was supported by the Leverhulme Trust under Grant
are able to work things out for themselves, to display good
Number: RPG#2020#148.
judgement? Do we trust the typical person to avoid being
ff
The authors made the following contributions. Tom Sta ord:
manipulated, to respond to arguments, to reason their way to
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisi-
good enough decisions? In short, is generalised trust informed
tion, Methodology, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing
- review & editing; Junyan Zhu: Conceptualization, Data curation, by beliefs about the rationality or reasonableness of others?
Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing - review & editing; Katharine
Similarly, attitudes to democracy may mutually inform beliefs
Dommett: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology,
about the reasonableness of one’s fellow citizens. One stan-
Writing - review & editing.
dardised measure of attitude to democracy is the item from
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
ff ffi
Tom Sta ord, Department of Psychology, University of She eld, the World Values Survey (Inglehart & Team, 2023) which
ffi ffi
She eld, UK. E-mail: t.stafford@she eld.ac.uk asks ‘How important is it for you to live in a country that is
FAITH IN REASON
governed democratically?’. Item development
In order to develop the scale items, we developed eight items,
Lack of existing measures
informed by the debates in cognitive science around the nature
of rationality (see introduction). Half of these were positively
To our knowledge, no existing scale directly measures en-
framed, to reflect endorsement of the human tendency towards
dorsement of the human capacity for rationality. There are
rationality and reasonableness. Half were negatively framed,
scales which measure related concepts, or concepts which are
to reflect endorsement of a tendency towards irrationality and
plausible antecedents or consequences of belief in the reason-
unreasonableness. Items, their framing (positive negative)
ableness of our fellow citizens. In addition to the measures
and the aspect of rationality they were designed to capture are
of generalised trust discussed above, there are also measures
of conspiracy beliefs or mentality (see Swami et al., 2017
for a brief review) including those which explicitly try to
In all analyses negatively framed items were reverse coded,
distinguish conspiracism from rational skepticism (Stojanov,
so that numerically higher scores always reflect greater en-
Bering, & Halberstadt, 2020; Stojanov & Halberstadt, 2019).
dorsement of human rationality, across all items. An attention
These do not directly assess rationality, and again could be
viewed a more alike to measuring a consequence of rationality
or a lack of it (i.e. due to manipulation or credulity).
Other items
Some researchers have looked at what they call ‘cynical be-
Other items we report from the original survey are a measure
liefs about human nature’ (e.g. Stavrova & Ehlebracht, 2016),
of generalised trust (‘Generally speaking, would you say that
but these, again, do not touch on reason or rationality as a
most people can be trusted?’), support for democracy (‘How
cause of cynicism. Instead, scale items are similar to gener-
important is it for you to live in a country that is governed
alised trust distrust measures.
democratically?’) and a measure of percpetion of the Third
ff
Person E ect in the context of political advertising. This was
Other studies have looked at beliefs about human nature (e.g.
calculated as the average response to six linked items about
Furnham, Johnson, & Rawles, 1985). These have questions
/ the influence of election advertising on the typical voter, with
which focus on the role of biology, genetics and or heredity
wording of the form specifically “Thinking about the impact
on psychological traits. For example, asking if participants
of political parties’ election messages on the typical voter, to
believe personality is entirely caused by a person’s genetics.
what extent do you agree or disagree that it helps to: - Raise
Again, these scales do not directly assess beliefs about human
their awareness of political issues; Raise their awareness of
reason, although they do assess beliefs which may plausibly
ff political candidates or parties; Prompt them to share messages
a ect beliefs about human reason.
related to the election; Prompt them to vote register to vote;
Persuade them to change who you are planning to vote for;
Summary
Influence how they feel about political opponents’. We also
In summary, generalised belief in the rationality or reason-
report demographic questions (age, sex, education)
ableness of others is interesting in its own right, in relation
to longstanding debates in the cognitive sciences about the
Preregistration
definition of rationality and due to plausible relation to other
Data was collected as apart of a wider project (reported in
atittudes recognised of importance, such as generalised trust.
Zhu et al. (2023)) which was supported by formal preregis-
To our knowledge, no scale exists which directly measures
tration of hypothesis and data analyses practices (OSF pre-
this generalised belief. To develop, refine and explore such a
// / / =
registration link: https: osf.io y9kjg ?view_only 609cd4
scale is the purpose of the current study.
6aab534e4c866c16b3ef29c510). Preregistration supports
the accurate identification of confirmatory versus exploratory
Method
analyses. The nature of scale development is necessarily
Sample
exploratory, and the bulk of the preregistration concerns the
analyses in Zhu et al. (2023). We raise the preregistration here
The questions were asked as part of a larger survey experiment
to allow readers to confirm what was intended and expected
ff
(Zhu, Dommett, & Sta ord, 2023), in which participants were
before data was collected. Informally, the line of research
asked to view adverts which appeared on Facebook during
ff
reported here was set out in this essay Sta ord (2022).
the 2019 UK general election. Participants were recruited via
the online platform Prolific. In terms of age, gender, regional
Reproducibility
ffi
dispersion and political a liations participants reflected a
representative sample of UK adults. Data was collected on Data availability: The analysis code and anonymised re-
2022-08-20. Full details are give in Zhu et al. (2023). sponse data which supports all results are openly available
TOM STAFFORD1, JUNYAN ZHU2, & KATHARINE DOMMETT3
Scale item wording
Item Framing Aspect Wording
R1 negative general The typical person is often irrational
R2 negative corresponence People are often misinformed on important issues
R3 negative influence People are too easily manipulated
R4 negative insight People often act for reasons they don’t understand or endorse
R5 positive influence The average person can be persuaded to change their mind if given good reasons
R6 positive correspondence Most people hold accurate views about the world
A NA ATTN CHECK For this question please click the middle option, ‘neutral’, to show you are paying attention
R7 positive coherance An individual’s beliefs about the world are generally coherent
R8 positive coherance People’s behaviour is generally consistent with their beliefs
= =
Note. Response was on a 7 point Likert scale from (1 "Strongly Disagree", 7 "Strongly Agree"). Items 1,2,3 and 4 reverse coded
so that for all items higher scores represented stronger faith in reason.
// / /
https: github.com tomstafford faithinreason
Summary statistics for each item
This repository contains the files used to generate this re-
Item mean median min max SD
port, which is in the form of a ‘reproducible manuscript’,
R1 4.15 4.00 1.00 7.00 1.34
a document which generates the analysis it reports, and so
R2 2.54 3.00 1.00 7.00 1.11
combines sharing, documenting and reporting an analysis in
R3 2.55 3.00 1.00 7.00 1.07
a single set of project files (Allaire et al., 2020; Aust & Barth,
R4 2.88 3.00 1.00 7.00 1.14
2020). Details of the statistical software packages used can
R5 5.05 5.00 1.00 7.00 1.16
be found in the repository, and via these citations (Aust &
R6 3.54 4.00 1.00 7.00 1.23
Barth, 2020; Epskamp, Cramer, Waldorp, Schmittmann, &
R7 4.09 4.00 1.00 7.00 1.12
Borsboom, 2012; Golino & Christensen, 2022; Müller, 2020;
R8 4.62 5.00 1.00 7.00 1.19
Revelle, 2022; Rizopoulos, 2006; Van der Ark, 2007; van der
Laken, 2022; Wickham et al., 2019; Xie, 2022).
Note. Items 1,2,3 and 4 are reverse coded, so
lower scores imply stronger endorsement of the
Results
question framing (but lower faith in reason)
Initial characterisations
Our data consist of 1881 participants who completed our The result could be viewed as ambiguous, since although
online survey. 6 failed an attention check and were removed, there is one main factor there is also a second factor which
ff
leaving a final sample of 1875. Inital inspection suggested falls just below the traditional cut-o an eigenvalue of 1.
Mokken Analysis. To understand the dimensional structure
all items of the scale received the full range of responses from
of our items, we turn to Mokken Analysis, part of the item re-
“Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”.
sponse theory framework (Sijtsma & Ark, 2017; Van Schuur,
2011). Very loosely, Mokken analysis tests scale items against
Scale development: assessing dimensionality item selec-
a model which assumes that items are monotonically ordered
tion ff
on a single dimension, with some a ording higher responses
ff
and others a ording lower responses, with this item property
Cronbach’s alpha for all eight items is 0.72, which is often
consistent across participants, who also vary in their propen-
taken to reflect good-to-acceptable scale consistency. A leave-
sity to give high or low responses. Violations of this model
one-out procedure suggests that Cronbach’s Alpha decreases
indicate that items do fit on a single dimension and so should
for omission of all items except item 5, without which the
not be combined in the same scale.
Cronbach’s Alpha of the remaining 7 items is 0.78. The caveat
to this is that, properly, Cronbach’s Alpha should be measured
In Mokken Analysis, the items with low Loevinger’s coef-
after confirmation of unidimensionality.
ficient of homogeneity (Hi), a criterion for scalability, are
A conventional method for assessing dimensionality is factor dropped. A rule of thumb is that Hi must be higher than 0.3
FAITH IN REASON
scale
two dimensional structure is only just sub threshold, depend-
1 to 4, 6 and 7 should be kept, and 5 and 8 dropped. This ing on how you wish to position the statement ontologically).
ffi
yields a scale of six items, with an overall H coe cient of However, at this stage of scale development we are hesitant
0.410, indicating a medium-strong scalability. to explore subscales. For the analysis that follows we present
a Faith in Reason scale which incorporates all items. A re-
However, following Sijtsma and Ark (2017) it is possible
duced scale, comprising items 1,2,3,4,6 and 7 was used as a
ff
to explore sensitivity of this result to di erent thresholds.
sensitivity analysis with qualitatively similar results.
Accordingly, with a threshold of 0.35 Mokken scale analysis
supports the grouping of the items into two scales (One, items
1,2,3,4 and Two, items 6,7,8, with item 5 fitting in neither
scale). This is consonant with the factor analysis which iden-
tified a second factor of below threshold salience.
Exploratory graph analysis. Exploratory Graph Analysis
[EGA; Golino, Shi, et al. (2020);Golino, Christensen, and
Moulder (2020)] can also be applied to understand dimen-
sional structure in our scale items. EGA allows a visualisa-
tion of the network formed by scale items, with items which
correlate clustered together. EGA also identifies underlying
‘communities’ of items.
use of leave-one-out Cronbach’s alpha and the Mokken scale
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Strongly neutral Strongly
analysis, this suggests Item 5 is distant from the other items.
disagree agree
Faith in reason
The EGA identifies two communities, grouping Item 1 with
Items 6, 7 and 8 and Items 2,3,4 and 5. To check the sta-
bility of the community structure a bootstrap procedure was
performed, which suggested that 2 community structure was
overwhelmingly the most likely and stable solution (frequency
1).
The Faith in Reason scale
Taken together, these three approaches to dimensionality as-
sessment suggest two things. First, that item 5 aligns least
well with the other items. Second, that a 1 or 2 (but not
higher) dimension solution would be legitimate. The results
from all methods of dimensionality analysis (conventional
factor analysis, Mokken scale analysis and EGA) suggest that
a two-dimensional structure may exist (and or evidence for
tnuoc
(all items)
Averaging across all items gives us our Faith in Reason scale.
The average score across these eight items was 3.68, a sum-
mary statistic which suggests that the typical view of other
people is weighted to being slightly less, rather than slightly
Relation to other variables
We now turn to ask how scores on this scale are associated
association with level of formal education.
TOM STAFFORD1, JUNYAN ZHU2, & KATHARINE DOMMETT3
None GCSE A−level UG PG
Education Level
rorre
dradnats
−/+(
nosaeR
ni
htiaF
examinations typically taken at age 16 in the UK. A-levels
are typically taken at age 18. UG : Undergraduate, PG: Post-
graduate.
racy and Faith in Reason.
2 4 6
Need for democracy
nosaer
ni
htiaF
0 2 4 6
Generalised trust
Reason. Linear fit shown. Note 0.1 jitter applied to x-axis
values to allow visualisation of point density.
and Faith in Reason.
There is a convincing lack of association between the Third
ff
To test these associations in conjunction we first review the
sion, which confirms that although all faith in reason can be
predicted, to a modest amount, from these other variables (Rˆ2
0.19). Education level and Need for Democracy predict,
ffi
albeit with a small coe cient, Faith in Reason. Generalised
nosaer
ni
htiaF
Reason. Linear fit shown. Note 0.1 jitter applied to x-axis
values to allow visualisation of point density
Correlation Matrix. FIR : Faith in Reason. NfD : Need for
Democracy. Trust : Generalised Trust. TPP : Third Person
Perception.
FIR NfD Trust Education TPP
FIR 1.00 -0.01 0.40 -0.11 0.06
NfD 1.00 0.26 0.19 0.09
Trust 1.00 0.06 0.05
Education 1.00 0.02
TPP 1.00
ff
Trust has a modest association. The Third Person E ect has
no association.
Discussion
ff
This paper arose out of a note published online (Sta ord,
2022) which we cite for completeness and by way of allow-
ing it to be checked that the intention of the study has been
consistent between conceptualisation and publication.
Summary
After developing eight items and gathering responses from a
representative sample of UK adults, we assessed dimensional-
ity using conventional factor analysis, Mokken scale analysis
(from item response theory) and Experimental Graph Analy-
sis. Conventional factor analysis and Mokken scale analysis
suggested that a unidimensional solution was dominant. EGA,
and Mokken scale analysis with an altered threshold, sug-
gested that the items might be grouped into two dimensions
(“communities” in EGA terms). All analyses suggested that
item 5 was least well aligned with the other items. We opted
not to pursue subscale identification and combined all items
FAITH IN REASON
2 4 6
Faith in Reason
noitpecreP
nosreP
drihT
The lack of relation with Third Person Perception is notable,
suggesting that domain specific beliefs about susceptibility to
influence in a particular context do not strongly link to general
beliefs about human reasonableness.
scale development
Issues with scale development and validity testing are usefully
reviewed in Flake and Fried (2020); Clark and Watson (2019);
Boateng, Neilands, Frongillo, Melgar-Quiñonez, and Young
(2018). With the current report we do not pretend to have
completed scale development and testing. We merely report
the beginnings of the development of a scale for measuring
belief in the rationality or reasonableness of the typical citizen.
Wither misinformation
Person Perception score. Note 0.025 jitter applied to x-axis
The nature of human rationality is a perennial concern, both in
values to allow visualisation of point density
terms of what it means for our self-regard and societal projects
like democracy. Recent concerns over misinformation have
amplified these concerns, and often assumed a pessimistic
into a single scale, using a reduced item scale a sensitivity
view of human credulity and bias. Nonetheless, extensive evi-
analysis (the qualitative pattern of all result presented holds
dence supports measured optimism about human rationality
when using the scale incorporating a reduced item set).
- that the capacity for due skepticism, warranted trust, and
ff
Exploring the di erences, similarities, costs and benefits of
reason responsiveness is widespread (Mercier, 2020; Nyhan,
EGA for scale analysis is beyond the scope of this report
2020). Responses to our survey appear to reflect these com-
ff
(but see Panagiotidi, Zavlis, Jones, & Sta ord, 2024). We
peting currents, with some endorsing extremely pessimistic
ff
note that it a ords visual insight into the structure within
views of human reason, other endorsing extremely optimistic
dimensional groupings of items; showing, here, that item 5 is
views, and the majority represented in the middle. It remains
least associated with the network and item 1 - the item which
to be seen how future world events and the dissemination of
assesses generic endorsement of the rationality of others - is ff
empirical results from the cognitive sciences might a ect the
most central.
population levels of Faith in Reason.
Combining all items into a single metric resulted in the Faith