MONDAYS CHILD
Are Wednesday’s children full of woe? Children’s differences in
physical and psychological traits are independent of day of birth
Emily Wood1; Anna Brown1; Kirsty Wilding1; Florence A. R. Oxley1; Helen L.
Fisher2,3; Louise Arseneault2,3; Avshalom Caspi2,4,5,6; Terrie E. Moffitt2,4,5,6; Sophie
von Stumm1.
Author affiliations:
1. Department of Education, University of York, York, YO10 5DD, UK
2. King's College London, Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, London, SE5 8AF, UK
3. ESRC Centre for Society and Mental Health, King's College London, London,
WC2B 4LL, UK
4. Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC
27708, USA
5. Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham,
NC 27701, USA
6. PROMENTA, Department of Psychology, University of Oslo, 0373 Oslo,
Norway
Authors’ ORCiD:
MONDAYS CHILD
Correspondence to:
Sophie von Stumm; sophie.vonstumm@york.ac.uk
Data availability: All primary data and study materials are available upon request to
Acknowledgements:
We are grateful to the twins in the E-Risk Study as well as study mothers and
fathers, and the twins’ teachers for their participation. Our thanks to the E-Risk team
for their dedication, hard work, and insights. The Environmental Risk (E-Risk) Study
is funded by grants from the UK Medical Research Council (MRC) [G1002190;
MR/X010791/1]. Additional support was provided by the US National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development [HD077482] and the Jacobs Foundation. HLF
was supported by the UK Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) Centre for
Society and Mental Health at King’s College London [ES/S012567/1]. SvS was a
Jacobs Foundation CRISP Fellow (2022-2027) and a Paris Institute of Advanced
Study Fellow (2023-2024) during the writing of this manuscript. EW and AB were
supported by a Nuffield Foundation project grant [FR-22132]. For the purposes of
Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright license to any Author
MONDAYS CHILD
Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. The views expressed are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the ESRC, MRC, Jacobs
Foundation, Nuffield Foundation, or King’s College London.
Preregistration:
The hypotheses, methods, and the analysis plan were preregistered
and-outcomes.pdf) on 8th May 2024, prior to requesting data access which was
granted on 14th May 2024. There were minor deviations from the preregistration (for
details see the Supplementary Material).
MONDAYS CHILD
Abstract
Nursery rhymes are rich in alliteration and vocabulary, and their benefits for
children’s language and literacy have been widely studied. Less is known about the
influence that nursery rhymes’ messages may have on children’s development.
Here, we focused on ‘Monday’s Child’, a popular nursery rhyme which alleges that
the day of the week of children’s birth forecasts their differences in physical and
psychological traits. Data came from E-Risk, a UK-population representative,
longitudinal cohort study of 1,116 families, whose same-sex twin children were
assessed at ages 5 through to 18 years (with 93% retention). In our preregistered
analyses, being born on Monday through Saturday did not predict children’s physical
and psychological traits as implied by the ‘Monday’s Child’ rhyme (β = -.04 to .03;
95%CI = -0.10 to 0.09; p = .195 to .754). Being born on Sunday was also not
associated with children’s traits across measures (β = -.00; 95%CI = -0.05 to 0.05; p
= .945). Results were unchanged after covariate adjustment (i.e., children’s sex,
birthweight, and socioeconomic status). Our findings suggest that children’s
differences in physical and psychological traits are independent of the day of the
week of their birth, refuting the messages from ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme.
Word count: 200
Key words: Individual differences; child development; longitudinal research.
MONDAYS CHILD
Introduction
“Monday’s child is fair of face,
Tuesday’s child is full of grace,
Wednesday’s child is full of woe,
Thursday’s child has far to go,
Friday’s child is loving and giving,
Saturday’s child works hard for his living,
And the child that is born on Sunday
Is fair and wise and good and gay.”
Engaging in nursery rhymes may aid children’s language development, literacy skills,
and cognitive abilities (Bryant et al., 1989; Dunst et al., 2011; Starr, Oginni, et al.,
2024), because nursery rhymes are rich in alliteration, vocabulary, onomatopoeia,
and imaginative imagery (Bryant et al., 1989; Kenney, 2005). However, whether the
messages that nursery rhymes convey also affect children’s development has not
been previously studied. Messages that are transmitted via other media, such as
television, film, books, and merchandise, have been shown to influence children’s
attitudes and behaviours (e.g., Coyne et al., 2016, 2021; Kirkorian et al., 2008). For
example, identifying with Disney princesses and playing with Disney princess toys
during the preschool years is – somewhat counterintuitively – associated with
developing positive body images and egalitarian attitudes in early adolescence
(Coyne et al., 2021). Here, we addressed whether messages from nursery rhymes
may also predict children’s development. We focused on ‘Monday’s Child’, a popular
British nursery rhyme which implies that the day of the week on which a child is born
forecasts their physical and psychological traits.
MONDAYS CHILD
‘Monday’s Child’ in popular culture
First recorded in 1833 (Bray, 1838), the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme continues to
be known by British people of all ages, and its messages are omnipresent in popular
culture. For example, the high-profile 2022 Netflix series ‘Wednesday’ introduced its
protagonist Wednesday Addams, a morbid and emotionally reserved adolescent with
a dark, sarcastic personality, in its first episode titled ‘Wednesday’s child is full of
woe’. The show crossed one billion viewing hours within 28 days of its release and
debuted at number one on Netflix in 83 countries (Oganesyan, 2022). But
Wednesday Addams’ imprint on popular culture predates Netflix: The cartoonist
Charles Addams created Wednesday, named after the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery
rhyme, as a member of the fictional Addams family, who delight in the macabre and
ignore social convention (Miserocchi, 2010). Other examples of the perpetuation of
‘Monday’s Child’ in popular culture include Will Young’s 2004 album ‘Friday’s Child’,
whose single of the same title featured the lyrics: “Monday's got a beautiful baby/
And Wednesday's child can never win/ Little Saturday will work till he's crazy/ But
Friday's child was born to give”. The album sold over 1.8 million copies worldwide
and went five times platinum in the United Kingdom (Kutner, 2022). In 1999, David
Bowie reflected on his life, loves, and career in the song ‘Thursday’s Child’ –
although Bowie himself was born on a Wednesday, he identified with the long and
onerous journey to happiness and success that is predicted for Thursday’s children
(Draper, 2024). The enduring presence of the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme in
popular culture suggests that children and parents across generations have been
exposed to the rhyme and thus, may have been influenced by its messages.
MONDAYS CHILD
How the messages of ‘Mondays Child’ may influence children’s physical and
psychological traits
There are several ways in which messages of the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme
may influence children. One is known as confirmation bias, where people seek
evidence which confirms their existing beliefs (Rabin & Schrag, 1999; Remmerswaal
et al., 2014). Children who believe the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme could be true
may find evidence which confirms this. For example, children born on Wednesdays
may attribute their feelings of melancholy, worry, or misfortune, which all children
experience on occasion, to their day of birth. As a result, they may perceive
themselves to experience these emotions more often or intensely than do children
born on a different day.
Another way in which ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme may influence children is the
self-fulfilling prophecy, where people’s expectations about their situation cause them
to become true (Madon et al., 2011). If children believe themselves to possess the
trait assigned to them by ‘Monday’s Child’, they may develop that trait as a result.
For example, children born on Mondays may think of themselves as facially more
attractive than children born on other days. Thus, they may develop greater
confidence and self-esteem (Diener et al., 1995), which in turn could make them
appear more good-looking to others (Zeigler-Hill & Myers, 2011).
A third pathway of influence is that parents and other caregivers who internalised the
messages that are conveyed in ‘Monday’s Child’ raise their children – perhaps
inadvertently – according to the rhyme’s predictions (cf. Pinquart & Ebeling, 2020).
For example, parents of Tuesday-born children may enrol their children in a ballet
MONDAYS CHILD
class as they foresee them being ‘full of grace’, or invest more in their Thursday-born
children’s education as they expect them to have ‘far to go’. These emphases in
parenting may shape children’s development of physical and psychological traits
according to the predictions of the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme.
Day of birth as a predictor of psychological and behavioural differences
Previous studies have reported that beliefs about the significance of day or time of
birth can manifest in children’s psychological and behavioural differences. For
example, the Asante people, who are native to modern-day Ghana, believe that boys
born on Mondays are quiet and peaceful in character, whilst boys born on
Wednesdays are thought to be quick-tempered and aggressive (no significance is
attributed to girls’ day of birth; Jahoda, 1954). Analyses of the region’s Juvenile
Court records showed that delinquent boys were less often born on Mondays than
on other days of the week. Furthermore, boys born on Wednesdays were more often
charged with committing “offences against the person”, such as assault or fighting,
compared with boys born on any other day (Jahoda, 1954). These findings imply that
the Asante people’s beliefs about the effect of children’s day of birth on their
characteristics can indeed translate into observable differences in children’s
behaviours.
Another study tested if children born in the Year of the Dragon according to the
Chinese zodiac calendar (e.g., 2012, 2024, 2036) are destined for greatness and
good fortune as compared to children born in years of other, less auspicious zodiac
signs (Mocan & Yu, 2020). In nationally representative survey data from China (N ~
3,000 to 13,000), children born in the Year of the Dragon were more likely to achieve
MONDAYS CHILD
higher scores in middle school and university entrance exams and to earn Bachelor
degrees than children born in other years (Mocan & Yu, 2020). This association
could be attributed to differential parenting, because Chinese parents invest more in
the education of children who are born in ‘lucky’ years, such as the Dragon year,
compared to those born in ‘unlucky’ years (Tan et al., 2024). Together, these
findings highlight how beliefs in prophecies about development based on birth days
or times can influence children in ways that ultimately make them fulfil the prophecy.
Other research has rejected the hypothesis that birth dates are associated with
developmental differences or people’s outcomes. For example, data from the UK
Labor Force Survey found no link between being born on Friday 13th, a date that is
widely believed to bring bad luck and misfortune (Rauch, 2021), and the likelihood of
experiencing unemployment, earning low wages, or being unmarried than being born
on other dates (Fidrmuc & Tena, 2014). Similarly, the rate of hospital admissions on
Friday 13th, on days with a full moon (associated in folklore with insomnia and
insanity, i.e., lunacy), or on Friday 13th with a full moon did not differ from that on
other days in data from Switzerland (Exadaktylos et al., 2001). Finally, the mortality
of patients suffering acute coronary syndrome (e.g., a heart attack) was no higher on
Friday 13th than on other days according to a South Wales hospital registry (Protty
et al., 2016). These findings question whether prevalent beliefs about dates can
exert meaningful influence on behaviour.
The current study
representative study of families who had twin children born in 1994 to 1995 in
MONDAYS CHILD
England and Wales, to test whether day of the week of birth relates to physical and
psychological traits, as predicted by the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme. E-Risk is a
longitudinal cohort study that assessed a wide range of physical and psychological
traits when the study children were 5, 7, 10, 12, and 18 years old. From the E-Risk
data dictionary, we identified measures that captured the physical and psychological
traits predicted by the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme. For example, we equated
“fair of face” with being perceived as more attractive or good-looking, which we
inferred from independent observer ratings based on video recordings or in-person
interactions at ages 5, 10, 12, and 18 years. For all physical and psychological traits
predicted by the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme, repeated multi-measure, multi-
informant assessments were available from E-Risk.
The exact wording and interpretations of the meaning of ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery
rhyme’s predictions varied across time and contexts (Fox, 2000; Herbst, 2023). For
example, “Tuesday’s child is full of grace” could be interpreted in the way that
children born on Tuesdays are gracious in personality, meaning courteous, kind, and
pleasant. Yet, the line could also be understood to refer to grace in physical mobility,
such as being nimble and light on one’s feet. Similarly, we might infer from
“Thursday’s child has far to go” that children born on Thursdays are disadvantaged
in life, so they have ‘further’ to go and overcome more obstacles than others to
achieve success. Alternatively, and perhaps more commonly, the line ‘has far to go’
is associated with having good prospects for achieving success, where going
‘further’ implies outperforming others. Where possible, we accommodated these
different interpretations of the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme in our analyses. For
example, we included both measures of gracious personality and of physical mobility
MONDAYS CHILD
to assess ‘full of grace’ for our analyses. That said, we acknowledge that our study
included only some, but not all the possible interpretations of the ‘Monday’s Child’
nursery rhyme.
Materials and methods
Sample
The Environmental Risk Longitudinal Twin Study (E-Risk) is a longitudinal cohort
study that was constructed in 1999-2000, when 1,116 families (90% Caucasian) from
England and Wales with same-sex 5-year-old twins (n=2,232, born in 1994-95)
participated in a home-visit assessment (Moffitt & E-Risk Study Team, 2002). E-Risk
families are representative of other UK families in the 1990s (Odgers et al., 2012).
The sample is representative of all socioeconomic conditions in Britain, with E-Risk
families’ distribution on ACORN and the UK Index of Multiple Deprivation (i.e.,
neighbourhood-level socioeconomic indexes) closely matching those of households
nationwide (Odgers et al., 2012). The total sample comprised 56% monozygotic
(MZ=621) and 44% dizygotic (DZ=495) twin pairs, with sex evenly distributed within
zygosity (49% male). Follow-up home visits were conducted when twins were aged 7
(98% retention rate), 10 (96%), 12 (96%), and 18 years (93%). Home visits at ages
5, 7, 10, and 12 years-old included assessments of the twins as well as of their
mothers or other primary caregivers. With parental permission, questionnaires were
also posted to the twin’s teachers, with 94% being returned at age 5, 91% at age 7,
86% at age 10, and 80% at age 12. At age 18, each twin of a pair was assessed by a
different interviewer. The Joint South London and Maudsley and the Institute of
Psychiatry Research Ethics Committee approved each phase of the E-Risk study
MONDAYS CHILD
(NRES 1997/122). Parents gave informed consent and twins gave assent before age
18 and consent at age 18.
Measures
Day of birth
Day of birth was recorded from Monday through Sunday, based on the twin’s date of
birth which was reported by mothers when their twin children were 18 months old.
Fair of face
We equated “fair of face” with being perceived as more attractive or good-looking. At
age 5 years, three independent coders, who did not conduct the home interviews for
directly assessing the twins, rated twins’ attractiveness using video recordings on a
7-point Likert scale (1 = extremely unattractive, 2 = very unattractive, 3 =
unattractive, 4 = somewhat attractive, 5 = attractive, 6 = very attractive, 7 =
extremely attractive). Inter-rater reliability was 0.61 and the three raters’ scores were
averaged to produce one combined score. At ages 10 and 12 years, twins’
attractiveness was rated by a single rater after an in-person interaction, using the
same 7-point Likert scale as before. At age 18, an interviewer rated an ‘unattractive’
item after an in-person interaction with each twin, using a 3-point Likert scale (0 = no,
1 = a little/somewhat, 2 = yes), which we reverse-coded.
Grace
We interpreted “full of grace” in terms of physical competences, fitness, and motor
abilities, which are indexed by Physical Education (PE) grades in UK schools
(National Curriculum in England, n.d.). Teachers reported on twins’ PE performance
MONDAYS CHILD
using a 5-point Likert scale (1 = far below classmates, 2 = somewhat below, 3 =
average, 4 = somewhat above, 5 = far above) at ages 7, 10, and 12 years. In
the term ‘full of grace,’ using interviewers’ ratings of how ‘well-poised, gracious, and
confident’ each twin was at age 18 years on a 3-point Likert scale (0 = no, 1 = a
little/somewhat, 2 = yes).
Woe
We assessed “full of woe” in terms of emotionality, including the tendency to be
withdrawn, anxious, and depressed. Emotionality was assessed when the twins were
aged 5, 7, 10 and 12 using the Child Behaviour Checklist in interviews with mothers
and the Teacher Report Form by post for teachers (Achenbach, 1991a, 1991b). The
emotionality scale is the sum of items on the withdrawn and anxious/depressed
subscales. The internal consistencies of mothers’ and teachers’ reports were .88 and
.93, respectively. We summed and standardised mothers’ and teachers’ ratings to
create cross-informant emotionality scores.
Far to go
Having “far to go” could be interpreted as having a long and successful future ahead
or having a long way to go to success. We measured this in terms of educational
achievement, because children who do well in school tend to have more favourable
life outcomes (Starr, Haider, et al., 2024). In E-Risk, twins reported their educational
qualifications at age 18 years on a 4-point scale from ‘no qualification’ to ‘GCSE
grades D-G’ to ‘GCSE grades A*-C’ to ‘A-level’.
MONDAYS CHILD
Loving and giving
We equated “loving and giving” with displaying prosocial behaviours. Two items from
the Revised Rutter Parent Scale for School-Age Children (Sclare, 1997) – ‘tries to
stop quarrels or fights’ and ‘kind to animals’ – were rated on a 3-point scale (0 = not
true, 1 = somewhat or sometimes true, 2 = very true or often true) by mothers when
twins were aged 5, 7, 10, and 12 years.
Works hard for a living
We likened “works hard for a living” to twins’ motivation to work hard in school, as
rated by teachers using the Achenbach Teacher Report Form (TRF; Achenbach,
1991b) and the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ; Goodman, 1997). At
ages 5 and 7, the item ‘compared to typical pupils of the same age how hard is
she/he working?’ was rated on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = much less, 2 = somewhat
less, 3 = slightly less, 4 = about average, 5 = slightly more, 6 = somewhat more, 7 =
much more). At ages 10 and 12, three items including ‘how often do you act to curb
disruptive behaviour?’, ‘how often do you give child extra encouragement to take
part?’, and ‘how often do you act to keep child’s attention in class?’ were rated on a
7-point Likert scale (as above) and reverse scored for this analysis. At age 18, the
co-twin or mother rated how well the statement being a ‘hard worker’ fit the twin (0 =
no doesn’t apply, 1 = yes applies somewhat, or 2 = yes certainly applies).
Fair and wise and good and gay
We interpreted “fair and wise and good and gay” as excelling on all measures of
physical and psychological traits described above, including being attractive,
physically fit, experiencing fewer internalising emotions, achieving higher educational
MONDAYS CHILD
qualifications, demonstrating more prosocial behaviours, and working harder in
school.
Sex and birthweight
Mothers completed a milestone questionnaire at first contact when the twins were 18
months old. Twin’s sex was recorded as binary (male or female). Twins’ birthweight,
recalled by mothers, was recorded in grams rather than as dichotomous
classification of low birthweight (LBW) versus normal birthweight (NBW), because
the conventional cut-off for NBW (> 2,500 grams) is based on singleton rather than
twin births, who on average have lower gestational ages and birthweights. In E-Risk,
51% of twins weighed less than 2,500 grams at birth and mean gestational age was
36 weeks (SD = 3, range 24–43 weeks).
Socioeconomic status
Family socio-economic status (SES) was indexed by a standardised composite of
parental income (i.e., total household income), education (i.e., highest parent
qualification), and occupation (i.e., highest parent occupation) when the twins were 5
years old. The three SES indicators were highly correlated (r’s ranged from 0.57 to
0.67, p-values <.05) and loaded significantly onto one latent factor (factor loadings =
0.80, 0.70, and 0.83 for income, education, and occupation, respectively). The
population-wide distribution of this latent factor was then divided into tertiles (1 = low
SES, 2 = mid SES, 3 = high SES).
Statistical analysis
MONDAYS CHILD
Our analyses were preregistered
and-outcomes.pdf). Individual items for our measures were z-transformed and
reverse-coded where appropriate, before averaging them into composites. We
The continuous covariate, birthweight, was also z-transformed prior to analysis.
Binary variables were created to reflect being born on a specific day of the week
(e.g., Monday), coded as 1, versus being born on any other day of the week, coded
as 0.
We fitted linear regression models to test whether day of the week of birth was
associated with children’s physical and psychological traits according to the
‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme, using the lavaan package in R (Rosseel, 2012).
Because data were assumed to be missing at random (and participation rates were
so high that E-Risk has little missing data), Full Information Maximum Likelihood
(FIML) estimation was applied. Standard errors were clustered at the family level to
account for the non-independence of observations (i.e., two twins per family).
In our linear regression models, we first entered the day of the week of birth as
predictor of the respective child outcome variable (e.g., the attractiveness composite
was predicted by being born on Mondays versus any other day of the week). We
then added our covariates including children’s sex, birthweight, and SES. We
evaluated beta weights with 95% Confidence Intervals (CI), p-values, and model R2
to interpret the results. Six models were built for births occurring on Mondays
through Saturdays, respectively. For births on Sundays, we first fitted six linear
MONDAYS CHILD
models to test the binary predictor of being born on Sunday versus on another day of
the week for each outcome. In additional (not preregistered) analyses, we tested if
children born on Sundays had cumulatively more favourable physical and
psychological traits: We predicted composite scores across all measures, after
reverse-coding the emotionality composite, from the binary variable of being born on
a Sunday versus on any other day of the week.
Results
frequency of twins’ birth ranged from N = 105 on Sundays to N = 202 on Fridays
with previous studies that showed higher birth rates on Fridays, presumably because
inductions are more common before than during the weekend (Littleboy, 2019). Our
covariates, including children’s sex, birthweight, and SES, did not vary significantly
Is day of the week of birth associated with children’s differences in physical
and psychological traits?
Day of the week of birth was not associated with any of the measures of children’s
physical and psychological traits as forecast by the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme
95%CI = -0.10 to 0.09, p = .195 to .754, R2 = .00 for all models; full model results are
MONDAYS CHILD
Child’ nursery rhyme, across days of the week of birth.
Note: Scores are plotted for one twin randomly selected from each pair. All plots
show z-scores (mean = 0, SD = 1).
Adding the covariates of children’s sex, birthweight, and SES improved model fit in
continued to not be associated with children’s differences in physical and
psychological traits.
Do Sunday’s children experience more favourable outcomes across domains
than children born on other days?
Being born on a Sunday, compared to being born on another day of the week did not
predict children’s physical and psychological traits (β= -.02 to .03, 95%CI=-0.08 to
MONDAYS CHILD
covariates of children’s sex, birthweight, and SES improved models’ fit but being
born on a Sunday remained a non-significant predictor (R2 ranged from .02 to .20,
In addition, being born on a Sunday as compared to being born on another day of
the week did not predict composite scores across all measures (β=-.00, 95%CI=-
cumulative effects across domains. Including the covariates of children’s sex,
birthweight, and SES improved the model’s fit, but being born on a Sunday remained
The difference in prediction effect sizes between day of birth and the covariates of
children’s sex, birthweight, and SES across children’s physical and psychological
MONDAYS CHILD
birth according to the ‘Monday’s Child’ rhyme.
Note: The R2 for ‘Fair and wise and good and gay’ was taken from the model for
composite scores across all measures of children’s physical and psychological traits.
SES = socioeconomic status.
MONDAYS CHILD
Discussion
We found no evidence for the predictive validity of children’s day of the week of birth
for their physical and psychological traits between the ages of 5 and 18 years. The
results were consistent across all weekdays and Sunday, which, despite being
painted as the most auspicious day, was not associated with more favourable child
outcomes in any domain. Overall, our findings suggest that the messages conveyed
by the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme do not manifest in observable differences in
children’s traits and behaviours.
Our study offers three distinct contributions to the literature. First, we add to the body
of empirical studies that tested the benefits of engaging in nursery rhymes for
children’s language, literacy, and cognition (e.g., Bryant et al., 1989; Dunst et al.,
2011; Starr, Oginni, et al., 2024). Specifically, we addressed here whether the
messages conveyed in nursery rhymes influenced children’s development. Our
findings suggest that this is not the case, at least for the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery
rhyme. We therefore conclude that the messages of nursery rhymes are unlikely to
have perversive, long-term influences on children. We hasten to add that this
conclusion does not rule out that other aspects of nursery rhymes (e.g., alliteration,
imaginative imagery) may affect children’s development (e.g., language; Bryant et
al., 1989).
Second, our research adds to the literature on the manifestation of prophecies about
the day or time of birth. The results from our analyses of a British family cohort study
diverge from earlier findings that were reported in Chinese and Ghanaian samples.
In these samples, prophecies about the day or time of birth were found to be
MONDAYS CHILD
significant predictors of children’s developmental differences (Jahoda, 1954; Mocan
& Yu, 2020). The discrepancy between the current and previous findings may be due
to differences in the cultural valence countries assign to the day or time of birth. For
example, in Chinese populations, the zodiac year of birth carries such significance
that birth rates increase during the most auspicious zodiac year, the Dragon year,
when compared to other years (Goodkind, 1991; Nye & Xue, 2014). While the
‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme is popular in British culture, it does not hold cultural
valence to the same degree as zodiac years do in Chinese culture. Thus, in the
British sample that we analysed here, it was less likely for us to observe significant
associations between day of the week of birth and physical and psychological traits.
Third, we found that our covariates of sex, birthweight, and socioeconomic status
(SES) explained more variance in children’s physical and psychological traits than
their day of the week of birth. A vast body of previous research has shown that sex,
birthweight, and SES are robust predictors of children’s social, cognitive, and
educational outcomes (e.g., Bradley & Corwyn, 2002; Buchmann et al., 2008;
Jefferis et al., 2002), which our findings confirmed. In contrast, day of birth would
likely only have had smaller, indirect effects on development, if any at all. We
speculated that such effects may be driven by confirmation bias, self-fulfilling
prophecies, or social influences related to the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme.
Overall, we conclude that research on the covariate effects of sex, birthweight, and
SES likely benefits our understanding of children’s developmental differences to a
greater extent than studies of children’s day of the week of birth.
Strengths and limitations
MONDAYS CHILD
A key strength of this study lies in its longitudinal data from a UK population-
representative family cohort study of children for whom repeated multi-measure,
multi-informant assessments of physical and psychological traits were available
across childhood and adolescence. However, the study also had some limitations.
First, no data were available on the extent to which the families were familiar with,
engaged in, or adhered to the ‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme. Thus, we could not
ascertain whether our findings were confounded by family-level differences in
children’s and parents’ endorsement of the verses of the ‘Monday’s Child’ rhyme.
Familiarity and engagement were key to our rationale of why the ‘Monday’s Child’
nursery rhyme may predict children’s differences in physical and psychological traits.
We acknowledge that our research would have benefited from measures that directly
assessed these constructs. That said, the omnipresence of the ‘Monday’s Child’
nursery rhyme in popular culture makes it likely that most families have been
exposed to the rhyme in some capacity. Also, family-level engagement with the
nursery rhyme may have varied in our sample, but exposure to the rhyme could have
also occurred through other pathways, including interactions with peers, teachers,
and media.
Second, the study sample comprised twins, which may limit our study for two
reasons. For one, twins differ from singleton births in prevalence (Smith et al., 2014),
parenting demands (Olivennes et al., 2005), and early childhood developmental
trajectories (Pulkkinen et al., 2003; Voracek & Haubner, 2008). Consequently, twins’
developmental experiences may differ from those of singletons, which could impair
the generalisability of our present findings to singleton populations. For the other,
MONDAYS CHILD
twin births are often induced or scheduled for a caesarean delivery before the twins’
due date (Hartley et al., 2001). Some might argue that, in these cases, twins are not
being born on their intended birthday that would predict their physical and
psychological traits. This limitation would affect the validity of our findings, if there
was an effect of the day of week of birth on children’s differences that was not
transmitted via confirmation bias, self-fulling prophecies, or socialisation processes,
as we speculated. Such effects are implied by astrology, for instance, where the
position of the sun, moon, and planets at the time of birth are said to predict later
personality traits (Thagard, 1978), an association that has been deemed
pseudoscientific and unsubstantiated (Clarke et al., 1996; Hartmann et al., 2006;
Thagard, 1978).
Third, it may be that the impact of ‘Monday’s Child’ on children varies as a function of
changes in the nursery rhyme’s popularity over time. Our null findings pertain to a
cohort of children born in the mid-90s (i.e., Millennials; Powell et al., 2017). However,
associations between day of the birth and children’s physical and psychological traits
may be evident in other generations. For example, the public’s exposure to the
‘Monday’s Child’ nursery rhyme has likely increased since the release of the high-
profile 2022 Netflix series ‘Wednesday’. Its messages may therefore shape the
socialisation experiences and development of the current Generation Alpha (born
between 2013 and 2025) to a greater extent than of previous generations (e.g.,
Millennials and Generation Z).
MONDAYS CHILD
Conclusion
Wednesday’s child is no more woeful than Monday’s child is fair. Although children
vary greatly in their physical and psychological traits, their developmental differences
are unlikely to be affected by the day of the week on which they were born.
MONDAYS CHILD