Deepening Knowledge, Preserving Opinion: The Differential Impact of Gamification within a
Depolarization Intervention
Charlotte Schenk1, 2+, Fritz Becker3, Nadia Said1*+
1Department of Psychology, University of Tübingen; Schleichstr. 4, 72076 Tübingen, Germany,
2University Hospital Frankfurt, Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and
Psychotherapy, Heinrich-Hoffmann-Straße 10, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
3Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien; Schleichstraße 6, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
*corresponding author, e-mail address nadia.said@uni-tuebingen.de
+These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Concerning contentious topics, researchers have identified a rise in belief polarization linked to
significant negative societal consequences, emphasizing the necessity for effective interventions.
Despite the potential of methods like intergroup contact or fact-checking websites, a critical challenge
persists—individuals must often actively seek out and engage with these interventions. An innovative
approach to address this challenge is gamification. Therefore, this study explores whether integrating
gamification into a depolarization intervention can boost engagement and, consequently, enhance
effectiveness. To this end, an adapted online version of the Consensus Conference method was
utilized, presenting well-balanced arguments for and against the contentious issue of implementing a
general speed limit on German Highways. A total of N = 269 participants (age: M = 44.86; SD =
14.37, n = 135 female) were assigned to one of three conditions: a text-based intervention (reading
balanced arguments on the contentious topic), a gamified intervention (engaging with these balanced
arguments in a gaming context), or a control condition (reading arguments on an unrelated topic). The
study results did not reveal a general effect of the traditional text-based intervention nor an enhanced
impact of the gamified intervention on depolarizing opinions. However, the gamified intervention led
to an increased number of read arguments and improved knowledge about the topic, highlighting the
independence of knowledge and opinions. Furthermore, political orientation influenced the
depolarization effect, with right-leaning individuals demonstrating a more pronounced depolarization
of their opinions. In conclusion, in the presence of pre-existing polarization and a politically much-
discussed topic, the effect of imparting knowledge as a depolarization strategy is limited, suggesting
the need for alternative approaches.
Keywords: belief polarization, intervention, gamification, knowledge, consensus conference
Introduction
Researchers have observed an increasing trend of belief polarization, particularly in the context
of contentious topics, such as abortion, anthropogenic climate change, or vaccination (Hout et al.,
2022; Dunlap et al., 2016; Schmidt et al., 2018). This growing divergence in beliefs is linked to
significant adverse consequences for society, including intensified debates, increased hostility toward
those with differing perspectives, right up to the potential destabilization of democratic institutions
(Finkel et al., 2020; Jost et al., 2022). This concerning trend of belief polarization and its negative
consequences highlights the necessity of the development of effective interventions.
While a wide variety of interventions already exist (e.g., emotional reappraisal of polarizing
issues, Gur et al., 2021; intergroup contact, Grönlund et al., 2015) one critical challenge is that
individuals must often actively seek out and engage with these interventions (e.g., websites that
provide fact-checked information, Amazeen et al., 2018). Furthermore, many interventions require
people to come together and discuss a topic (e.g., Consensus Conferences, Fishkin et al., 2021;
intergroup contact, Grönlund et al., 2015). While those in-person interventions do have multiple
advantages, there is, aside from the already mentioned issue that people need to actively engage with
those interventions, another critical issue namely scalability. That is, because they are costly and time-
consuming, they are difficult to roll out at scale, therefore the number of people that can be reached
are limited. One approach to address this issue is to create an online version of the intervention (e.g.,
Bad News online game, N = 15,000 participants, Roozenbeek & van der Linden, 2019). As there are
different types of polarization (affective polarization, issue-based belief polarization) and also
different causes (selective exposure, negative emotions, exaggerated portrayals of polarization, fake
news) interventions are often tailored to address one of those causes. Depending on the type of
intervention and the polarization cause it addresses, adapting the intervention to be used as an online
tool might not be feasible. We thus focus in our research on issue-based belief polarization regarding
the topic of a general speed limit on German Highways. We choose this topic, as opinions on whether
or not to implement such a speed limit are highly divided in Germany. An opinion poll conducted by
the Allgemeiner Deutscher Automobil-Club (abbr. ADAC; literal translation: ”General German
Automobile Club”) in 2022 (Standpunkt ADAC e.V., 2023) showed that 44% of respondents rejected
a speed limit, 52% were in favor of a speed limit and only 4% of respondents had a neutral position
regarding the issue.
Furthermore, the type of interventions we focus on are those that are designed to reduce
polarization that is most likely based on a lack of (correct) information about the topic (selective
exposure, Stroud, 2010; fake news, Au et al., 2021). This allows us to implement a simple and
straightforward intervention which aims at providing correct information, or in our case, balanced
arguments in favor and against a speed limit.
Moreover, as online interventions have been shown to be less effective (Caluwaerts et al.,
2023) than their in-person counterparts, we want to make use of gamification elements as this method
can increase engagement and potentially enhance effectiveness (Nah et al., 2014).
The aim of the present study is thus twofold: first, we want to investigate whether presenting
balanced arguments reduces issue-based belief polarization. Second, we want to investigate whether
integrating gamification elements (e.g. badges, avatars, etc.) into a depolarization intervention, more
specifically, into an adapted online version of the consensus conference approach, can boost
engagement and, consequently, enhance the effectiveness of the intervention.
Definition and Operationalization of Belief Polarization
DiMaggio et al. (1996) provided one of the earliest definitions of issue-based belief
polarization, describing it as the extent of disagreement on a particular topic within a population. A
population is considered maximally polarized when opinions cluster at the extreme ends of a
spectrum, with no representation of moderate views. This concept is distinct from how opinions are
expressed, focusing solely on their distribution of frequency. Related to issue-based belief
polarization is affective polarization, characterized by positive feelings toward one's in-group and
negative feelings toward the out-group, which intensify as issue-based belief polarization increases
(Iyengar et al., 2012). Political polarization, another related concept, refers to the divergence of
opinions along political lines, with significant evidence of increasing polarization between Democrats
and Republicans in the U.S. (Gentzkow, 2016). Furthermore, it is important to distinguish between
polarization as a state, measured at a single point in time, and as a process, assessed over time
(Bramson et al., 2017). This study investigates issue-based belief polarization, defined by DiMaggio
et al. (1996) as the divergence of opinions toward extremes and depolarization as the convergence
toward the center. Opinions on a specific topic are measured as a process on a unidimensional
continuum at two time points, before and after the intervention.
To operationalize issue-based belief polarization one common approach is to use measures of
dispersion. For example, Bramson et al. (2017) proposes that belief polarization could be assessed by
the spread (or range) between the most extreme opinions on a one-dimensional opinion continuum.
This approach, however, does not take into account whether some extreme values might be outliers
and how opinions are distributed at the end poles of the continuum. Two other approaches to quantify
belief polarization were proposed by DiMaggio et al. (1996), namely by using the dispersion (or
rather the variation) or the modality of the belief distribution. The first approach (dispersion) has been
criticized by Bramson et al. (2017) and Van der Eijk (2001) regarding the interpretability of the
measurement as information about the modality as well as the skewness of the distribution is missing.
For example, a uniform distribution can have the same variance as a bimodal distribution with a
smaller range. Regarding the second approach (modality of the distribution) a bimodal distribution
would indicate polarization, which can be quantified by the kurtosis of the distribution. However,
using the kurtosis as measurement for polarization has the issue that it does not account for the
distance between the two distributions and thus cannot account for an increase in polarization
(Koudenburg et al., 2021).
Buder et al. (2022) propose a method to quantify individual polarization through a polarization
value, which captures changes in opinions over time. This is calculated by taking the difference
between pre- and post-measurement opinions and adjusting it by the direction of the change relative to
a neutral scale midpoint (e.g., 3.5 on a 7-point Likert scale).
sign [ pre − 3.5 ] x ( post − pre )
A negative polarization value indicates depolarization (movement towards the neutral
midpoint), while a positive value indicates polarization (movement away from the midpoint). If no
change in opinion occurs, the polarization value is zero.
As the method of Buder et al. (2022) allows us to assess individual changes of beliefs we decided to
use an adapted version for our study. More specifically, the method is adapted to include neutral pre-
measurement opinions, where any deviation at the post-measurement is considered polarization,
calculated as the absolute difference between pre- and post-opinions.
if pre=3.5 : ( post − pre)
∨ ∨
Causes and Consequences of Belief Polarization
Opinion polarization is often attributed to selective exposure, where individuals systematically
seek out information that aligns with their pre-existing beliefs while avoiding contradictory
information (Stroud, 2010; Iyengar & Hahn, 2009). While research attributes this behavior as a means
to reduce cognitive dissonance, an uncomfortable state caused by conflicting information (Festinger,
1957), others argue that, given that beliefs are held with high confidence, people might even actively
seek out contradicting information as they are confident in their ability to refute them (Stroud, 2010).
Echo chambers and filter bubbles can exacerbate people’s one-sided information consumption,
as individuals are exposed only to like-minded views and algorithmically filtered content that
reinforces their beliefs, potentially making them more extreme (Bakshy et al., 2015; Tufekci, 2018).
Additionally, fake news can exacerbate societal polarization by intentionally spreading false
information that mimics legitimate news, thereby amplifying existing divisions and tensions (Au et
al., 2021; Roozenbeek & Van der Linden, 2019). Conversely, polarization also facilitates the spread
of fake news, creating a mutually reinforcing cycle between the two phenomena (Osmundsen et al.,
2021).
Simplification of complex issues into binary categories can further intensify polarization by
fostering divisive, black-and-white thinking (Fernbach & Van Boven, 2022). Negative emotions, such
as anger, contribute to polarization by reducing the ability to consider alternative perspectives, leading
to categorical rather than analytical reasoning (Yip & Schweitzer, 2019; Lerner & Tiedens, 2006).
Furthermore, exaggerated portrayals of polarization can also increase polarization, as individuals try
to align with the perceived group norms of their group. (Fernbach & Van Boven, 2022; Mackie,
1986).
While research shows that affective polarization can have a variety of adverse effects on society
(e.g. reduced support for democratic norms, Kingzette et al., 2021; dehumanization, Martherus et al.,
2021; hostility, Tappin & McKay, 2019; tendency of avoidance and intolerance towards political
opponents, Berntzen et al. 2024), the societal impact issue-based polarization is still debated (Mason,
2015). However, affective polarization and issue-based polarization seem to be closely linked, that is
negative emotions towards out-groups intensify as issue-based belief polarization increases (Iyengar
et al., 2012). For contentious topics like climate change or COVID-19 political polarization on those
topics can have real-world consequences (lower compliance to health-guidelines, Kerr et al., 2021;
belief in scientific consensus about climate change, McCright & Dunlap, 2011). However, opinions
on those topics are especially prone to be more extreme depending on which media outlets are being
used as a source of information and the amount of confrontation with misinformation. As has been
mentioned before polarization also facilitates the spread of fake news, creating a mutually reinforcing
cycle between the two phenomena (Osmundsen et al., 2021). Thus, while partisanship might drive
people to adopt opinions in accordance with the political party they associate themselves with, it also
impacts the people's choice of media outlets (Humanes, & Valera-Ordaz, 2023; Ramírez-Dueñas &
Vinuesa-Tejero, 2021) thus potentially driving them towards a more one-sided or even downright
false depiction of the issues. This in turn might enhance issue-based polarization.
Taken together, there are numerous factors that can cause and exacerbate belief polarization,
which in turn can have adverse effects on society. Thus, developing interventions that either tackle
one or multiple of those aforementioned polarization mechanisms are of utmost importance.
Interventions
To support fact-based and nuanced opinion formation, free from negative emotions, fake news,
or distorted perceptions of opposing views, it is crucial to develop interventions that counteract
polarizing mechanisms. One strategy involves verifying information for accuracy, which can mitigate
the impact of fake news. This can be facilitated by websites that provide accessible and graphical fact-
checking (Amazeen et al., 2018). For instance, a simulation study demonstrated that belief
polarization could be nearly eliminated when information came from a generally trusted source based
on fundamental truths (Perfors & Navarro, 2019). However, the applicability of these findings is
limited due to the often contested nature of fundamental truths and the low mutual trust among
polarized groups.
Emotional reappraisal of polarizing issues can also have depolarizing effects. Sadness,
compared to anger, reduces the willingness to negotiate with out-groups and increases openness to
information supporting the out-group's perspective (Gur et al., 2021). Intergroup contact can also
reduce prejudices that stem from a lack of positive interactions (Pettigrew & Tropp, 2006), thereby
decreasing affective polarization.
Correcting misperceptions of societal opinions is another promising approach. A study showed
that when participants were informed about the actual opinions of an out-group on polarized topics,
they reported less extreme opinions themselves, suggesting that accurate portrayal of opinions can
contribute to depolarization (Ahler, 2014).
Additionally, there are interventions trying to counteract the effects of selective exposure.
Evidence suggests that intergroup contact, such as discussions with diverse groups, can promote
political compromises (Grönlund et al., 2015; Mutz, 2002). However, a field experiment by Bail et al.
(2018) found a backfire effect, where conservative Twitter users, after following a counter-attitudinal
bot, developed even more conservative views.
A combined approach that addresses selective exposure, corrects misperceptions of
polarization, and reduces prejudices through contact is the Consensus Conference. This involves a
representative sample of the population discussing polarized issues with expert input and moderation
until reaching consensus (Fishkin et al., 2021). Research indicates that merely learning about the
outcomes of such conferences can reduce polarization (Sloman et al., 2023). The idea of a Consensus
Conference is part of the deliberative democracy approach in which citizens exchange arguments
about contentious topics. Whether or not the exchange of arguments leads to depolarization or can
even foster polarization depends on a multitude of factors (e.g., group composition, interaction mode,
type of polarization, Caluwaerts et al., 2023). There is research supporting the idea that well-balanced
arguments regarding controversial topics (e.g., legality of abortion) can enhance participants' – who
have low prior knowledge – ability to recall arguments against their own position on the topic (Wiley,
2005). However, this also depends on the mode of presentation (presenting arguments in a
point/counterpoint manner, Wiley, 2005). Furthermore, Nussbaum and Schraw (2007) for example,
showed that graphical organization of arguments lead to more refutations of counterarguments while
instructing students about qualities of a good argument lead to more balanced reasoning. Other
research shows that presenting balanced arguments can foster polarization (uncongeniality bias, Buder
et al. 2023; motivated reasoning, Stanley et al., 2020; Hart & Nisbet, 2012). Recent papers, however,
contest whether presenting balanced arguments leads to an increase of polarization (8.76% of
participants polarized and 33.33% depolarized after reading balanced information about
nanotechnology; Said & Fischer, et al., 2021). In the study of Fischer et al. (2022) polarization was
less prevalent and weaker compared to depolarization (20% of participants polarized, 35%
depolarized, and 44% did not change their opinion after reading balanced arguments about climate
change). Overall, research regarding the impact of balanced arguments on issue-based polarization
yields mixed results.
What all of these types of interventions share are two critical limitations: first, participants must
be motivated to engage actively and second, scalability is – for those interventions that are based on
an exchange of different opinions and arguments in a group – often limited. To address those
limitations our aim is to transfer the core idea of those interventions, the exchange of arguments, into
an online setting (similar to Buder et al. 2023, Said & Fischer, et al., 2021; Fischer et al., 2022).
However, as has been shown in a meta-analysis, the mode of presentation (whether in-person or
online) mattered. More specifically, the in-person exchange of arguments settings were more effective
regarding depolarization (Caluwaerts et al., 2023). This is also substantiated by simulation results in
which group discussion played a crucial role in decreasing polarization (Lee et al., 2022). As has been
mentioned before, the drawback of in-person interventions is that only a limited number of people can
be reached. While gamifying these interventions won’t replace in-person discussions, they could
enhance motivation and engagement with the content. More specifically, we want to implement a
simplified online version of the Consensus Conference which encompasses multiple gamification
elements to counteract the potential decrease in effectiveness due to the online environment.
Gamification
Studies in educational research have demonstrated that incorporating gaming elements into
digital non-gaming contexts can positively impact participation and learning outcomes (Nah et al.,
2014). For instance, progress bars that visually represent advancement can enhance motivation
(O’Donovan et al., 2013), while regular, direct, and visually illustrated feedback during knowledge
assessments can increase active engagement (Raymer, 2011; Todor & Pitică, 2013). Additionally, the
use of trophies and badges for achievements, such as correctly answering quiz questions, has proven
effective in sustaining user motivation (Brewer et al., 2013), with frequent, small badges being
particularly impactful (Raymer, 2011). The integration of a narrative as a unifying element, often
paired with customizable avatars, has also been shown to boost participation willingness (Kapp, 2012;
Todor & Pitică, 2013). This study applies these gaming elements to a digital version of the Consensus
Conference to enhance motivation and active participation.
The Present Study
The aim of the present study is to investigate the effectiveness of two online depolarization
interventions: a text-based intervention (reading balanced arguments on implementing a general speed
limit on German Highways) and a gamified intervention (engaging with these balanced arguments in
a gaming context). In a control condition participants were presented information about an unrelated
topic (alternative medicine, Buder et al., 2022). H1: We expect that the text-based intervention leads
to a decrease of opinion polarization compared to the control condition. H2: Furthermore, we expect
that the gamified intervention leads to a higher decrease of opinion polarization compared to the text-
based intervention. H3: The relationship between the type of intervention and the extent of
depolarization is mediated by the engagement to participate (measured by the number of arguments
read).
Methods
Pilot Study
To ensure that the arguments presented are balanced (that is, whether they can be
unambiguously categorized as either in favor or against a speed limit) and are similar in
persuasiveness we ran a pilot study with 32 self-generated arguments (16 in favor of the speed limit
and 16 against a speed limit)1. Arguments covered six different topics: safety, environment, health,
time, focus, and freedom. Length of arguments were between 25 and 56 words ( M = 38.219, SD =
Example for the topic “security”.
In favor of a speed limit Against a speed limit
Fast driving takes lives. According to the There is a general speed limit on rural roads,
Federal Statistical Office, in 2021 a total of 318 nevertheless there are more fatalities per billion
people lost their lives on German highways. In kilometers driven than on freeways.
about half of these cases, the reason was Furthermore, more people die in traffic
Note that for the pilot study informed consent was collected from participants, they were fully debriefed at the end
of the study, and had the opportunity to withdraw their data. Furthermore, for demographic data as well as the questions
about car ownership/highway usage there was a don’t want to answer option.
excessive speed. accidents within cities than on highways. In
conclusion, highways are the safest roads in
Germany.
participants were asked for each argument how much the argument – in their opinion – speaks in
favor or against a speed limit on a 7-point Likert-scale with 1 = speaks very strongly against and 7 =
speaks very strongly in favor. The 7-point scale with a neutral midpoint was chosen to identify even
arguments without any polarity. To assess the persuasiveness of the arguments, and make sure that an
opinion change is not due to the fact that either the arguments in favor or against a speed limit are
more persuasive, the participants were asked how persuasive the arguments were on a 7-point Likert-
scale with 1 = very convincing and 7 = not at all convincing.
Furthermore, the aim of the pilot study was to validate a new scale to assess participants’
opinions regarding the general speed limit on German highways. To this end participants had to
answer four questions: “I reject a general speed limit on German highways” (reverse coded), “There
are good reasons for a general speed limit on German highways”, “I think a general speed limit on
German highways is appropriate”, “I don't think a general speed limit on German highways makes
any sense at all” (reverse coded). Answers were given on a 6-point Likert-scale ranging from 1 =
don’t agree at all to 6 = totally agree. The 6-point scale was chosen to avoid response bias (Nadler et
al., 2015). Items were presented in random order. Additionally, we assessed age, gender, political
attitude, whether participants own a car, how often they drive on the highway, as well as their
affective polarization. Regarding their affective polarization, participants were asked how they feel
regarding people with similar opinions with respect to a speed limit (ingroup) and those with
opposing opinions (outgroup). To this end, participants indicated on a 6-point Likert-scale how likable
or unpleasant they perceive the respective people and if those people trigger positive or negative
emotions. Answer options ranged from 1 = do not agree at all to 6= fully agree. Results for the
affective polarization can be found in Appendix A2a. Cronbach’s alpha was for both scales extremely
low: α = .40 [.08; .72] for the ingroup scale and α = .37 [.07; .68] for the outgroup scale. As the
purpose of our main study is to assess opinion polarization, and given the low reliability of the scales,
we did not include the scale into our main study.
Sample
Participants were recruited via the SONA system of the Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien. A
total of N = 49 participants took part in the study. Informed consent as well as agreement to data
processing was collected. N = 5 participants were excluded who answered the attention check
incorrectly. Furthermore, n = 2 participants were excluded who read the arguments and answered the
respective questions in less than five seconds. The final sample thus consists of N = 42 participants.
Participants were aged between 19 and 63 years (M = 23.86, SD = 8.09). N = 29 participants were
female and n = 13 male. Most participants indicated high-school diploma (Abitur) as their highest
graduation (n = 39), two participants had a secondary school certificate (Realschulabschluss) and one
participant a secondary modern school qualification (Hauptschulabschluss). Political attitudes of
participants were mostly left leaning with 62% indicating being liberal or very liberal. 22% of
participants reported being neither liberal nor conservative, 14% being conservative or very
conservative, and one person did not want to answer the question. N = 21 of the 42 participants owned
a car. Most participants only rarely drove on the highway (n = 23), some regularly (n = 12) and only
few often (n = 5) or never (n = 1).
Results
Polarity and persuasiveness of arguments. Polarity ratings were centered such that a
value of 0 signifies neutral, > 0 signifies in favor of a speed limit, and < 0 against a speed
as such with M=-1.27 (range = -1.76 − -0.81) and arguments in favor of a speed limit were
rated accordingly M = 1.61 (range = 0.64 − 2.29). The ratings with respect to the
persuasiveness of the arguments were centered – and to ease interpretation – reverse coded.
Values of 0 signify neutral, > 0 signify high persuasiveness, and < 0 low persuasiveness.
a mean persuasiveness value of M = 0.72 (range = -0.07− 1.93). Arguments against a speed
limit had a mean persuasiveness value of M = -0.25 (range = -1.38 − 0.76). Running a t-test
revealed that persuasiveness of arguments were significantly different (t(15) = 4.36, p < .001).
That is, arguments in favor of a speed limit were rated as more persuasive than those against a
speed limit. Results are discussed below.
Polarity of arguments Persuasiveness of arguments
the centered polarity values of the arguments the centered persuasiveness values of the
with their standard deviation. arguments with their standard deviation.
Opinion scale. Validation of the opinion scale was successful: Cronbach’s Alpha was α = .94,
95%CI[.91; .97], which denotes an excellent internal consistency (Blanz, 2015).
Discussion
The goal of the pilot study was twofold: First, to ensure that the arguments
presented are balanced with regard to polarity and persuasiveness and second, to validate
the newly developed opinion scale.
Regarding the polarity of the arguments, those against a speed limit were classified as
being against a speed limit and those in favor of a speed limit were classified as being in favor.
Regarding the persuasiveness of the arguments, those in favor were classified as more
persuasive than those against. One possible reason for the difference might be that arguments
in favor of a speed limit are objectively more persuasive. For example, in the "safety" category
the arguments in favor of a speed limit was that it can save lives, while the arguments against a
speed limit were qualifying the statement that highways are dangerous. Another reason could
be that the participants who took part in the study were generally more in favor of a speed limit
aligned with one's beliefs are perceived as more convincing than those which are opposed to
one's beliefs.
Taken together, results of our main study revealed that (i) arguments were balanced,
(ii) arguments in favor of a speed limit were classified as more persuasive than those against it,
and (iii) the newly developed opinion scale had a very high validity and thus is suitable for our
main study.
Main Study
study was approved by the local ethics committee of the Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien in
Tübingen. All materials as well as the data and code (R) that was used for this study will be made
available upon publication.
Material and Measures
Demographics. Gender was assessed with three items: female, male, and non-binary.
Education was assessed with four items: no graduation (kein Schulabschluss), secondary modern
school qualification (Hauptschulabschluss), secondary school certificate (Realschulabschluss), and
high-school diploma (Abitur). Political attitude was assessed on a 5-point Likert-scale (1 = right to 5
= left). For all variables there was a prefer not to say option.
Car Ownership and Highway Usage. Participants were asked whether or not they owned a
car (yes/no) as well as how often they were driving on the highway (never, rarely, regularly, and
often). For both questions there was a prefer not to say option.
Attention Check. The study contained two attention checks. Participants were excluded if they
failed both.
Number of read arguments. To assess the number of read arguments the number of clicks on
the prompt “I want to read more” was counted.
Knowledge Assessment. To assess whether participants not only superficially skimmed over
the arguments but actually updated their knowledge about speed limit they were asked one question
after each topic (total of n = 6 questions). The questions can be found in the appendix A3.
Opinion Scale. Participants' opinions were assessed with the four items validated via the pilot
study. That is“I reject a general speed limit on German highways” (reverse coded), “There are good
reasons for a general speed limit on German highways”, “I think a general speed limit on German
highways is appropriate”, “I don't think a general speed limit on German highways makes any sense
at all” (reverse coded). Answers were given on a 6-point Likert-scale ranging from 1 = don’t agree at
all to 6 = totally agree.
Interventions
Text-Intervention. In the text intervention participants read a short introduction about the task
(to inform themselves about a general speed limit on German highways) and that they will receive
arguments in favor and against a tempo limit for the six topics: safety, environment, health, time,
focus, and freedom. Furthermore, they were instructed that they could read as many arguments as they
wanted for each topic. After each argument they were asked whether they wanted to read another
argument. If participants decided that they had read enough arguments or if they had read all of them
they were asked a knowledge question about the topic (single-choice with four answer options).
Afterwards the arguments for the next topic were presented to them. After the third topic, participants
were shown an attention check to ensure that arguments and knowledge questions were read
thoroughly. Topics and the order of the arguments within each topic were randomized.
Gamified Intervention. In gamified intervention participants were instructed to
imagine themselves to be part of a jury that decides whether a general speed limit on German
highways should be implemented. Furthermore they were informed about the different
gamification elements, that is that they could receive e.g. a badge if they read all arguments.
Choice of avatar
Note. Participants choose between ten different avatars.
Afterwards participants were instructed that, by clicking on the jury members, they
would receive different opinions about the speed limit, so that they can build an informed
opinion themselves about the different topics. Thus, by clicking on the different jury members,
Presentation of the arguments Decision to learn more or go to the next
topic
Note. Participants were shown one argument per Note. After each argument participants could
page. decide whether they had read enough about the
topic or wanted to read more.
If the participants had read all the arguments or decided that they read enough, they
had to answer – like in the text intervention – a knowledge question. In contrast to the text
intervention participants received feedback about whether they answered the questions
correctly. Additionally they received a badge – if they answered correctly and read all the
Feedback in the gamified intervention condition
Note. Feedback if the Note. Feedback if the Note. Feedback if the
knowledge question was knowledge question was knowledge question was
answered incorrectly. answered correctly. answered correctly and all
arguments were read.
Another gamification element was a progress bar to show participants how much
they progressed during the study. Furthermore, participants’ badges that they had
received so far were displayed below the progress bar. Like in the text intervention
condition participants were shown an attention check after the third topic and topics as
well as the order of the arguments within each topic were randomized.
Control Condition. The control condition was exactly like the text intervention. The
only difference was the topic. Instead of receiving arguments about the speed limit,
participants received arguments about alternative medicine. Arguments were taken from Buder
et al. (2022) and adapted in length. Furthermore, 8 additional arguments were generated such
that length and number of arguments were comparable to the speed limit topic. As in the text
and the gamified intervention condition there were five topics: scientific evidence,
Sample
A Monte Carlo power analysis for mediation models (Schoemann et al.,
2017) determined that, with a significance level of α = .05, a power of 1 − β
= .80, a sample size of N = 240 is required. To obtain a quota-based (age and gender) sample
for Germany, participants were recruited through Bilendi & respondi, a company certified under ISO
20252:2019 for market, opinion, and social research. Informed consent was collected from the
participants at the beginning of the study.
A total of N = 312 participants took part in the study. After excluding those with incomplete
data (n = 32), those who failed two attention checks (n = 8), those who did not consent to data use (n
= 3), and those who participated multiple times (n = 1, 3 datasets removed), N = 266 datasets
remained for analysis. The sample age ranged from 19 to 69 years (M = 44.81, SD = 14.44), including
n = 134 males and n = 132 females. Detailed demographic data and driving behavior are summarized
Procedure
At the beginning of the study informed consent was collected, followed by demographic data
and questions on car ownership and highway usage. Afterwards participants' opinions regarding a
general speed limit on German highways were assessed. Participants were then assigned to one of
three groups: one group received a text-based intervention (involving only the reading of arguments; n
= 77), one a gamified intervention (where participants engaged with arguments within a gaming
context; n = 92), and one was in a control condition (involving the reading of arguments on an
unrelated topic; n = 97). In each condition participants were free to choose how many arguments they
wanted to read. Additionally, they were required to answer questions related to the presented
arguments to assess their knowledge about the topic. Subsequently participants' opinions on the speed
limit topic were assessed again. Finally participants were debriefed about the aims of the study and
had the opportunity to withdraw their data.
Results
Opinion Distribution and Polarization Scores
The distribution of opinions for each measurement time point and each condition are
Cronbach's alpha α = .94 95%CI[.93, .96] for the pre-intervention ratings and α = .94 [.93; .95]
for the post-intervention ratings.
Note. Opinions ranged from 1 = implementation of speed limit is rejected to 6 = implementation of
speed limit is endorsed.
To ensure that opinions did not differ between the groups before the interventions, pre-
intervention opinion ratings were compared. A Kruskal-Wallis test revealed that there were no
differences between the groups regarding their initial opinions (H(2) = 0.697, p = .721). Based
mean values and standard deviations for each condition are displayed.
Descriptive results for the polarization scores for each condition
Condition M SD min max N
Control condition -0.07 0.51 -2.50 1.50 97
Text intervention -0.17 0.76 -3.00 2.00 77
Gamified intervention -0.21 0.76 -3.00 2.50 92
Note. Values < 0: depolarization; values > 0: polarization; values = 0: no change.
Comparison of Control Group, Text, and Gamified Intervention
Multiple linear regressions were conducted to investigate whether the two interventions (text
and gamified) reduced polarization compared to the control group. As pre-registered we compared the
control condition with the text intervention to investigate whether receiving balanced information
about the benefits and drawbacks of a general speed limit on Germany highways reduced polarization
(H1). In the baseline model we controlled for age, gender, education, political attitude, car ownership,
and highway usage. When conducting a likelihood ratio test results revealed that there was no
difference between the model including the two conditions and the baseline model: F(1) = 0.666, p
A: Comparison control group and text B: Comparison text intervention and gamified
intervention intervention
polarization scores with age, gender, education, political attitude, and highway usage as control
variables. The size of the distributions indicate 95% CI.
In a second step, we compared the text intervention with the gamified intervention to
investigate whether gamification enhances effectiveness of the intervention (H2). In the baseline
model we again controlled for age, gender, education, political attitude, and highway usage. When
conducting a likelihood ratio test results revealed that there was no difference between the model
including the two conditions and the baseline model: F(1) = 0.809, p = 0.370. Only political attitude
F(7, 154) = 3.959, p < .001, R² = .152, R²Adjusted = .114; t(154) = .309, p < .001, a small effect
political attitudes. Note that for better interpretability, the scale was reverse coded with 1 denoting left
leaning and 5 right leaning.
Relationship between polarization and political attitudes
Note. Polarization: values > 0, depolarization: values < 0. N = 165. Political attitudes: 1 =
left, 5 = right.
We exploratorily conducted a third regression analysis comparing the control condition with
revealed that there was no difference between the model including the two conditions and the baseline
model: F(1) = 2.186, p = .141.
Effects of Gamification on Number of Read Arguments and Knowledge Acquisition
scores, correctly answered knowledge questions, and number of arguments read for the two
interventions (text and gamified).
Means, standard deviations, and correlations with confidence intervals
Variable M SD 1 2 3 4
Polarization -0.19 0.76
scores
Prior 4.00 1.73 .23**
opinions [.08, .37]
Post 4.13 1.62 .20* .90**
opinions [.05, .34] [.86, .92]
Correct 3.40 1.56 .13 .13 .10
answers [-.02, .28] [-.02, .28] [-.05, .25]
Number of 14.20 12.94 .07 .12 .12 .62**
read [-.08, .22] [-.03, .27] [-.03, .27] [.52, .71]
arguments
Note. M and SD are used to represent mean and standard deviation, respectively. Values in square
brackets indicate the 95% confidence interval for each correlation. The confidence interval is a
plausible range of population correlations that could have caused the sample correlation (Cumming,
2014). * indicates p < .05. ** indicates p < .01.
Number of Read Arguments. There was a significant difference regarding the read
arguments between the three groups: in the control condition participants read n = 6.26 (SD =
7.79) arguments, in the text interaction condition participants read n = 5.86 (SD = 8.56)
arguments, and in der gamified intervention participants read n = 21.18 (SD = 11.81)
was no difference between the control condition and the text intervention: W = 4201, p = .145.
When comparing the gamified intervention and the text intervention, results showed that in the
gamified intervention participants read significantly more arguments: W = 1439.5, p < .001.
Number of read arguments for each condition
Note. Control condition: n = 97, text intervention: n = 77, gamified intervention: n = 92.
Knowledge Acquisition. In the control condition participants answered 59.11% (SD =
25.23%) of the questions correctly, for the text intervention percentage of correct answers was
45.67% (SD = 21.36%), and in the gamified intervention participants answered 65.94% (SD =
each condition.
Number of questions answered correctly for each condition
Note. Control condition: n = 97, text intervention: n = 77, gamified intervention: n = 92.
A two sample t-test was performed to compare the percentage of correct answers
between the text intervention and the gamified intervention. Results showed significantly more
questions were answered correctly in the gamified intervention compared to the text
intervention: W = 1989, p < .001.
As pre-registered (H3) we investigated whether the relationship between the type of
intervention and the extent of depolarization is mediated by the engagement to participate
(measured by the number of arguments read). Running a path analysis with the number of read
arguments as mediator variable showed that while the type of intervention significantly
increased engagement, the number of read arguments did not impact polarization scores (see
same. That is, the gamified intervention significantly increased the number of correctly
answered questions, however there was no impact of knowledge on the polarization scores (see
controlling for age, gender, education, political attitudes, highway usages and car ownership
results stayed the same (see Tables A12 and A13), with political attitudes again significantly
predicting polarization scores.
A: Path analysis for number of read arguments B: Path analysis for knowledge
Note. N = 162.
attitude, pre intervention opinions, post intervention opinions, polarization scores, knowledge, and
text based and the gamified interventions. We exploratorily investigated whether participants differed
in their engagement and knowledge based on their political attitude, controlling for age, gender,
education, highway usage, car ownership, and intervention. Results revealed that there was no effect
of political attitude on engagement or knowledge (see Tables A15 and A16 in the appendix).
Discussion
The aim of this research was twofold: First, we investigated whether presenting well-balanced
arguments about a general speed limit on German highways leads to a depolarization of opinions.
Second, we explored whether a gamified adapted online-version of the Consensus Conference
enhances participants’ engagement with the intervention and thus, increases effectiveness.
Introducing gamification elements to an adapted online version of the consensus conference
Albeit both, the text-based intervention and the gamified intervention, had a depolarizing effect on a
descriptive level, running multiple regressions revealed that neither the text-based intervention nor the
gamified intervention significantly reduced opinion polarization. Regarding the text-based
intervention one possible explanation could be that participants did not engage with the content, that
is, they did not read the arguments. However, the gamified intervention also did not reduce
polarization, even though participants showed a high engagement with the content. Another possible
reason for the ineffectiveness of both interventions could be that opinions were measured directly
before the interventions. Hessler et al. (2014) showed that participants were less likely to change their
opinion about a topic if they were reminded of their opinion shortly before they received information
that was incongruent with their beliefs. As people have the tendency to be consistent, asking
participants about their opinions regarding a general speed limit on German highways shortly before
the interventions might have reduced their effectiveness. One solution for this issue could be to assess
opinions one week before the interventions in future studies. A different explanation for the lack of
effectiveness could be motivated reasoning (Stanley et al., 2020; Hart & Nisbet, 2012). Motivated
reasoning refers to people's tendency to challenge information that contradicts their opinion and to
search for explanations that confound this information. In contrast, opinion congruent information is
integrated in already existing beliefs (Taber & Lodge, 2006). Furthermore, the number of presentation
arguments could have been too low to have an effect. Research showed that if the amount of
counterarguments is large enough, they cannot be ignored or explained away and thus opinions have
to be updated (Redlawsk et al., 2010). Additionally, even though there is an abundance of research
showing that arguments play a crucial role in opinion formation (Dür 2019; Eagly, 1974; Sears &
Freedman, 1965), the effectiveness of arguments on changing opinions depended on a variety of
conditions (e.g., comprehensibility or perceived novelty of the arguments). In future studies
introducing arguments as novel and/or investigating whether arguments differ in their
comprehensibility might be an approach to foster effectiveness. Lastly, opinions might not change that
quickly. It is possible that participants might have needed more time to integrate the new information
into their belief system (Bradley et al., 1999; Harker-Schuch & Bugge-Henriksen, 2013), thus it
would be interesting to investigate whether opinions might change time-delayed.
Effects of gamification on knowledge acquisition
While both interventions did not impact participants’ opinions about a general speed limit on
German highways, there was a strong effect of the gamified intervention on engagement with the
content (participants read almost four times (3.62 times) more arguments in the gamified condition
compared to the text-based version) as well as knowledge about the benefits and drawbacks of a speed
limit (65.94% of correct answers compared to 45.67% of correct answers in the text-based version).
Surprisingly, there was neither an effect of engagement with the content nor of knowledge about
speed limit on the polarization scores. One possible reason for why there was no connection between
an increase in knowledge and opinions might be that participants differed in their prior knowledge.
Nyhan et al. (2013) showed in their study that participants with low prior knowledge about a topic
were more prone to change their opinions about that topic than those with high prior knowledge. It is
thus possible that in our study participants already had high knowledge about the pros and cons of a
general speed limit and thus, were less inclined to change their opinions. However, our results showed
that reading more arguments was positively related to a higher score of correct answers, therefore,
prior knowledge about the benefits and drawbacks of a speed limit might have been low. Nonetheless,
in future studies prior knowledge should be assessed as a control variable.
Another explanation for our results could be that an increase in knowledge about a topic does
not necessarily lead to a change in one’s opinion. That is in line with literature that assumes that
knowledge and opinions are based on different mental representations and thus can change
independently from each other (Abelson, 1979; Dole & Sinatra, 1998). Furthermore, research shows
that while there is a relationship between knowledge and opinions (e.g., knowledge about climate
change, Harker-Schuch & Bugge-Henriksen, 2013; Guy et al., 2014; knowledge of organic food
labels Van Loo, et al., 2013) imparting of knowledge does not necessarily affect opinions (Druckman
& Bolsen, 2011; Harker-Schuch & Bugge-Henriksen, 2013). In contrast, scientific literacy research
emphasizes the importance of educating the public about scientific issues to enable citizens to
accurately assess benefits and risks associated with those scientific issues (Kolstø, 2001; Miller,
1998). The assumption is that opinions (e.g., whether climate change poses a risk to humanity) are –
at least partly – shaped by knowledge on the respective topic. Bradley et al. (1999) for example
showed that after a ten-day environmental science course high school students had an increase in
knowledge as well as a shift in their opinions towards being more pro-environmental. Thus, while our
intervention did enhance engagement and lead to an increase in knowledge about the drawbacks and
benefits of a speed limit, updating opinions – as has been argued before – might have required more
time, than simply learning new information.
Taken together, our results support previous research showing that imparting knowledge does
not necessarily lead to a change in opinions, at least not within such a short time frame.
Political attitude and depolarization
When exploratorily investigating the impact of political attitude on opinion polarization,
results showed that participants who were more right-leaning depolarized more. This is in line with
other research showing that more conservative participants had a higher likelihood to shift their
beliefs towards the scientific consensus about climate change after receiving information about said
consensus (Linden et al., 2019, Said et al., 2023). Interestingly, this is in contrast with other research
in which conservative Twitter users developed even more conservative views after following a
counter-attitudinal bot (Bail et al., 2018). While research on motivated reasoning shows that people
have the tendency to refute arguments that are incongruent with their belief system, it seems that in
our study conservative participants were more open to considering arguments that were contrary to
their opinions.
One explanation for the results in our study could be the persuasiveness of the arguments. Our
pilot study showed that, overall, arguments in favor of a speed limit were rated as more convincing
than those against a speed limit. In our study participants with more conservative political views had a
higher tendency of rejecting the implementation of such a speed limit (see appendix A14). Thus, when
being confronted with arguments in favor of a speed limit, which were more convincing, right-leaning
participants could have been more prone to shifting their opinions as opposed to left-leaning
participants for whom it might have been less likely that they will change their opinions after reading
the weaker arguments against a speed limit. Note, however, that the persuasiveness rating in the pilot
study was done by a sample that was overall more left-leaning and in favor of a speed limit, thus the
higher persuasiveness ratings for the arguments in favor of a speed limit could have been influenced
by the opinions of the sample rather than being objective assessment (Edwards & Smith, 1996).
Another explanation could be that right-leaning participants had a higher engagement with the
content and thus exposed themselves to more (counter-)arguments. However, when investigating
whether political attitudes were related to engagement and knowledge results revealed that, albeit
there was a significant correlation (more left-leaning participants read more arguments and had higher
knowledge scores; appendix A14), when controlling for demographic variables and intervention type
results showed no impact of political attitude on engagement and knowledge.
Limitations
Our study has several limitations. First, pre-intervention attitudes were assessed shortly before
the intervention. That could have led to congruency-effects, that is participants might have tried to
stay consistent with their previous attitudes when answering the post-intervention statements. Second,
we did not take prior knowledge into account. As prior knowledge might have influenced whether or
not participants update their opinions, in future studies participants' knowledge about the topic
investigated should be assessed. Third, opinions might not change within such a short time frame,
thus conducting a longitudinal study would be an important next step. Lastly, as has been shown in
other research (Caluwaerts et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2022), interaction within a group is an important
factor (ideally in-person and not in an online setting), thus, regarding the gamified intervention it
would be worth investigating whether adding the possibility to further interact with the jury members
might influence opinions.
Conclusions
The proposed intervention, which involves reading balanced arguments on an already
polarized topic, showed no significant impact on opinions on this matter compared to the control
intervention. This held true for both the traditional text-based intervention and the gamified
intervention. However, in the gamified intervention, the engagement to participate was successfully
increased, and knowledge about the controversial topic was significantly enhanced. One obvious
conclusion from our results would be that – in line with other research – merely imparting knowledge
is not sufficient and other methods are necessary to decrease issue-based polarization. However, there
is the question of whether changing opinions should even be a primary goal. In the end, successfully
educating people about a topic and then leaving it up to them to make their decision based on the
information they received might be the better approach. To this end, while our intervention did not
decrease polarization participants did acquire knowledge about the arguments for both sides, in favor
and against a speed limit.
Authors' Contributions
CS and NS developed the research idea. NS, FB administered the project. CS analyzed the data. CS
was responsible for data collection and for data visualization. NS and CS wrote the original draft. All
authors were responsible for reviewing and editing the original draft. All authors approved the final
version of the manuscript for submission.
Acknowledgments
We want to thank our colleague, Dr. Jürgen Buder, for proofreading the paper and giving us some
great feedback that improved our manuscript.