Power, ritual, and identity
A cognitive study of conversion to the Unification
Church
Avel Guénin—Carlut1, 2, 3 †, Isaac Dubourg2
1: University of Sussex
2: Active Inference Institute
3: Kairos Research
† avel@kairos-research.org
Abstract
We revisit the sociological discussion around coercive conversion to the worldview of
religious or political organization, building from the historical example of the
Unification Church. Using the neurocomputational framework of Active Inference, we
demonstrate that (in line with the current sociological consensus) there is no plausible
mechanism by which organizations may erase human agency through “mind control”
or “brainwashing”, for lack of a clear separation between external/social and
internal/cognitive processes. However, we consider the many processes by which the
Unification Church produces a material and social environment which robustly aligns
the agency of members with its goals and organizational norms, giving special
attention to the organization of members’ experience in Unification Church seminars
and its cognitive effects. On this basis, we conceptualize identity capture as social
control through the production of a rigid sense of self-identity thoroughly embedded in
the social context set by an organization or elite group, which acts to structure one’s
engagement with the world. Finally, we use the framework developed here to offer
some considerations about the historical development of social power, and the
mechanisms by which ritual has plausibly set the stage for the emergence of large scale
social organization.
0) Introduction
[0.1] The question of how people integrate new beliefs and behavior, either as adults
exploring new perspectives on the world or as child discovering it, has long been a
central line of research for both sociology and cognitive science. Structuralists or
cognitivist tend to understand the question through the enaction of pre-determined
templates, on which new information is projected. Constructivists in either discipline,
on the contrary, emphasize the agency of people in creating genuinely novel ways to
understand the world. However, most researchers today would probably agree that both
perspectives are to some extent valid: some form of social or cognitive structure
actually exists, and we play some role in shaping it. At least in a minimal way, both
seem to be self-evident - we do speak structured languages, we do act in structured
contexts, we do think in a structured way, and these patterns of activity do change in
time and between context. In our perspective, the articulation between structure and
agency hasn’t meaningfully changed since the introduction of symbolic interactionism
(Mead 1934) and its refinement into role theory (Goffman 1956) and frame analysis
(Goffman 1974). Some form of structure is bound to exist in the terms in which an actor
understands the terms of their engagement with the world and others ; and some form
of agency is bound to exist in the manner the actor can decide to mobilize different
terms of engagement or redefine them altogether (see e.g. Archer (2003))
[0.2] To some extent, the question of structure and agency intersects with a broader area of
research regarding the nature of social power and the dynamics it entails. Indeed, while
different fields may refer to this idea under the term of social fields (Lewin 1975;
Bourdieu 1972), structuration (Giddens 1984), cultural niche (Laland, Odling‐Smee, and
Feldman 2001; Boyd, Richerson, and Henrich 2011), or cultural evolutionary psychology
(Heyes 2019), it is beyond doubt that we make sense of the world in a material and
social context defined by others. In a sense, our agency is constructed or constrained by
the norms and beliefs displayed by others, in a manner that disproportionately reflects
those of actors in a dominant symbolic position (State officials, teachers, men, whites,
higher-class…). The relation between social power and the reproduction of social norms
has been a long time topic of social sciences, especially in the line of Gramsci (Gramsci
1947), Bourdieu (Bourdieu 1972), and Foucault (Foucault 1975; 1980). It has been more
recently explored by the field of social psychology, which led to the development of a
quite rich variety of models describing the psychological underpinnings of social power
(Fiske and Dépret 1996; Sidanius and Pratto 1999; Keltner, Gruenfeld, and Anderson
2003; Turner 2005; Simon and Oakes 2006). But in our view, these approach do not
address adequately a very fundamental challenge posed by the sociological study of
power: if people cannot freely decide on the terms of their engagement with the world,
are they really agents?
[0.3] The novelty of our argument is to approach the question through a recent
neurocomputational framework, Active Inference (Friston, Daunizeau, and Kiebel 2009;
Friston et al. 2016). At core, Active Inference claims that the processes driving our
cognition are predictive in nature. We perceive trees, chairs, and dogs because we have
integrated an implicit model of how those concepts may affect our senses, and because
they are the most likely explanation for the sensations we experience. Moreover, our
actions are driven by the same imperative for predictive (Bayesian) coherence, as we
strive to maintain states of the world that align with our prior expectations. For
example, we may experience thirst as a violation of our prior model of ourself, expect to
take some corrective actions, and go look for some water. The latter mechanism for the
correction of prediction errors motivates the name “Active Inference”, as it can be
understood as a manner in which agents actively produce evidence for their implicit
model of themselves as a form of life (Hohwy 2016). Today, Active Inference wields a
significant deal of authority for three core reasons: its alignment with the Free Energy
Principle, a proposed mathematical framework for describing and explaining cognition
(Friston, Kilner, and Harrison 2006; Friston et al. 2010; Friston 2019); its elegant
explanation of how skillful engagement with the world is even possible with the known
time and energy constraints of biological agents (Hipólito et al. 2021; Hipólito 2022);
and its coherence with known architecture of brain activity (Walsh et al. 2020).
[0.4] A detailed account of Active Inference, its virtues, and its demerits is however beyond
the scope of the present argument (see Parr, Pezzulo, and Friston (2022) for a state-of-
the-art exposition). We will focus instead on its implications for the social sciences, and
especially for the line of questioning defined in paragraph [0.2]. If the picture laid out
by Active Inference theorists is correct in principle, it entails that our experience of the
world is action-oriented, and that it is structured by prior expectations regarding what
we can (or ought to) do in the context of our engagement with the world. To respect the
standard vocabulary in cognitive science, our experience of the world is structured as a
field of affordances (Bruineberg and Rietveld 2014). These affordances are very directly
defined by our prior model of the world and its dynamics, but perhaps most
importantly for our argument, they are also defined by our model of ourselves as
ecological agents. For example, to perceive a cliff as “climbable” is implicitly to
perceive ourselves as a climbing agent. Furthermore, for social agents such as
ourselves, the affordances we experience are defined by our cultural context and by the
social expectations we have come to integrate throughout our development (Ramstead,
Veissière, and Kirmayer 2016; Veissière et al. 2020; Guénin--Carlut 2024b). In other
words, the patterns of symbolic action mobilized during social interaction become an
anchor of how they engage with their world (both in its material and social
dimensions), and therefore an a anchor of how an agent perceives themselves.
[0.5] We will attempt to demonstrate the relevance of this framework by revisiting the
sociological literature on religious or ideological conversion, and more specifically
what is likely the single most important case study in the recent history of this field:
the Unification Church (UC); or colloquially the “Moonies” movement. The UC is a
religious organization born in the wake of the Korean War of 1950-53, as Reverend Sun
Myung Moon emerged from North Korean labor camps with strong millenarist beliefs.
He founded what later became know as the Unification Church, a millenarist New
Religious Movement (NRM) derived from Christianity, which spread internationally
and reached a notable level of public influence within the anti-communist movement in
Japan and the United States. The UC became the target of public criticism in both
countries due an array of arguably manipulative and exploitative practices, most
importantly evangelist concealing their affiliation to UC during recruitment, the
imposition of heavy personal and financial contribution to members, and the de facto
isolation of the members from the broader world. In the United States, the UC was
(along other religious and political organization) publicly accused of forcefully
converting recruits through a process called “brainwashing” (E. Hunter 1953) or
“Thought Reform” (Lifton 1961), modeled on prior accounts of coercive conversion to
Maoism in China. Both concepts differ heavily in their academic plausibility and in the
socio-cognitive process they propose, but they were largely used as two
interchangeable terms describing conversion as the coercive imposition of beliefs or
behavior to the recruit.
[0.6] The public and academic debate around the accusation of coercive conversion became
heavily muddied. Academics would seemingly defend either side based on their ethical
position regarding NRMs, often without clear relation to their academic works. In
particular, Margaret Singer (a prominent scholar of political and religious conversion)
would describe in her work the subtle processes by which a convert is brought to a
novel perspective, while describing them publicly as “low-IQ, low-affect zombie[s]"
effectively mind-controlled by their recruiters. Here, we argue that the confusion of
this debate is in great part due to an implicit prior model of the integration of social
and cognitive processes, which assumes a clear separation of internal and external
processes – or, equivalently, the private domain of thought and the public domain of
behavior. Assuming such a separation, it is natural to understand that conversion
involves the competition of internal processes (tied to the convert’s agency) and
external processes (tied to the converter’s intervention) are competing for the control of
the convert, and that conversion is coercive if (and only if) the latter win. This picture is
essentially vindicated by the literature on social power, which largely understands
social power through the lenses of influence, where agents attempt to force or
manipulate each other to perform certain actions or adopt certain perspectives (Brauer
and Bourhis 2006). However, we argue that the relevant processes at play are far more
subtle, as the very goals of the agents (and, more generally, the manner in which they
perceive their worlds) are precisely being (re)constructed in the process of social
interaction.
[0.7] Instead of considering conversion as an external intervention on the recruit’s mental
processes, we propose to understand it as a (generally co-operative) process centered on
the definition of the terms of social interaction. In other words, we claim that
conversion centrally targets the social norms accepted by the recruit in the context of
the organization, and that any effect on their mental states is in essence
epiphenomenal. This claim constitutes a re-contextualization of Táíwò’s practice-first
account of ideology, as proposed in Táíwò (2018), which holds that propaganda aims to
shape public behavior rather than private thought. However, in opposition to Táíwò’s,
we argue that the distinction between the two is tenuous – if it exists at all. Indeed,
Active Inference entails a fundamental entanglement between the domain of
private/internal thought and public/external behavior. Our cognition essentially reduces
to the process by which we engage with the world, and if some specifically human
behavior (e.g. self-talk) enable the construction of complex, autonomous modes of
regulation, those remain fully integrated in our engagement with the world. Hence, the
norms we accept in our public social engagement come to shape our private experience,
and vice-versa. On this basis, we will show that the social context set by the UC is
unusually efficient in producing powerful and intimate forms of social control, even
though those fall short of full-fledged “brainwashing” or “Thought Reform”. In
particular, we insist on the processes that lead recruits to develop a very rigid sense of
self-identity tied to the social context set by the UC – a phenomena that we call identity
capture (Guénin--Carlut 2022b).
[0.8] In this document, we will focus heavily on providing a biocognitive (Active Inference)
reformulation of the sociological literature on conversion to the UC. In consequence,
we will not address in any depth the existing social psychology / psychiatry literature
on the topic (e.g. Galanter et al. 1979; Galanter 1982). Indeed, the latter seems more
interested in describing the prior psychological / psychiatric traits which makes an
individual susceptible to conversion – which is a productive approach in its own right,
but is orthogonal to our goals here. Instead, we will first provide in part 1 a brief
overview of the public and sociological debate regarding the coercive nature of
conversion. Then, we will turn in part 2 to exposing the history, structure, and ideology
of the UC and the broader movement it generated. In part 3, we will expose the Active
Inference framework, focusing especially on the existing body of work applying it to
cultural transmission, social power, and identity capture. Then, we will provide in part
4 an Active Inference account of the documented socio-cognitive processes driving
conversion to the UC. In part 5, we will leverage the theoretical insights built
throughout this paper to discuss more generally the role of identity capture in social
power, relating our account to existing paleo-anthropological literature on the
ontogeny of ritual activity in the human species. In doing so, we hope to provide both
theoretical insight and pragmatic understanding of the socio-cognitive processes at
hand in conversion, especially regarding the integration of social norms and social
identity, as well as their relation to social power.
1) Coercive conversion: concepts and
mechanisms
[1.1] The question of how people come to be converted to a “deviant” perspective (Lofland
and Stark 1965), or more precisely how they come to be recruited into new religious or
political movements, has been at the center of many debates throughout the second
half of the XXth century in the USA. Those debates, which encompassed both the
public and academic sphere, involved the development and mobilization of competing
models of religious or political conversion. For the purpose of our analysis, we will
portray them as each inhabiting a specific place within two distinct spectrum: one
ranging from pure fiction to detailed sociological analysis ; and one ranging from
describing conversion as voluntary to describing conversion as coercive. The first and
most famous of those accounts, “brainwashing”, was a construction of Edward Hunter’s
Brainwashing in Red China (E. Hunter 1953), and corresponded to a largely speculative
account of the conversion techniques enacted by communist regimes onto dissidents.
Those were portrayed as giving the perpetrator the power to literally “mind control”
the victim, as one would control a RC device. Although somewhat clearly
counterfactual, this concept was given credence in the public sphere by the
development of a sociologically grounded account lending similar coercive properties
to the process of coercion : Thought Reform, as described in Lifton’s Thought reform and
the psychology of totalism (Lifton 1961). This work did provide a detailed account of
coercive conversion, but one that was focused on the mobilization of specific
techniques (e.g. sleep deprivation and self-criticism) to implant specific beliefs and
attitudes in the victim.
[1.2] Both approaches were, from a scientific perspective, as different as was possible.
Hunter’s brainwashing was entirely based on anecdotes and narratives that were
transparently intended to serve an anti-communist political agenda. Additionally, it
portrayed its victims as being robbed of any agency whatsoever – they were, quite
literally, subject to mind control, and were either controlled from afar or subject to rigid
programming. On the contrary, Lifton’s Thought Reform was based on extensive
interview data and testimonies from the presumed victims of the coercive conversion
techniques he aimed at describing. Furthermore, it described the process of conversion
as the transformation of the victim in a believer to some cause and associated practices,
rather than an outright destruction of their agency. Starting from a similar point of
view to Hunter’s, Lifton elaborates on the methods used to target the mental processes
of the victims and convert them to the point of view of their captors, listing out the
threat of violence, a control of social environment (”milieu control”), a strident
imposition of norms and boundaries (”demanding purity”), the imposition of confession
as a norm (”cult of confession”), and the extensive use of loaded language to imply and
signal (”thought stopping clichés”), as instrumental to the goals of thought reform. The
main common point between those approaches was their shared premise: (coercive)
conversion is a process that targets the internal states of mind of a victim through
external intervention. Due to this commonality, both were mobilized in an
interchangeable manner by the critics of new religious movements to underline their
predatory and coercive nature.
[1.3] Indeed, as these models of conversion were gaining in prominence in the psychiatrist
community in the 1960s, American society was at the beginning of a revival in new
religious practices and movements (Banchoff 2007, chap. 12)) which elicited a heated
public debate around the questions of religious pluralism and freedom of worship.
Public perceptions of such trends ranged from curiosity to outright fear, and hostile
response to the new religious movements would in particular be catalyzed by a series of
publicized tragedies during the late sixties and throughout the seventies : the trial of
Charles Manson in 1970, Patty Hearst’s abduction in 1974 and subsequent trial in 1975,
or the Jonestown massacre of 1978. In line with the accounts of coercive conversion
described above, those were framed as instances and consequences of brainwashing
where cult members would be mentally controlled by the cult leader into criminal
behavior. Concurrently, the self described American “anti-cult” movements developed
gathered and broadly adopted legal tools towards their core goal : getting people to
leave new religious movements. The image and trope of brainwashing, and the model
of Thought Reform, were core to the rhetoric and discursive strategies of those
movements (Robbins and Anthony 1982). Both were mobilized to suggest that people
joining certain New Religious Movements like the Unification Church or the People’s
temple did not do so out of free choice, but because of the mysterious, coercive
influence developed by some malicious actors.
[1.4] The public presence of the related concepts of “thought reform” and “brainwashing”
grew in the following years, as it became increasingly mobilized as justification for
restrictions on NRM activity (Richardson, Harder, and Simmonds 1972). This led to a
profound and lasting polarization of the academic community’s attitude regarding
these concepts. Some scholars would later go on to reject the brainwashing hypothesis
and condemn its use by governing bodies (Richardson and Introvigne 2001). Others
would, on the contrary, further affirm the narrative of “reprogramming” as a coercive
process which enabled malevolent cults to mind-control innocent citizens. The most
notable example of that last category was the case of Margaret Singer, a clinical
psychologist best known through her legal expertise on brainwashing. She first
attained public notoriety by testifying as an expert in the 1976 trial of Patty Hearst for
an array of crimes committed with the far-left “Symbionese Liberation Army”. At this
point, she had been studying the subject of “psychological coercion”, both in the
context of the Cold War and that of NRMs, since 1953 (according to her 2004 obituary
(Oransky 2004)). While the prosecution presented Hearst’s participation to the crimes
as voluntary, Singer pointed to the many signs of abuse in the material evidence as well
as Hearst’s testimony to present her as "a low-IQ, low-affect zombie" literally mind-
controlled by her captors (McLellan 2003). The testimony did not have any immediate
effect, as the tribunal refused to allow Singer to testify in front of the jury, and Hearst
was condemned to 35 years of prison.
[1.5] However, it marked a turn in the public legitimacy of both the concept of
“brainwashing” and the publicly perceived expertise of Singer personally (Anthony and
Robbins 1995). Singer went on to testify on many other similar cases, and the increasing
acceptance of the reality of “brainwashing” led to the commutation of Hearst’s
sentence and then her pardon. Singer clearly exemplified the motivated nature of the
anti-NRM campaign due to what Dick Anthony termed her “tactical ambiguity” in the
mobilization of her scientific work (Anthony 2001). Indeed, in her public expertise, she
consistently emphasized the “total zombifying effect” Thought Reform had on Hearst
and other victims of coercive conversion. She presented it as a process allowing literal
remote mind control, denying the victim any agency whatsoever and therefore voiding
any legal responsibility for the acts committed while in this state of mind - consistently
with the public narrative around brainwashing. At the same time, her scholarly work
put an accent on how influence was exerted through the control of social and material
environment to align the victim’s motivation with those of the organization, which was
characteristic of Lifton’s model of Thought Reform. The shift between the academic
and the public context of expression enabled her to use the same concept of “thought
reform” to express two fundamentally different and even incompatible models of
coercive conversion, respectively corresponding to the specific constraints of academic
sociology of religion and of anti-NRM activism.
[1.6] Although other sociologists of religion may agree with some elements of Singer’s
rhetoric, a core reason why a strong reaction emerged against it is the way it was
mobilized by the “anti-cult” activist sphere. As “brainwashing” (and by extension
Singer’s public account of thought reform) entailed that the victim was literally
controlled from afar, this seemed to imply that equally coercive methods were
necessary to break that link. This motivated the process of “deprogramming”, which
generally reduced to the forcible abduction, seclusion and interrogation of NRM
members in the hope it would reverse the programming they’d supposedly been
subjected to. Deprogrammers were overwhelmingly hired by friends or family of people
involved in NRMs, who saw their very involvement as proof that their kin was indeed
mind-controlled and needed drastic measures in order to come back into the fold. The
specifics of deprogramming methods varied depending on the group or “expert” who
advocated and practiced it, in line with their idiosyncratic views on what was necessary
to “snap the person out of it”. Some deprogrammers emphasized convincing people
through forced verbal confrontation while others made more extensive use of physical
coercion - up to bodily harm. The people who’d hired the deprogrammers would
furthermore often file a demand for conservatorship or guardianship over the person
who was being “deprogrammed”, under the argument that their religious belief
demonstrated their lack of agency (M. Mickler 2000, 155; H. O. Hunter and Price 2001).
A number of cases of extreme abuses by deprogrammers would come to light when the
abductees managed to get free and sue the people they held responsible, either their
relatives or the hired deprogrammers. Likewise, some NRMs sued the deprogrammers
and the hiring parties on behalf of or alongside their abducted or formerly abducted
members.
[1.7] If the language and evocative images of sinister “brainwashing” cults have mostly
disappeared from mainstream media, it’s not as a result of a rejection of the idea
altogether but is rather the consequence of a general cooling of the public discussion
around NRMs. The tempo of news reporting around “cult activity” drastically slowed
down, and alongside it the visibility of the anti-cult movement. While the model of
Thought Reform keeps to this day being mobilized on occasions in the public sphere, it
fails to generate the same level of attention that it once did. In the academic sphere, it
was broadly replaced by other models of conversion (Anthony 2001). This seems to be
explained in part by the enduring association of the model of Thought Reform with the
trope of Brainwashing, together with the questionable approaches to deconversion that
it inspired, which has alienated a number of researcher from the former model. A large
section of NRM researchers attempted to distance themselves from the “Thought
Reform” framework, out of worry of helping the spread of false information or the
coalescence of further anti-NRM activism. Many notable actors in the field explicitly
attempted to come to terms with this legacy, as for example through the collective tome
Misunderstanding cults : Searching for Objectivity in a Controversial Field (Robbins and
Zablocki 2001) which sought to address and find a middle ground between differing
approaches to the question of religious conversion.
[1.8] One specific work had an outsize influence in marginalizing the “Thought Reform”
thesis: Eileen Barker’s 1983 book “The making of a Moonie: choice or brainwashing?”
(Barker 1984). This volume was focused on the process of conversion to a major NRM,
the Unificationist Church, at the time subject to a high level of public attention due to
a major court case against a journalist who had accused them of practicing
brainwashing. Barker based her work on the extensive ethnographic work she
conducted between 1976 and 1983, including participant observation, surveys, and in-
depth interviews of group members (colloquially known as Moonies). While she
conceded that the UC uses arguably coercive measures to drive conversion, her main
argument is to demonstrate that those measures are much more mundane than is
usually depicted by its critics and fall short of the charge of “brainwashing”. In her
words, “there will be some factors that are common to both the process of POW thought reform
[as described by Lifton] and the process of becoming a Moonie. Overlaps can, however, also be
found with elements of the process of becoming a Catholic, a college graduate, a woman in
Muslim society or an army officer.”. Barker’s book was widely celebrated for its thorough
study of the matter, and remains to this day an authoritative account of the sociological
process of conversion to the Unification Church. However, it was also understood as a
direct attack on the anti-NRM movement, taking what Margaret Singer and her co-
author Janja Lalich qualified as an “apologetic stance” by denying the agency of the UC
in enforcing conversion (Singer and Lalich 1995).
[1.9] Indeed, while Barker’s finding are factually coherent with earlier works on the
Unification Church, she differs in her framing of the processes at hand. A notable
predecessor to Barker’s work on recruitment to the UC is Taylor’s 1978 thesis Social
organization of recruitment in the Unification Church (Taylor 1978), which describes the
role of UC workshops and seminars in conversion. Taylor describes the core process
underlying conversion as “the choreography of total participation”, an array of attitudes
apparently aimed at eliciting an absolute identification of the attendees to the Church.
Attendees are showered in positive attention (”love bombing”), and implicitly
threatened with withdrawal or outright shunning if they fail to return it while being
under constant monitoring by UC members. In the words of a Moonie : “No one can do
anything alone. Everyone has to participate one hundred percent for the whole or the songs,
feeling, everything wouldn't be as great as they are.” (Taylor 1978, 71). This produces a social
context where attendees are unusually pressured to “follow center”, i.e. display deference
and agreement with the UC leaders designated as being “closest to the source of God’s
truth” (Taylor 1978, 121). In her chapter on love-bombing (Barker 1984, chap. 7), Barker
largely concurs on the observation that “Moonies are successful in controlling the
environment of their workshops to suppress the expression of dissent” 1. However, she also
notes that the UC cannot ultimately control attendees’ subjective interpretation of
their experience at the workshops or their decision to join, as is made manifest by the
variety of reactions ranging from enthusiastic participation to open skepticism.
Furthermore, she argues that the overt happiness of the Moonies is a powerful enough
motivation to drive conversion outside on any unusual pressure.
[1.10] In this light, we can hardly explain the fierce discussion surrounding the question of
coercive conversion through a factual disagreement about what social process drive the
conversion of outsiders to NRMs and the retention of their members. Rather, it seems
to tie back to the variety of conceptions that different authors hold regarding the
nature of human agency, and the condition in which it can possibly be undermined. In
line with earlier Greek and Christian accounts, modern occidental societies understand
agency as the product of one’s intrinsic will, which takes into account one’s goals and
values to take decisions. For example, a person who highly values altruism may decide
to give away their life’s savings to a charitable organization, based on the evaluation
that their own discomfort will be balanced out by the utility of the money for others.
They are then understood to be responsible for this decision, since it was taken
autonomously and in full knowledge of the consequences. Any contextual fact which
impedes the ability for autonomous, informed decision is typically understood to
reduce or void one’s agency. For example, we wouldn’t consider someone who was
1 “There can be little doubt that the Moonies are successful in controlling the environment of their workshops.
It is, after all, their home ground. They do not put decisions about the day's timetable to the vote. Everyone
is expected to attend the lectures and other activities; if the guests do not want to fit in, they are asked to
leave - not to find a friend with whom to make alternative arrangements for the afternoon. Guests seldom
have the opportunity to get together to reinforce each other's doubts. The near-constant presence of
enthusiastic Moonies means also that conversations are kept from becoming too critical or from wandering
too far off the point, and, in California especially, it also ensures that the lectures and other activities are
met with such seemingly unanimous 'Isn't-this-all-wonderful?' responses that it can be difficult for the guest
not to feel exhilarated and drawn into following the example of the Moonie 'cheerleaders' - an effective
practice, but by no means one which is unique to the Unification church.” (Barker 1984, 174).
tricked to send their life savings to a scammer on the mistaken belief that it will be
paid pack with interest to be fully responsible for their situation - and, a fortiori, we
wouldn’t consider someone who is forced to do so at gunpoint to be responsible at all.
This perspective is surely useful, as it constitutes a necessary basis for the definition of
legal and social responsibility. However, it poorly translates in the case of higher-order
social influence, where the stakes of social interaction are precisely the goals and
values of a specific agents.
[1.11] Indeed, the Thought Reform model works on the premise that a victim’s internal states
of mind are manipulated by external intervention, therefore undermining the victim’s
ability to take decisions autonomously. To reconcile this idea with our baseline model
of social agency, only two conclusions are possible: either the intervention functionally
erases one’s will to replace it with their reformer’s ; or the external intervention is
insufficient to erase one’s will. The two solutions to this dilemma, compounded by
their very afferent legal and social implications, seem to explain adequately the
polarization of the debate over coercive conversion. On one side, anti-NRM activists
insist that the social influence exerted by NRMs effectively turn their victims mind-
controlled zombies ; on the other, “apologists” such as Barker concede the existence of
this social influence but deny that it is meaningfully undermining members’ agency. In
our view, this dichotomy is meaningfully dissolved when accounting for the complex
cognitive and social processes underlying the determination of human agency. In
micro-sociology, it is generally accepted that human social behavior is regulated by
contextual norms related to an agent’s understanding of their role within an interaction
(Goffman 1956). On this basis, it is hardly surprising that the social context defined by
NRMs sets specific social norms, or that the members adapt their self-expression to
meet those norms. However, this simple observation doesn’t entail in any way that the
social context defined by NRMs is innocuous, or that it cannot undermine agency in a
more subtle and fundamental manner.
[1.12] In the present document, we argue that the debate around coercive coercion is
critically flawed by the implicit premise of a dichotomy between an “internal” thought
process and “external” influences over it. We consider that social activity (and its
relation to cognition) is best understood through the construction of what we would
call “practical premises for public action” (Táíwò 2018) or “social constraints” (Guénin--
Carlut 2024b). Those are not quite external nor internal to the mind of agents, as they
constitute the common ground through which a community of agents understand and
engage with a given social context. In this light, the social influence exerted by the UC
should not be understood as a form of “mind control”, but rather as the construction of
a social context where any attitude other than blind faith is simply not afforded to UC
members. In itself, this process has nothing unusual, as it is not different from the
manner in which participants in a discussion collectively decide which premises are
accepted within the context of the discussion. The specificity of the social context set
by the UC is rather in its structure, more specifically in the manner in which it seems
specifically tuned to instill in the members a rigid sense of self-identity tied to specific
(UC defined) social norms. In other words, the social organization of the UC illustrate
what we would call identity capture (Guénin--Carlut 2022b). Before we make that
argument, however, we will attempt to provide more context to our discussion by
drawing a more complete picture of the history and organization of the UC.
2) The making of the Unification Church
[2.1] The Unification Church (or colloquially “the moonies”) constitutes a broad and
internationally implanted New Religious Movement, constituted of a deeply
intertwined network organizations, businesses, ventures, charities and religious
communities. In the following section, we will distinguish between Unification Church
(UC) as a general term for the formal institution representing the group’s leadership in
the Western context, and Unification Church Movement (UCM) to designate the broader
constellation of related actors and groups. This distinction matters immensely, as the
UCM could be present in a community without any official UC presence, in virtue of
the penetration of an informal religious community and an ecology of businesses which
maintain strong ties to that community (Bromley and Blonner 2012). This makes the
UC quite difficult to study from a macro-sociological perspective, for lack of a clear
methodology to infer how many people participated in its ecology and in which
capacity. However, Reverend Moon compiled many of the UC core principles,
teachings, and imperatives in a broadly diffused book titled “The Divine Principle”
(Moon 1966). Furthermore, the UCM allowed the sociologist of religion Eileen Barker
to overtly integrate their community with the explicit goal of studying their practices
and structure - apparently as an attempt to counter the negative exposition of the
church (Barker 1984, 14). Furthermore, other ethnographers were able to covertly study
the UCM, including David Frank Taylor. This available information provides us with
an overall coherent picture of the ideology and organizational culture of both the UC
and the UCM, applying at least to the UK and US branches of the Church and
movement.
[2.2] The UC was officially founded in 1954 by Sun Myung Moon (M. L. Mickler 1993),
around the central tenet of ushering the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth through the
unification of humanity within Moon’s religious movement. Its theology, as presented
in “The Divine Principle” (Moon 1966), draws heavily from its explicit christian
influences. However, it occasionally deviates from the most widely shared christian
beliefs and discourses, often in a manner that seems to reveal quite straightforwardly
the core elements of UC ideology. For example, the UC holds that the fall from the
garden of Eden is due to Eve’s marital infidelity, and that Jesus’ failure to start a family
and renew the bonds that unite humanity was a tragic mistake – leading to the
designation of Sun Myung Moon as the Second Advent. The importance of familial
piety and unity is omnipresent in unificationist doctrine, starting at the top of the
theology : Sun Myung Moon and his wife Hak Ja Han were referred to as “True
Parents”, as their stated role was to serve as the parents of the grand family that they
understood the Church to be. Following the same logic, new recruits to the UC are
called “spiritual children”, in relation to the “spiritual parents” who brought them to
the church, and were therefore placed in a symbolic situation of deference toward elder
members of the organization. More generally, the UC understands the organization of
the cult by analogy to family relation, both being intertwined dimensions of the
“unification” it strives toward.
[2.3] Indeed, UC discourse systematically centers marriage and the nuclear family as the
pillars of humanity’s renewal, unification and access to the kingdom of heaven. It
especially emphasizes that the betrayal of the “promise” of family in the form of
adultery or sex before marriage are Satan’s tools to undo the work of God and Moon on
earth. As the church strives to “unify” Christianity, it also strives to “unify” man and
woman into marriage. Sun Myung Moon being the center of the church, the task of
administering the most holy event in a believer’s life is naturally up to him. For the first
decades of its existence, the marriage ceremony known as the “Blessing Ceremony”
would see Sun Myung Moon marry large numbers of couples at once. The people being
married would usually be selected a month prior to the ceremony, and would not
typically have any kind of relationship prior to their Moon-declared engagement. As
the Church grew, and Moon’s personal attention would become a more limited
resource, these ceremonies grew into spectacular mega-weddings where hundreds,
thousands, and – according to the UC’s own book-keeping - eventually up to 30.000
couples would be married simultaneously (Taekon 2014). The designation process
would evolve during the 2000s and would see local leaders take a more active role, and
children native to the church would even have their parents choose who they marry
instead of UC officials. The blessing ceremony would also occasionally be officiated by
members of local churches instead of Moon.
[2.4] The Blessing Ceremony, and more generally the regulation of wedding by the
Unification Church, did a lot of work to cement the worldview it proposed. Indeed, the
active role of the UC in both the ceremony of wedding and the decision of who was
wedded expressed at the same time two core tenets of its doctrine: the importance of
marriage in one’s relation to God; and the legitimacy of the UC in mediating one’s
matrimonial life. The power of that institution was further compounded by the fact
that wedding itself, rather than a basic right of UC members, was practically made a
reward for committed members. Notably, the UC required a three years period of
celibacy as a condition to be selected for the Blessing Ceremony (Bromley and Shupe
1979, 134). Given that family life was overtly defined by the Church as a central element
of one’s faith, critical to one’s relation to God and one’s commitment to the Church,
this practically required a blind leap of faith by its members. They were expected to
display full commitment to the UC in their religious and personal life, even while the
UC alone was in a position to allow them to display their commitment in the first
place. The regulation of wedding by the UC can therefore be seen as the expression of a
broader worldview, one placing faith in God in the center of one’s personal life, and the
UC as a legitimate mediator of one’s faith.
[2.5] Indeed, members of the UC are expected to display the same ethos of total
commitment in all dimensions of their lives. The routine of a UC member involves the
re-framing of every of their daily activities in the language and theology of the Church
(Lofland and Stark 1965). Furthermore, they must practice absolute honesty in the
expression of their feelings to both their peers and their superiors during (collective or
dyadic) confessions. Indeed, the authentic expression of one’s heart is seen as a core
virtue for a Moonie, one which builds the connection to both the Church and God, and
allows the validation of one’s true self by the collective (Parsons 1986). The intimate
relationships built in this manner are typically framed by analogy to family
relationships, either between parent and child or between siblings, but always
providing a very clear definition of a dominant and subordinate role). The child must
obey his parent, but they must do so out of the earnest expression of their trust and love
rather than dutiful obedience ; the younger sibling must submit to the older sibling in
the same authentic manner, lest they reproduce the fratricide of Caïn (Parsons 1986).
Hence, the authenticity that is so encouraged by the Church must only be understood
within the context of the role one is assigned. If Moonies must earnestly express their
heart’s content, it is because they must trust theirs peers and elders to decide which
feelings adequately express their assigned condition, and discourage those which do
not.
[2.6] The important role of community in the spiritual development of Moonies led to a
strong emphasis on communitarian dwelling from the inception of the UC (Bromley
and Bobbitt 2009). This practice was first imported in the USA by the first Japanese UC
missionaries to set foot in the country in 1959 (M. L. Mickler 1993). It led to the
development of many small and relatively autonomous groups scattered around the
country. Those communities only survived through intense work and self-deprivation
by their members, who were expected to “put in long hours without the usual
distractions of domestic/sexual/recreational/occupational responsibilities and options”,
all the while giving away their earnings to the Church and “living out of their
suitcases” (Bromley and Shupe 1979, 122). The community only started to grow notably
when the first missionaries moved from the East coast to the San Francisco Bay area in
1959, and started focusing their recruitment efforts on students and younger adults. In
1970, they were able to buy a plot of land in Boonville, California, which became a
major hub for the UC in the region, serving at the same time as a ritual place, a
recruitment center, and a communal dwelling for its members (M. L. Mickler 1993). The
growth of the UCM, although explicitly encouraged by Reverend Moon, quickly
overcame the limited administrative capacities of the UC proper. UC leaders could
broadcast the norms followed by the movement, they could define certain goals for the
movements, and they could encourage the UC chapters to take certain action. Given
the basis of their legitimacy, the leaders of local chapters would certainly be
incentivized to pay close attention to their instructions. But at an operational level,
they had full discretion to decide on the planning and executions of the overall UC
policy.
[2.7] In particular, the organization of recruitment and fundraising - the bread and butter of
the UC - was almost exclusively left to the discretion of local leaders. For example,
Mobile Fundraising Teams, a set of small crews devoted to door-to-door or street sales
for fundraising, was developed by local chapters and spread horizontally before being
coopted by Reverend Moon (Bromley and Shupe 1979, 120–24). The major holdings of
the UCM were generally owned individually by core UC figures, and centralized in the
Unification Church International to enable the distribution of funds to useful projects
(Bromley 1985). However, in the absence of a systematic oversight system, even this
attempt at centralizing the economic activities of the UC was at best inefficient. The
importance of Moon’s personal approval in securing funding projects meant that his
inner circle would routinely feud to secure funding for their own projects by
overplaying their importance, while downplaying the importance of other projects.
Many major investments of the UC turned out to be major money sinks, either due to
the inadequate information available to the UC leadership, the inexperience of their
leaders, or because they were effectively subsidies to the UC’s other objectives (mainly
recruitment and propaganda) (Bromley 1985). In addition to UC’s major companies, the
UCM included many companies and unofficial enterprises led by members in the name
of and to the profit of the UC, which the UC simply lacked the administrative power to
manage (or even be aware of).
[2.8] Despite the heavy insistence of the UC on the principle of “following the center”, the
decentralization of decisions power and resources appears to be an intentional feature
of the UC. Indeed, the UC is organized around a chapter-based structure: the parent
organization led by Reverand Moon allows small and relatively independent
organizations or groups to use the names, iconography, models, etc, defining its
doctrine. It may in principle withdraw license to use these elements, but practically
lacks the ability to monitor the activity of individual chapters. Available evidence
suggests that this was limited to blatant attacks on the UC’s core teachings, e.g. Woo
Myung-Shik’s claim that he was the illegitimate son of Moon and his demand that
female followers procreate with him outside the bonds of marriage (Unification Church
of Japan 2002). While national organizations headquarters formally oversaw the UCM
in their respective regions, they maintained minimal permanent staff, relying instead
on task-specific committees recruiting among local administrations or even rank-and-
file members for the organization of UC projects. In absence of a systematic
monitoring of UC activities, the permanent staff and core leaders of the UC could only
maintain loose oversight over those committees (Bromley and Shupe 1979, 135). The
UC as a whole therefore incorporates multiple scales and scopes of activity : national,
regional and local ; religious, economic, and political ; each maintaining its own
organization, leadership, and resources. Although extensive evidence is not available
for every national chapter, it is safe to say that the same logic applies everywhere.
Indeed, the layering of the UC was present in the UC from the moment of its Korean
inception (Syn-Duk 1967), and it is clear that the UC simply lacked the administrative
capacity to conduct its business otherwise.
[2.9] The overall reliance of the UC on charismatic authority, together with the high level of
autonomy practically afforded to local chapters, predictably led to a fragmentation of
the movement’s practices and ideology. Local leaders could indeed rely on operational
initiative and their own charismatic presence to build a power basis essentially
independent from the UC itself. The most significant example of this is the leadership
of the Durst couple over the Bay Area UCM. Durst indeed introduced the practice of
establishing an overtly secular presence in the region to covertly introduce potential
members to the organization, enabling in massive growth in recruitment (Bromley and
Shupe 1979, 138). In a notable display of political acumen, Reverend Moon handled that
threat to his authority by “promoting” Fred Durst to the presidency of the American
UC branch, hence publicly rewarding his work while effectively cutting him from his
power base by requiring him to move to New York. More importantly, Moon’s personal
importance in the symbolic authority and the organization of the UC meant that the
limited level of centralization he could achieve during his life could not plausibly
survive his death. Within two years of Moon’s 2012 passing, the UC exploded in three
organizations competing for legitimacy as Moon’s heritage (“Unification Church”
2024): the legacy Family Federation for World Peace and Unification, controlled by
Moon’s widow Han ; the Global Peace Foundation and Family Peace Association,
founded by Moon’s son Hyun Jin Moon and church leader Chung Hwan Kwak ; and the
Rods of Iron Ministry, led by Moon’s sons Hyung Jin Moon and Kook-jin Moon .
[2.10] Despite its decentralized nature, the UC was able to effectively pursue a strategy of
influence in the countries it was implanted in, generally centered on building quid pro
quo alliances with the dominant conservative parties. The Moon-founded Washington
Times (not to be confused with the older, more liberal Washington Post) arguably
played an important role in the development of the US Republican Party from 1982
onward (Ridgeway 2007; Campbell 2024), laying the foundation for more extremist and
racially motivated platform (Beirich and Potok 2005). However, the series of events
surrounding the 2022 assassination of Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe are likely
the best available microcosm of the controversies surrounding the UC. The UC
developed from the 70s onward strong ties with the conservative LDP, which
dominated the Japanese political scene almost continuously since its creation in 1955
(Samuels 2001; Nurcan and Doğrul 2022; Hyun 2022; Campbell 2024), due to their
common anti-communist agenda. In particular, Abe’s grandfather Nobusuke Kishi
played an incidental role in this alliance through his cooperation with the co-founder
of the Japanese UC chapter Ryoichi Sasakawa. The UC would provide volunteer work
for LDP campaigns, in exchange for lenience regarding their arguably fraudulent
activities. When Tetsuya Yamagami’s mother decided to give away all her possessions
to the UC, he therefore decided to take revenge against the former Prime Minister and
murdered him with an improvised firearm. The controversy caused by this event led to
the public discovery of the deep ties between the UC and the LDP, and to the forced
resignation of the many political leaders who had demonstrable links to the
organization (Hyun 2022; Campbell 2024).
[2.11] Besides the murky political connections and far-right agenda of the UC, the
circumstances surrounding Abe’s assassination expose the core role played by
allegations of fraud in the controversies surrounding the UC. The millenarist ideology
broadcasted by the UC, in itself, provides decent grounding to these allegations. The
people who gave away their time and money did so under the UC-inspired belief that
this was the only manner in which they could save their souls from impeding doom.
However, the UC also practiced the even more questionable practice of “spiritual sales”,
i.e. the sell of items with alleged spiritual abilities to laypeople and members alike. The
National Lawyers Network against Spiritual Sales claims to have received 4,537
consultations about this practice between 1987 and 2021, with an aggregated total of
about $1 billion in claims for damages (Sharp 2022; see also Nurcan and Doğrul 2022).
In what is possibly the most extreme instance of this practice, members were told to
pay “liberation fees” of up to $5000 (for Japanese citizens) to rescue their 7 jlast
generations of ancestors from the flames of Hell (Han 2022; Campbell 2024). Given the
UC expectation of unconditional trust toward elders, it is not an understatement to
claim that those donations were demanded under pressure. Furthermore, as was
emphasized in both Singer’s research (Singer and Lalich 1995) and in the 1991-2003
“Give Us Back Our Youth” Japanese lawsuit, UC recruiters would routinely fail to
disclose their association to the organization, allowing them to build strong links of
trust with recruits before they could understand the financial demands associated to
this relationship.
[2.12] In the light of these elements, we can conclude that if the UC had at any point the goal
of producing a “total zombifying effect”, it failed dramatically to do so. While it
handled internal threats to Moon’s authority more than adequately, it did not prevent
the emergence of these threats in the first place, which should be expected if members
were indeed made into “low-IQ, low-affect zombies”. Perhaps most importantly,
zombification would in fact have run directly contrary to the organizational logic of the
UC. At all time and at all scales, the UC relied heavily on the operational initiative of
local chapters and rank-and-file members while retaining very minimal oversight over
the actual organization of the movement. This model arguably had some positive traits
given the apparent objectives of the UC. Notably, it ensured that Moon’s personal
authority would remain the only centralizing force in the movement, and that factions
within the movement could not possibly challenge his power by capturing a practically
non-existent central administration. Regardless of the function we could infer to this
trait, it was unambiguously a core element of the UC’s organization from its very
beginning. This meant that, were UC members actually made into thoughtless zombies,
the entire organization would instantly grind to a halt. As exposed in the previous
section, we believe that the actual process at play is more subtle and pernicious than
mere “mind control”. We will now turn to make this argument in more detail, by first
exposing the neurocomputational framework of Active Inference and the previous
array of works which applied it to the question of social power.
3) An Active Inference account of power
[3.1] As seen in section 1, the literature on the social organization of the UC provides more
questions than answers, as sociologists of religion do not seem to agree on the
dynamics of conversion. In particular, some sociologists (e.g. Lofland and Stark 1965;
Bromley, Shupe, and Ventimiglia 1979; Barker 1984) hold that conversion is a voluntary
process, and the organization only provides a social context in which individual can
freely choose to participate. On the contrary, some others (e.g. Zablocki 2001; Singer
and Lalich 1995) hold that conversion is a coercive process, and that it targets the
alteration of the inner thought process of the convertee to align it with the expectations
of the organization and enforce belonging. In other words, the literature is clustered in
a manner that associates the statement that “conversion is coercive” to the statement
that “conversion targets the alteration of internal mental processes”. This association is
especially blatant given the polemical context of the debate. It strongly suggests that
authors operate under the assumption that agency is the expression of one’s internal
values and thoughts, and that going against the free expression of agency (e.g. by unduly
affecting one’s values and thoughts) is the hallmark of coercion. However, we will
hereby argue that this framing is critically flawed, as it is based on an incorrect
dichotomy between “internal” and “external” processes.
[3.2] As Barker argues, all social context induce socialization and (to some extent) the
alignment to a set of norms and values which govern this context. As a trivial example,
participating to a conversation in English entails to understand and respect the syntax
and semantics characterizing this language. Fluent speakers will likely come to use this
language beyond the scope of conversations, e.g. while talking to themselves or making
plans for the future, effectively internalizing those rules. Would it be fair to say that
English speakers are being indoctrinated? That would be a stretch, especially since in
an anglophonic context understanding English is a core enabler of one’s agency. More
generally, we argue that inducing the internalization of norms and values
(communicative or otherwise) is not a sufficient criterion for establishing the coercive
nature of conversion. At the same time, cognition is a situated, enactive process which
extends into the world beyond the mind of the agent. More generally, public behavior
such as language and other forms of communication play a constructive role in one’s
cognitive processes (Clark 2006; Zawidzki 2013; Guénin--Carlut 2024b). To force one’s
hand is to force one’s mind, if only in the way one will have to reconcile with the
memory of enacting the coerced act. Therefore, highlighting that conversion is above
and before all grounded in the internalization social norms expressed in the context of
public behavior does not prove that it is not coercive in nature.
[3.3] In order to resolve these tensions, we will need to provide a more specific picture of
how the mind works. In particular, we will recruit the theory of Active Inference as a
basic model of human cognition. Active Inference is a theory stemming from
computational neuroscience, which was first formulated in 2006 (Friston, Kilner, and
Harrison 2006) and progressively refined into an integrative model of cognition (as
expressed e.g. in Friston et al. 2022; 2023). In a nutshell, it holds that the brain works by
anticipating upcoming sensations, and selecting actions that induces the realization of
those anticipations. Assuming that basic knowledge about one’s life cycle is embedded
in brain dynamics (e.g. expecting oneself to go look for water when feeling thirsty), this
explains in a very elegant and minimal way how we can solve on the fly the complex
optimization problems necessary for adaptive perception and action (Kaplan and
Friston 2018; Hipólito et al. 2021). Indeed, directly calculating from our visual
sensations what is the 3d shape of an object, or what is the optimal way to mobilize
specific muscle, are nearly intractable task. Additionally, they necessitate a lot more
raw information that the amount we can practically gather or compute. Simply relying
on minimal, action-oriented models of what our world look like, and gathering the
minimal amount of information necessary to adjust our actions, is a lot more efficient
computationnally and informationally - assuming of course that our model is at least
roughly correct (Clark 2015).
[3.4] Say we cross the path of an aggressive dog and prepare to flee. The classical, old school
cognitivist picture would have us run a “aggressive dog” filter over the entire scope of
our sensory cues (at the same time as many other filters, corresponding to every type
object we could potentially recognize), then given a positive outcome compute the
optimal policy given our specific situation, and then only recruit motor planning to
define and execute our flight plan. As stated above, this is computationally impractical,
if not impossible to realize with an adequate robustness and speed to regulate
behaviour. The Active Inference picture is that some unexpected cue (say, a snarling in
of an aggressive dog, and we’d then pay specific attention to an array of other, more
friendly? is it even a dog? am I feeling able to run at the moment? is there any place
nearby where it couldn’t follow me? The second picture explains why we can react
immediately (even though maybe erratically) to unexpected circumstances, instead of
freezing to compute elaborate plans based on information we don’t have. When
assessing complex situations (especially ones that we’re used to), we tend to find
ourselves looking at relevant dimensions of the problem without having to make
explicit calculations over a complex mental model of our world. This is why we should
take the model it proposes seriously, even when it contradicts our folk wisdom about
human psychology.
[3.5] Incidentally, a core feature of this model is that it dissolves our intuitive model of
agency - understood as our ability to take decisions aimed to fulfill intrinsic values and
objectives, based on the information we have at our disposition. Simply speaking, our
motivations reduce under Active Inference to embodied, situated knowledge about
ourselves and the world we live in (Clark 2020; Guénin--Carlut and Albarracin 2024;
Guénin--Carlut 2024b). This knowledge is not embedded into abstract values and
objectives held in the privacy of our own minds, and much less into explicit
propositional beliefs like those assumed by philosophy of knowledge. It is embedded at
a very basic level in the way our attention is dynamically distributed toward sensations
that are maximally useful to minimize the uncertainty of our upcoming sensations (cite
Sengupta). Let’s revisit the example of the dog above: we pay attention to aggressive
dog cues, and then immediately to the relevant information for our exit. We don’t stop
to make explicit plans based on the totality of the information that we can access
visually, the entirety of our autobiographical memories, and the complete list of the
goals we’ve been trying to achieve. We find ourselves looking at the relevant
dimensions of the problem at hand without any sensible effort, because we use the
context to identify those dimensions and proactively monitor them. The values and
objectives we enact are implicitly present in the association we make in doing so. For
all practical purposes, we experience the (presumably aggressive) dog as something that
elicits fleeing, and we visually sample immediate surroundings (while estimating our
own bodily state) so as to acquire the minimal information serving that one contextual
goal.
[3.6] This experience of the world as a stream of minimal, action-oriented representations
was described by phenomenologists as a landscape of affordances (Bruineberg and
Rietveld 2014). Affordance is a foundational term of ecological psychology which
describes an (actual or perceived) opportunity for action. In this picture, the basic
elements of our perception come packaged with the actions they provide the
opportunity for (i.e. the action which they afford). The aggressive dog is perceived as
something to be fled, as is made evident by the immediate shift of our attention toward
the (implicit) planning of our escape. If a plexiglass wall separated us from the dog, we
would perceive their presence as a neutral fact that doesn’t elicit any specific feeling or
action; if they were friendly, their presence would maybe be experienced as a positive
fact affording petting or a mildly negative fact affording dodging the dog’s wet nose
nudges. The point we aim to make is that the experience of facts in the world is not
separated from the experience of the specific actions they elicit, or from their
emotional valence (Guénin--Carlut and Albarracin 2024). We experience the world as a
landscape of relatively high-level, rich percepts packaging perceptive concepts with
their direct consequences on our mood, metabolism, and the stream of actions we’re
enacting. In other words, the norms, goals and value which guide our actions are
embedded in our immediate experience of our world.
[3.7] The same goes, of course, for cultural norms and values. Humans are cognitively
complex creatures, notably - mainly - because of our inborn expectation to act with
other humans and our associated tendency to track their mental states. Indeed, human
lack any specific adaptation that could explain the exceptional character of human
cognition and social organization (Heyes 2012b; 2012c; 2012a; 2019). The main
empirically discernible difference is our much stronger motivation to communicate
with our peers and to engage in shared tasks, starting with our inborn motivation to
track the eyes and facial expressions of caretakers. In particular, Tomasello and
colleagues (Tomasello et al. 2005; Tomasello and Carpenter 2007; Tomasello and Moll
2010) identify shared intentionality as the central particular of human social cognition.
Shared intentionality differs from simple collaboration (even with good mind reading
ability, like those displayed by corvids) by the effort made to define specific roles and
rules for the shared tasks, which allow agents to form a bird’s eye view on their own
shared activity. Perhaps most importantly, it enables the development of intentional
teaching (Tomasello 2016; Brandl, Mace, and Heyes 2023), an activity where two agents
co-operate in order to transfer skills mastered by one to the other. In accordance to this
line of research, it has become beyond doubt that the development of mature human
agency critically requires the integration of cultural skills through intentional teaching,
or more generally cultural learning (Henrich 2017). In other words, shared
intentionality (together with the social motivation and the tendency for reflexivity it
entails) provides a sufficient basis to explain the evolution of the human specie as a
eusocial cognitive behemoth.
[3.8] This picture resonates naturally with the Active Inference model. Indeed, Active
Inference regards one’s model of the world as the core generator of one’s percepts - and
implicitly, one’s self model as the core generator of one’s actions. If Active Inference is
an appropriate model of cognition, it is therefore only natural that the development of
technologies allowing the social construction of one’s self-model lead to the kind of
runaway evolution in cognitive complexity that the human species has experienced.
This synergy has long been noted by Active Inference theorists, who insisted on the
role of reflexive engagement with one’s social context in the development of cultural
affordances (Ramstead, Veissière, and Kirmayer 2016) and its role in the evolution of
cultural evolution (Veissière et al. 2020; Guénin--Carlut 2024b). To paraphrase Veissière
et al. (2020), paying attention to how “one such as oneself” would engage with or react
to a given situation entails a constructive role of ambient cultural norms in one’s self-
model, and therefore enable the integration of cultural norms and knowledge. But then,
there is a deep permeability between one’s abstract cultural knowledge and one’s
embodied, situated anticipation and planning of their own actions. And because we
perceive the world as a landscape of affordances, i.e. a frame for our own actions to
unfold, this permeability extends to our phenomenological experience.
[3.9] In the words of Guénin--Carlut and Albarracin (2024), our immediate perception of the
world is in itself embedded with the cultural norms and knowledge that determine the
kind of action our environment affords. In the same way that we use a binocular to see
from afar, we use cultural concepts like “father” or “boat” to understand our material
and cultural context, and those concepts come with a specific model of how the token
should act and how we should relate to them. Therefore, the cultural norms and value
we project onto the world seem to flow from the objective nature of objects in the
world, rather than our subjective understanding and judgment regarding those objects.
But then, there is no meaningful separation between the “internal” domain of personal
beliefs and motivations and the “external” domain of social relations and cultural
performance. By construction, our intentional states are the prolongation of our
engagement with a given cultural and material context. Therefore, to say that a given
organization alters the private thoughts of its members so as to induce the
internalization of the norms and value which govern its public practices is not to say
much, beyond the fact that the members indeed act in the context of the organization.
This is not to say, however, that we should simply abandon the notion of coercion or
social influence. On the contrary, we expect to provide here a much clearer picture of
their mechanisms.
[3.10] Following Táíwò (2018), we will use the fable of the naked emperor as a parable for the
nature of social power. In this fable, a trickster sells to an emperor an imaginary
garment which they claim to be invisible to the incompetent and stupid. Neither the
emperor nor his minister dare to admit that they see no such garment, for fear of
appearing as incompetent or stupid. As the emperor leads a procession in town,
everyone chimes in to compliment the emperor’s new cloth, until a child exclaims “But
he hasn’t got anything on!” and causes the crowd to finally acknowledge that the
emperor is in fact naked. Then, nothing happens. The procession continues it course as
normal. Táíwò questions the interpretation that the townspeople had failed to believe
their sense and understand that the emperor was naked from the beginning. Rather, he
proposes that the townspeople failed to publicly acknowledge that fact due to the
power relationship which relates them the emperor. Gullible as he is, the emperor is
still the one who commands armed men and powerful political alliances, and
humiliating the emperor by being first to point out his nakedness would be very
unwise. The procession continues as normal after the townspeople acknowledge the
emperor’s nakedness because his humiliation didn’t change anything important. The
power of the emperor does not lie (at least in first order) in his ability to make people
see clothes where there are none, it lies in his ability to impose “public practical
premises” for social action.
[3.11] Táíwò uses the parable to drive his argument that the target of propaganda is not
private beliefs, but setting the premises for public action. The same can be said of other
relays of social power, such as ritual or war. Indeed, conception of power in social
theory generally revolve around the ability to produce intended outcomes (Brauer and
Bourhis 2006; Pansardi and Bindi 2021). What makes a person or institution socially
powerful is not its ability to produce abstract agreement (which may or may not result
in action), but rather its ability to actually structure social activity. Active Inference
equips us with a dual understanding of social norms and social activity. What agents do
is what they expect themselves to do - not in the abstract, but the embodied and
situated anticipation of their own action in a given material and social context.
Therefore, the exercise of power is dual to being able to set one’s expectations about
one’s own behavior. This power may be a shared enterprise, using deliberation and
negotiation to best reflect everyone’s interest in the course of social activity. It also may
be an unilateral imposition of specific normative expectation, subjugating the agency
of some actor to the will of some other through the threat of violence or any other
mechanism. If we understand one’s ability to set the norms guiding their own activity
as a fundamental component of agency (as does e.g. Barandiaran, Di Paolo, and Rohde
(2009) or Guénin--Carlut (2022a)), this second case entails the effective erasure of the
agency of an actor, and unequivocally counts as coercion.
[3.12] As noted in Guénin--Carlut (2022b), the pivotal role of social identity in regulating
behavior provides an avenue for social control through identity capture. As elaborated
earlier, much of the human capacity for enculturation is driven by mentalizing about
what “one such as oneself” would do in such or such context. Additionally, this
mentalization does not result in a decision tree that would be transparent for the agent,
but instead produces an intrinsically normative perception of social and material
affordances which is entangled with the norms and values in which the agent operates.
Therefore, setting normative expectations related to an agent’s social identity is an
especially powerful method for enacting power. If convinced, the agent will not
experience the interaction as the source of the norms they are expected to perform, but
instead will understand those norms as intrinsic elements of their identity. Therefore,
the reach of the social power enacting in this way extends well beyond the dyadic
interaction the agent is subjected to, and into their own private mental life. The
concept of identity capture aims to capture forms of social power that are enacted in
this specific manner, allowing an elite to canalize and mobilize public activity by
persuading a broader population that they belong to a certain social identity which
come equipped with certain norms. The prototypical example discussed in Guénin--
Carlut (2022b) is this of nationalism, and the role it played in the construction of
modern Nation-States. However, such historical examples come with very limited
ethnographic sources. Here, we aim to specify the mechanisms underlying identity
capture by applying it to a contemporary organization: the Unification Church.
4) From the choregraphy of total participation
to conversion to the UC
[4.1] As we have articulated it in section 1, the question we are trying to address in the
present discussion is the following: can organizations coerce individuals into
internalizing the norms and values associated to membership. If so, what cognitive and
social mechanisms can explain this process ? The account of human cognition under
Active Inference articulated in section 3 does some work to answer this question.
Social norms and social identity are not simply the topic of abstract information which
an agent can opt to use or not, they fully participate in the generative model which
underlies their immediate perception and their decision making at the most
fundamental level. Therefore, the domain of public practices and that of private
mentalization are not that far away. Produce a context where an agent rationally
expects themselves to think this or do that, and their cognitive dynamics will
spontaneously align to produce that outcome. The production of a context where an
agent expects to comply is not that difficult: present someone with the barrel of a gun,
and they will certainly feel compelled to provide any labor or resource you demand.
However, once the dominant agent looks away, the dominated agent is perfectly free to
do anything else – and they will likely be motivated produce other social and material
contexts which prevent further coercion. For the purpose of this article, the question is
therefore how the Unification can produce a social context which robustly enforces
compliance, but also drives presumably healthy and radically free people to decide to
spend the near-totality of their waking life in an arguably Orwellian social context
instead of walking away.
[4.2] In the public expression of its norms, the Unification Church makes its expectations
toward prospective members very clear. Members are expected to respect the symbolic
power of the Church ; they are expected to fully participate in its ritual activity,
together with the proper emotional expression of elation ; they are expected to believe
in rigid familial values centered around the dominant role of the parents (and the father
in particular), and to enact those values in their personal lives ; they are expected to
display extreme altruism through the material and emotional support of co-members,
as well as remind them of their obligations to the cult ; and perhaps most importantly,
they are expected to support the Church by donation as much money and work that
they can possibly afford, with a special focus on helping with the conversion of new
members. They are also constantly reminded through rather unsubtle cues that norm
violation (even through a general attitude of uncooperativeness) will be met with
exclusion, and they overtly monitor each other to ensure the continued performance of
those norms. None of this seem to be particularly shameful from the perspective of the
Church, as all of these facts were abundantly documented in Eileen Barker’s seminal
work, The Making of a Moonie (Barker 1984). Indeed, Barker openly presented herself as
a sociologist engaging in participant observation in order to document the activity of
the Church. While we will quote extensively from this last book, we need to emphasize
that from a purely factual perspective, Barker’s account is absolutely consistent with
this of other ethnographers. For example, we could have replaced every single quote
below with a similar excerpts from Taylor (1978) without altering our core argument.
[4.3] Our core argument is that members of the UC are not made to comply with norms they
perceive as external, as would be the case in a situation of coercion through threat of
violence. Rather, the UC sets a social and material context in which agents are prone to
develop a sense of self-identity which is so thoroughly embedded in the UC’s ideology
that they become unable to form the coherent intention to resist, evade or even act
outside its norms and its commands. We further propose to consider three distinct
processes underlying “conversion”, which we name as follow : 1) “lovebombing”, or
conditional validation ; 2) social filtering ; 3) the expectation of total participation.
While those processes work in concert, they can be understood in rough chronological
succession to produce subjects that are fully compliant to the public premises for
action set by the Unification Church. Note however that we will not attempt to propose
a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for conversion, in the style of Lofland and
Stark (1965). Rather, we will attempt to describe and explain in terms of Active
Inference a set of key socio-cognitive processes which collectively produce a social
context where agents cannot meaningfully deviate from the directives of the Church
even away from peer monitoring. We propose to understand this process, i.e. the
integration of one’s self-identity into a social and cognitive landscape where their
agency is efficiently canalized to flow along the expectations of the Church, through
the concept of identity capture as described in Guénin--Carlut (2022b).
[4.4] The first process we will describe was coined by Barker as “lovebombing”, which we
could also describe as an ostentatious attitude of conditional validation. From the
moment they arrive, attendees are showered with ostentatious and quite extreme
demonstration of affection by devout Moonies, ranging from validating and
encouraging comments to physical acts of affection. The demonstrations of affection
and support would also be directed toward each other, and (perhaps most importantly)
toward the ritual context itself as “members always endorse every procedure with
cheers and applause” (Barker 1984, 79). Barker notes that “The aura of loving often
prompts newcomers to declare very positive approval for the kindness shared among
everyone” (Barker 1984, 77), and that “It is difficult for a guest to maintain reservations
about a community that defines itself as actualizing unconditional love.” (Barker 1984,
78). At the same time, members use those demonstrations of affection to convey,
implicitly but firmly, the expectations that a similar attitude is expected of newcomers.
Moonies would intentionally monitor their reaction, and answer perceived expression
of disagreement or disinterest with a gradation of calls to compliance: “Members gauge
newcomers'- reactions to this stream of events, scrutinizing continuously their
responses to each situation to measure the extent of their participation. They appraise
carefully prospective members' receptiveness to lectures. If one does not seem to be
giving full effort during songs, a member gives him a slight nudge and a broad smile
while singing and clapping loudly to demonstrate the happiness of taking part” (Taylor
1978, 79).
[4.5] At the same time, Moonies are careful to express these calls in a non-adversial manner,
but rather by “supporting one another when new people express themselves in ways
that are not consistent with group consensus” (Barker 1984, 78). When this strategy is
unsuccessful, however, they will explicitly ask attendees to leave, while still framing
this demand as an expression of support for the ingroup. Barker notes that “an implicit
rule is: Follow directions and you will have a very enjoyable weekend. Those who step
out of line are admonished by reminders that they are not fully cooperating. For
example, one participant was slightly uncooperative within his group, yet not overtly
outspoken or negative. He was confused and asked the training-session "director,
"Aren't you using mind control here"? After conferring with the director, his group
leader told the newcomer that he had to leave. He was escorted immediately from the
training session to a bus stop. His group leader told him she regretted his leaving, but
obviously he was not ready to hear the truth with a pure heart and open mind. His
skepticism could influence adversely the spiritual growth of other new people. A
former training-session participant commented on the fact that a guest's response to
caring gestures must be one of compliance.” (Barker 1984, 80). Hence, newcomers are
presented with an overwhelming demonstration of support and validation, but which is
unambiguously presented as conditional on their reciprocation and their compliance
with local norms.
[4.6] While first cementing the prospective convert’s emotional bound to the Church and its
community, love-bombing would have the effect of aggressively filtering populations
that are especially susceptible to conversion. Indeed, Barker notes that “moonies do not
appear to be rejecting the values that were instilled into them during their childhood
[by participating in the UC]; they appear, on the contrary, to have imbibed these so
successfully, that they are prepared to respond to an opportunity (which society does
not seem to be offering them) to live according to those very standards and ideals”
(Barker 1984, 210). By and large, converts come from conservative Christian middle-
class background, with a strong emphasis on the importance of family and community
cohesion, as well as conventional markers of success and respectability (Barker 1984,
210–15). In particular, it appeared especially important that converts’ sense of social
cohesion and belonging would be grounded in assiduous church activity from an early
age, as “churchgoing had been particularly important during early childhood; later they
were unlikely to drift into a casual relationship with a church, but would have decided
either to keep to regular worship or to discontinue contact with institutionalized
religion altogether.” (Barker 1984, 213). Hence, the context of UC seminars would have
been coherent with their prior experience of religious activity. The same orientation
toward external validation is also visible in the Moonies’ academic performance, which
tended to be “considerably more consistent in their academic performance, though
with a smaller proportion of excellent grades” (Barker 1984, 198) than the general
population.
[4.7] Overall, these elements paint a coherent picture of the prospective converts’
personality and values. Barker adds that not only will the potential Moonie have done
better than his peers by objective criteria, he is likely to have been encouraged to think
of himself subjectively as an achiever, and he will have started to define himself in such
terms, accepting the criterion of academic success as the pathway to success in
general” (Barker 1984, 215). Overall, it seems the typical convert has the temperament
of an aimless achiever: they feel that they ought to succeed at something, but that are in
a moment of their life when they are not sure what they ought to do precisely. Hence,
they strongly associate the idea of success and purpose with the social validation
provided by school, but also (and most importantly) by family and church. They do not
experience the performative cheerfulness and the overt expectations for continuous
engagement characterizing UC seminars as an external imposition, but rather as the
validation of the priors for social cohesion and support integrated in their early life. In
line with this argument, Lofland and Stark (1965), Galanter et al. (1979), and Barker
(1984) 2 all emphasize that converts would typically experience a high level of “tension”
or “neurotic distress” in the moments leading to conversion, which they hope to solve
2 Barker suggests that “those who had had a happy, secure home background had been ill-prepared
to cope with the disappointments, hurt and disillusionment which they experienced around the
time that they first ventured out into the world, and that such people might experience
considerable relief on meeting a group of friendly people who appeared to share the same values
and to believe in similar standards” (Barker 1984, 214).
through integration to the UC religious community. The early exposition to UC
seminars would therefore strongly select a specific profile of people, especially
susceptible to conversion, by motivating them to attend further seminars while also
discouraging or outright ejecting less susceptible populations.
[4.8] The third and final process we wish to consider in the conversion is an extension of
what Taylor called the “choregraphy of total participation”, emerging from the
intersection of permanent monitoring by / engagement with the members and the
expectation of high emotional arousal of the ritual. As is made abundantly clear above,
conforming to the settings of the UC seminars requires the participant to perform a
high level of emotional elation during the seminars. This subjective experience of
happiness predictably becomes tied to participation in the UC as an institution, and to
the social norms which are explicitly reinforced during the seminars by peer
monitoring as well as preaching. The most interesting aspect, in the present analysis, is
however the very nature of those norms. The most prominent ones are uncritical
deference to its teachings and administration, as well as the performance of volunteer
work. Furthermore, UC preaching tend to heavily accentuate the contrast between
good members on one hand, and bad members or outsiders on the other. For example,
the reverend Moon frequently demean members that are not aggressive or efficient
enough in their proselytism, once claiming “If you have been in the Unification Church
for decades and you do not have any spiritual children, then you are parasites, robbers!”.
Hence, any deviation from the norms defined by the UC, any commitment short of total
participation would be experienced by the member as a betrayal of its core teachings.
This effect is immensely amplified by the relative isolation from the outside world that
members tend to develop over time, which lead the UC to become their one and only
source of social validation.
[4.9] Indeed, Barker (1984) notes that members tend to grow isolated from their non-
members friends and family, due to both the heavy workload demanded by the UC and
to the distinctively alienating and attitudes they integrate in the UC (an observation
corroborated by Lofland and Stark 1965; Taylor 1978; Bromley and Shupe 1979). The
aggressive proselytism demanded by the UC is of special interest here. As the Moonie
attempts to convince friends and family to attend seminar themselves, they can either
succeed (and therefore drive further the integration of their social circle in the UC) or
fail and experience first hand the alienation of their former relations from their new
found happiness. But as noted above, repeat attendees are typically people whose prior
social circle is defined by the expectation of uncritical (although conditional) support,
an attitude that is heavily reinforced by context of the UC seminars. Hence, they will
predictably experience this alienation as a rejection of themselves as a person, and
withdraw from the relation (and therefore drive further the integration of their social
circle in the UC). This repeated experience is very likely to alienate them from society
outside the church, and therefore further drive them away from any social context
where they could reflect critically on their experience in seminars. Hence, the “total
participation” (understood as an emotional performance in the specific context of
seminars) builds over time a “total participation” in the church (understood as a
complete integration of their social activity into the settings of the UC).
[4.10] This context is highly efficient in driving members not only to conform to the norms
set by the UC, but also experience them as an expression of their own agency. This is
made abundantly clear by a UC member who was reported in Taylor (1978, 81) to say
“You know, you must think we are crazy, rushing about doing things for people and
helping them however we can. The staff actually competes to see who can sacrifice the
most. This is the way to bring us the most joy.” In context, “doing things for people and
helping them however we can” is not to be understood at face value as unconditional
altruism. Given the context explained above, it refers either to volunteer work for the
UC or to the performance of “lovebombing” toward other members and potential
converts. But to the member, this work is not experienced as an imposition by the UC
administration in exchange for allowing their participation to the seminars, it is
experienced as something that intrinsically brings them joy. The process leading to
that state of affair is precisely what we aim to explain here. As developed in the section
above, we consider social activity to flow from an agent’s prior expectation regarding
their own behavior and the behavior of others. The UC works to confirm the prior
expectations of the prospective converts, both in the content of the preaching (centered
on family values) and the context set by the seminars (hinged on mutual validation
conditional on adequate participation).
[4.11] We need to turn back, here again, to the predictive model of social engagement
outlined in section 3. If social activity flows from an agent’s predictions about their
own and other’s behavior, the social context in which they act (or in other words, the
practical premises for public action that are locally accepted) become a core structuring
element of an agent’s experience and activity. This context, after all, is a strong
predictor of the meaning carried by specific acts within a social interaction, and of the
adequate way an agent can understand them. Social agents can typically navigate
between different social contexts, and in doing shift between different manners to
reflexively understand their own activity. This entails some degree of agency, not only
within a given context but in the choice of context through which an agent relates to a
given interaction. But if given elements of social context become integrated in every
single act of cognitive engagement by the agent, they become indistinguishable from an
agent’s core traits. Hence, when UC members are driven to relate to themselves as
Moonies in every single aspect of their social life, they are effectively made unable to
escape the norms of social engagement embedded by the UC. The practical premises
for public action embedded in the Moonie identity become defining elements of the
way they relate to the world. And by construction, those premises are set by Church
administration without any feedback from individual members. This process is what
we call identity capture.
[4.12] The cognitive model proposed above enables a novel axis of reflection regarding the
debate on the status of conversion to the UC. On one hand, it clearly does not
constitute a kind of “brainwashing” producing “low-IQ, low-affect zombies”. Members
of the UC are by and large intelligent people, who are perfectly capable to explain
themselves and their motivations to participate in the Church. Furthermore, and unlike
what is assumed by Hunter’s “brainwashing” or even Lifton’s “Thought Reform”, the
UC lacks any mechanism to coerce people into participation. Hence, members act
along their own agenda at any point of the conversion process, and they can simply
leave if they don’t feel the UC enables them to do so. On the other hand, conversion to
the UC cannot be framed as fully voluntary. As was demonstrated above, the social
context set by the UC is clearly and efficiently tuned to erase any agency that
prospective converts would have to resist or renegotiate the influence the Church holds
over them - not only in acts, but also in thought. Of course, the example of the UC
cannot stand as a general model for ritual or the exercise of ideological power. It relies
on a highly specific sociological context, defined by the intersection of industrial
capitalism and Christianity - both recent systems which emerged well after the
development of ritual behavior, and both highly disruptive in their respective historical
context of their introduction. However, in our analysis, this reveals a more fundamental
aspect of the process of “conversion” and its relation to social power.
5) Ideology and identity: the role of ritual in
building the practical premises of public
action
[5.1] As developed above, the core driver of conversion to the Unification Church appears to
be the use of ritual to set the context for social engagement outside the direct influence
of the UC. In itself, ritual is a much older category of social activity, usually
characterized as a communal activity which is 1) defined by the performance of rigid,
stereotypical sequences of actions ; 2) embedded with symbolic and normative meaning
; 3) contains at least some elements that are not causally efficient (Rohan Kapitány and
Nielsen 2015; Hobson et al. 2018; Legare and Nielsen 2020; R. Kapitány, Kavanagh, and
Whitehouse 2020). Ritual behavior is largely believed to be functional in constructing
social identity (Whitehouse and Lanman 2014) and helping with the internalization of
social norms (Boyer and Liénard 2020). To understand the cognitive and sociological
study of ritual, it is however critical to keep in mind that it constitutes a rather
heterogeneous umbrella category with blurry boundaries. Many people would certainly
describe a group of indigenous Asian or American people dancing at designated times
of the days under the influence of stimulant substances as a “ritual”, but would frown at
using the same word to describe the same activity in the context of “clubbing” by
people of European descent. We do not aim to engage in the debate over the
fundamental nature of ritual or the typology of social activity as “ritual” or “non-ritual”.
Rather, we would like to borrow from an approach that focuses on the phylogenetic and
mechanistic description of social activity. Following what Sterelny (2018; 2020) calls the
“ethnographic model of religiosity”, we consider that ritual in its modern, ideological
form is the product of mosaic evolution from prior forms of synchronic, emotional
activities such as song and dance.
[5.2] In this sense, we may not and will not consider the ritualistic activity of the Unification
Church as a prototype for all ritual activity, or even for a collection of phylogenetically
or functionally related ritual activity. What we can do, however, is to outline the
mechanisms of ritual in the context of the Unification Church, and derive by abduction
a more general thread of reflection about the relation between ritual activity and social
power. To do so, we must first describe the evolutionary account of ritual activity
proposed by contemporary cognitive anthropology. Sterelny (2018; 2020) attempts to
summarize the relevant literature as a mosaic evolution along the human lineage
leading to the emergence of articulated religion from prior embodied religion , and
then in some human groups (including those that interest us here) to ideological
religion. Embodied religion is, by Sterelny’s account, nothing but a collection
«distinctive rituals, ceremony, collective activity, and material symbolism». Indeed, we
have a decisive level of evidence that coordinated, embodied activity like song and
dance near certainly constitute early human adaptation which produces mutual
identification through the experience of shared emotions and movement, and therefore
promotes both social cohesion and cultural transmission (Shilton et al. 2020; Savage et
al. 2021). This function is very simple to understand in terms of Active Inference: as
agent act together in a synchronized manner, they come to expect their own movement
and bodily states to correlate and develop a deep form of sympathy (etymologically: to
feel together with). In other words, embodied religion builds an embodied and
emotional common ground between agents, which facilitates further acts of committed
or complex co-operation.
[5.3] Articulated religion, in Sterelny’s sense, emerges when ritual activity does not only
serve to build sympathy but also to institute a shared system of mythological and
identitarian narratives shaping social activity. The religious system of the
contemporary Achuar society, as described in Descola (1993), constitute a
straightforward example of this category. The Achuar provided the foundational
example for the definition of an animistic cosmology, as they understand most living
(and some non-living) entities as full-fledged social agents with whom they must
negotiate in their day-to-day life. Achuar must for example ask for the cooperation of
the “small father of pecaris” to ensure the success of a hunting party, and sing anents to
their crops to plead with them to grow into nutritive vegetables. The rules of
engagement with the spirit world therefore provide structure to all aspects of life in the
Achuar society, up to the way Achuar people understand their own role in the world
(and therefore the cultural affordances they experience). Some Achuar, usually called
shamans by analogy to Siberian religions, develop specific skills which are understood
to give them preferential access to the spirit world. Those skill empower them them to
mediate the interactions between their peers and this world, notably through the ritual
use of natem (also know as ayahuasca). Those ritual specialist are by all means
extremely powerful individuals, as they can use their preferential access to the spirit
world to help as well as harm others in cultivation, hunting, illness, or conflict.
However, they seemingly lack any interest in ruling over their peers, effectively or in
claim: ultimately, they only are (unusually powerful) actors in the overall Achuar
understanding of the world. By analogy to Táíwò’s terminology in Táíwò (2018), we
could describe articulated religion as a system defining and transmitting a common
ground for social interaction and engagement with the world, embedded with many
useful cultural skills.
[5.4] The direct articulation between ritual activity and social power, as is manifest in the
Unification Church, is characteristic of the later-coming category of ideological
religion. Ideological religions are articulated religions where the shared system of
beliefs and norms is reified and used to cement the power of an exclusive elite group.
They plausibly first emerged in the context of the urbanization of Neolithic Levant
societies, which both demanded an unprecedented scale of social coordination in
public works, and allowed the development of social stratification based on the control
of this coordination. This process left exceptionally clear archaeological evidence in the
form of monumental temples, both displaying the dominant power of the priest class
and concretely embodying its ideology in urban structure (Thomas 2012; Guénin--
Carlut 2022c). A defining feature of ideological religion is its asymmetry. Unlike
articulated religion, it is not simply a widely shared system of practices and institutions
by which anyone may make sense of their world. It is a system of practices and
institutions by which everyone must integrate the core norms and beliefs defined by an
exclusive, centralized institution. Within ideological religions, social agents are
expected to organize their social activity in terms exclusively defined by ritual elites -
terms which often include quite prominently the compulsory performance of corvee
labor at the command of religious institutions. Therefore, the development of
ideological religions appear to be deeply tied to the development of the complex,
stratified societies characteristic of the late Neolithic period onward, as it provided
both a powerful solution to the social coordination problems that came with increasing
economic complexity, and the basic epistemic and social infrastructure for full-fledged
stratification. Again by analogy with Táíwò’s terminology in (Táíwò 2022), we could
describe ideological religion as a system where the ground-building characteristic of
religion is the instrument of “elite capture”, i.e. is weaponized to create social control
over the wider population.
[5.5] Although it is quite evident that the context of the contemporary Unification Church
differs widely from this of early Sumerian temples, they share a common problem: they
must bring people to costly cooperation within a context where they are effectively
deprived of all social agency, and they must do so by acting on norms and beliefs
through the use of ritual activity. On this basis, we consider that the well-documented
case of the UC may - accounting carefully for the profound changes but also the
invariances in social context - be used to draw inference about the mechanisms
common to ideological religions. From a functional perspective, the core difference
between the UC and earlier religions is likely the US legal context, which (together
with its marginal position in the US society) prevents the UC from forcefully retaining
members. This is likely a critical reason for the overall cheerful ritual context deployed
by the UC, since (as we have demonstrated in part 4) it plays an important role in the
retention of prospective members. By contrast, many historical religions were tied to
(or directly constituted) a dominant political actor, dealing with a largely captive
population which lacked the power to overtly rise against the religious system or
uproot their lives to join another community. Where they not locally dominant, they
were (and still are) usually passed down familial lines and were the ground for deep
feelings of belonging, making them just as hard to escape (barring a complete cut off
from one’s social web of support and one’s sense of social identity).
[5.6] In this context, the core constraint underlying ideological religions would not be
retention, but rather the ability to effectively legitimize their power and broadcast the
norms expected of the population. Incidentally, the core mechanisms of conversion to
the UC that we identified in section 4 are just as powerful (if not more) in the context of
captive populations. High-arousal rituals would lead individuals to contextualize their
feelings as an expression of the social identity and norms tied to the religion ; and the
shared experience of those rituals would make those same identity and norms
extremely afferent structuring elements of public social activity. Of course, not all
ideological religions rely on high-arousal ritual: Protestantism and Buddhism, for
example, constitute two extremely successful religions largely known for their sobriety.
However, we conjecture that religions which do not rely on high-arousal ritual would
more often than not strongly emphasize the importance of self-reflection in the form of
prayer, meditation or journaling (like Protestantism and Buddhism), leading to a similar
contextualization of one’s private experience in religious ideology. Critically, this
simple process fundamentally reconfigures the landscape of social power. Overt
coercion may force agents to cooperate with a more powerful agent during dyadic
interaction, but dominated agents have access to many resistance strategies. In some
context, they may simply walk away, or they may stop cooperating once outside the
view of the dominating agent (Scott 2009). At scale, it requires the cooperation of many
armed men, which must themselves be persuaded to follow the lead of the dominating
system. On the contrary, ideological power may bring total cooperation even away from
direct interaction, as agents are led to believe that cooperation is an expression of their
own intrinsic agency.
[5.7] This brings us to recontextualize the practice-first account of ideology proposed by
Táíwò (2018), which we discussed in section 3. While we overall agree with Táíwò’s
argument, we cannot fully endorse the view that propaganda aims to shape public
behavior rather than private thought, because of the lack of a clear separation of the
two as distinct domains of activity. To shape one’s premise for public action is to shape
one’s perceived role in the world, and therefore one’s private experience. In fact, we
would argue that the embedding of one’s internal experience in a shared system of
social norms and roles is a fundamental element of human cognition (Guénin--Carlut
2024b). As discussed in section 3, what separate us from other animal species is an
extreme proclivity for acting within shared tasked structured by well-defined social
roles, i.e. shared intentionality, and the associated construction of a landscape of cultural
affordances. In itself, this is not a novel insight. For example, Goffman (1956) has
discussed at length how human social engagement is defined by an active attempt by
social actors to keep face, i.e. maintaining their public behavior in line with their
assumed social role. However, the Active Inference treatment of role-taking exposes
the fundamental entanglement between the domain of public behavior and private
thought. Because our social activity is (according to the Active Inference Framework)
shaped by the definition of cultural affordances based on predictive processes, the
adequate performance of any social role is dual to the internalization of certain
premises regarding the nature of the social world and our role within it.
[5.8] However, the constraints exerted by social context on one’s cognition do not typically
entail a total control of their public activity or their private experience. This emerges
naturally from the reconstructive nature of cultural transmission. Indeed, barring a
telepathic, gene-like reproduction of other people’s expectation, social actors must
necessarily integrate cultural expectations through an active, hypothesis-driven
systematization of the underlying structure of many instances of social interaction.
Hence, the landscape of cultural affordances defining a given social context at a macro
scale is subject to a permanent reconstruction by the engagement of social agents at a
micro scale (Guénin--Carlut 2024b). In other words, the social roles described by
Goffmann are not a given parameter of social interaction, they are actively brought
about by the very agency of the same people who assume them. This, again, is not in
itself a novel insight. For example, Archer (2003; 2007) has extensively described the
role of reflexivity (and in particular internal dialogue) in the exercise of genuine agency
in structured social context. If social agents may be strongly determined by the
accepted premises for public action in the social context they navigate, their internal
dialogue enables them to recruit those premises in any order, shape or form to
determine their own goals or actions. They may for example decide that abstract moral
principles such as humanism or pacifism trump accepted social norms, and campaign
for social change aligned with those ideals. They may decide that their obligations as a
parent or a husband trumps their obligations as a man or a patriot, and attempt to
dodge conscription.
[5.9] Hence, reflexive engagement with oneself - while it is a basic condition for the
integration of social structure in the context of shared intentionality - is also a core
driver of social agency through the specific manner in which a social agent may come
to tie specific social norms to their self-identity (Guénin--Carlut 2024b). This makes it
all the more afferent when the norms embedded a specific social identity appear to
systematically undermine one’s ability for social agency through reflexivity.
Incidentally, this is the case for the Moonie social identity, as it is embedded in the
context set by the Unification Church. While the expectation of deference to the UC,
the choregraphy of total participation and the norm of proselytism bear in and of
themselves on public behavior (the only category of behavior that the UC may
effectively monitor), we have exposed in section 4 how they build over time a very
restricting sense of self-identity. Moonies are not only brought to enact the social role
defined by the UC during the course of a seminar, they are brought to integrate this
role in every aspect of their life - from their emotional experience to their interaction to
people outside the organization. Effectively, this suppresses their ability to relate to
themselves outside of the context set by the UC, and to consider alternative systems of
beliefs under which they could decide on their actions. The process by an agent
integrates such a rigid sense of self-identity that it meaningfully undermines their own
agency, as well as the resulting state and power structure, collectively constitute what
we call identity capture.
[5.10] The core reason why we imagine that self-identity may play such a central role in
bridging one’s cognition and social context is that, according to Active Inference, it
does. As elaborated in section 3, Active Inference postulates that both perception and
action are driven by a single predictive process. As was abundantly discussed in this
literature, this entails that an agents perception of the world entails a model of
themselves, which it strives to maintain in coherence with its actual sensorimotor
states (Hohwy 2016). To perceive that a cliff affords climbing is to perceive oneself as
able to climb it ; to perceive that a glass of water must be drunk is to perceive oneself as
thirsty. The same principle applies above the scale of “simple” sensorimotor
engagement, and within the more abstract context of social engagement and social
identity. To perceive oneself as a Moonie is to perceive the central administration of
the UC and its demands for donation and volunteering as authoritative. The power
relation entailed by this premise is not directly afferent, given the framing of a
competition between internal and external processes. The UC’s power resides precisely
in the fact that its goals and norms do not enter in competition with those of the agent
at any point in the interaction. Rather, it clearly goes out of its way to accommodate the
goals of its recruits - be they community, belonging, or a sense of purpose - and in
doing so it reframes the very goals and norms that structure the agent’s engagement
with the world.
[5.11] On this basis, we will turn back to the public and academic debate regarding the
coercive nature of conversion to the UC. We hope to have made abundantly clear that
conversion does not rely on “mind-control”, “brainwashing”, or even “Thought
Reform”, understood as a coercive intervention of outside actors on one’s internal
thoughts - for this process is simply not a physical possibility, given the known
architecture of human cognition. However, this framing is only natural given the
mainstream understanding of social power and agency, which is fundamentally
centered on the dichotomy between internal thought and external influence. In our
view, this not an adequate framing to understand human social activity, especially in
social contexts where ideological religiosity and assimilated forms of social control are
prevalent. As we have argued above, human agency is thoroughly embedded in social
norms and cultural expectation defining both our public behavior and our private
experience of the world. We never truly act alone, in the sense that the flow of
anticipation driving our activity is defined both by our current social context and those
in which we have matured. To understand social power, we must therefore turn our
attention to the distributed socio-cognitive processes which leads a social agent to
understand the world as they do and have the goals that they have. As per the
discussion above, we consider ritual (especially within the context of ideological
religiosity) to be a prototypical example of how social agents may enact power by
constructing and broadcasting specific frames of references, which then serve as the
common ground for social interaction.
[5.12] Although this analysis is applied here to a power structure grounded on charismatic
authority and ritual activity, we believe that it may usefully inform the study of other
types of organization. For example, most modern settings are dominated by
bureaucracies drawing from legal-rational authority, where power is usually tied to
impersonal interactions with State or company official which have (at least formally)
very little authority to deviate from the organization-wide rules. However, those
organizations also rely critically on the framing of social interaction and political
discourse both for their decision structure and their legitimization, notably through the
processes of agenda-setting (Lippmann 2004; Rogers and Dearing 1988) and propaganda
(Táíwò 2018). Arguably, the ability for those organization to successfully broadcast their
framing of social interaction is critical for their long-term development and their
ability to effectively project power and maintain their own existence (Scott 2020;
Guénin--Carlut 2022c). Furthermore, this framing is to a great extent embedded in
what we could describe as “everyday ritual”, e.g. the practice of giving away one’s
control over their own actions in the context of “disciplinary institutions” (Foucault
1975). In our analysis, the core characteristic of a system of power is that a central agent
(or a community thereof) uses framing to (re)define the common ground for social
interaction - sometimes including the normative way in which people understand
themselves. We believe that a systematic study of this process as ground building,
integrating both the literal common ground of linguistic interaction (as described in
Stalnaker 2002 and Táíwò 2018) and the variety of embodied processes participating to
define cultural expectations, would be an overall productive research program.
6) Conclusion
[6.1] In the present document, we have proposed an Active Inference account of the socio-
cognitive processes driving conversion to the Unification Church. While our argument
was built on a quite narrow ethnological basis, namely the specific UC communities
which could be widely studied by sociologists, we believe it may provide insight for a
more general account of the relation between social power, ritual, and identity. Our
core argument is that social power in the UC is mainly mediated by the process we
coined “identity capture” – following (Guénin--Carlut 2022b). Identity capture consists
in the construction and broadcasting of a given sense of self-identity, tied to specific
social norms defined unilaterally (or asymmetrically) by a central institutions or elite
group. While it does not necessitate the full-on coercive interaction supposed by the
models of “brainwashing” or “Thought Reform”, identity capture remains a very direct
way to build and enact social power. This is because of the deep duality between self-
identity and cognitive engagement with the world, as is entailed by the Active
Inference Framework. In this framework, to expect oneself to enact a given action or
perceive a given fact is to allocate the relevant physiological and cognitive resources to
enact that very action or perceive that very fact, in the literal sense that those two
concept refer to the same process. This process directly structures not only one’s
behavior, but also one’s experience of the world, as the very perception of one’s
environment as a landscape of affordances supposes an implicit normative model of what
one would or could do (Guénin--Carlut and Albarracin 2024).
[6.2] The role of social context in driving cognition under Active Inference has been
extensively studied since the introduction of the framework (Ramstead, Veissière, and
Kirmayer 2016; Veissière et al. 2020; Guénin--Carlut and Albarracin 2024; Guénin--
Carlut 2024b), and has even been proposed as a foundation to dramaturgic role theory
(Albarracin et al. 2020). In this framework, social context do not simply act as an input
to a prior cognitive architecture, as would be expected under a behaviorist or
cognitivist model of the human mind. More generally, there is no clear separation
between internal and external factors to one’s behavior, or between the domain of
private thought and this of public behavior. Rather, one’s cognitive engagement is
embedded into one’s social context, as many different factors (biological,
neurocognitive, material, cultural…) act together to produce the expectations causally
driving perception and action (Guénin--Carlut and Albarracin 2024). However, to our
knowledge, it had never been applied to a specific case study, nor had it been shown to
provide novel insight into the existing sociological literature about the structuring role
of framing, norms and identity in social activity - as developed e.g. in the work of
Goffman (1956; 1974). Here, we have provided preliminary evidence that the Active
Inference Framework enables an explicit model of the socio-cognitive processes
driving conversion to the UC, hinging on the progressive construction of a sense of
self-identity embedded in the context set by the UC. Furthermore, this model has direct
implications for the still live (if somewhat cooled down) debate about its coercive
nature, and more generally for the existing social theory of power.
[6.3] In line with authoritative sociological literature on the topic – especially Taylor (1978)
and Barker (1984) – we identified three core sub-processes driving conversion to the UC
: 1) lovebombing ; 2) filtering ; 3) expectation of total participation. Of course, these
categories are to be taken as stylized types aiming to analyze a complex ecology of
socio-cognitive processes, rather than clearly individuated causal process, temporally
separated steps, or necessary and sufficient criterion for successful conversion. But all
afford a direct Active Inference interpretation, and taken together they explain the
phenomenon of identity capture in the context of the UC. Lovebombing clearly
(although implicitly) broadcast the expectation of uncritical deference to the UC’s
teachings, as expressed in the axiom “follow the center”, while also grounding this
norm in positive affects by social validation. Given this context, individuals whose prior
beliefs about social interaction is aligned with this norm of behavior tend to stay while
others tend to leave, leading to filtering. For those who stay, the high-arousal context of
seminars grounds in their embodied experience the expectation of total commitment to
the UC, as expressed in content of the norms it broadcast. Hence, prospective converts
whose prior development led to a strong prior for social validation, especially from
their church community, are effectively driven to become unable to imagine a happy
life – unless they forfeit their ability to act outside the context defined by the UC. Their
sense of self-identity was turned into an efficient weapon of social control, as they now
expect themselves to think and act like a Moonie.
[6.4] Furthermore, we related this analysis to existing paleo-anthropological literature to
propose a tentative ontogeny of social power through ritual activity. A core element of
conversion to the UC is that the Moonie identity and the associated norms are not
simply expressed to or demanded from prospective converts, but grounded in the
embodied, synchronic activity of UC rituals and the associated emotional states. This is
an avenue of social power afforded to ancient humans, unlike overt coercion. Indeed,
Wrangham (2019) points out the apparently extreme selection against aggressive traits
in early human history, which he attributes to the conjunction of ranged weapons and
coalition building. In simpler words, human ability for weapon use and deception make
it near impossible for a single agent to build social power from violence alone – lest
they become the target of coordinated, and probably effective, assassination attempts.
In this context produced by our species, social power is much more to be built by
instrumental appeal to a (real or imagined) “common ground” (Stalnaker 2002), defining
the accepted terms of social interaction in a given context. Ritual provides an especially
powerful for defining and (re)producing such a common ground, as it anchors abstract
social norms in synchronic activity associated to powerful emotional states. In
consequence, we would consider the kind of ritual-powered social regulation (and
identity capture) displayed by the UC to constitute a prototypical example of social
power as it was enacted before the emergence of States and their infrastructure for
coordinated mass violence - or, as it is enacted within such States.
[6.5] In our view, this account entails a significant contribution to the existing literature on
social power. Indeed, social power is often conceptualized as an asymmetry between
agent’s ability to reach specific goals in social interaction, in the line of Fiske and
Dépret (1996). In the typology proposed by Pansardi and Bindi (2021), this translates
into the category of “power over” – the ability to make others do what one want them to
do. However, social interaction are more often than not characterized by co-operative
action where agents negotiate and act within specific a “frame” (Goffman 1974) or
“common ground” (Stalnaker 2002), corresponding to implicit shared expectations
about what norms, beliefs, or dynamics are accepted within the interaction. Hence, we
would argue that the concept of “power-over” overlooks many routine aspects of social
power, mainly related to its embedding in a prior ecology of practices and social
relations – see Simon and Oakes (2006) for a related discussion. Even in the relatively
marginal case of dyadic interactions where very clear threats are involved, actors will
often agree on a co-operative frame (e.g. defining racket as “payment for protection”, or
tribute payments as an expression of respect), as it enables the dominant actor to
underplay the coercive aspect of their proposal while it prevents the dominated actor
from losing face. To borrow here again Pansardi and Bindi (2021)’s typology, the
negotiation of specific premises within overtly co-operative interactions (as is the case
with the process of conversion to the UC) corresponds instead to “power-with”, the
ability to act together toward collectively defined goals.
[6.6] But then, how can we conceptualize the obvious asymmetry of power prevalent in so
many social contexts and interactions? The approach we suggest is to simply decline to
provide an a priori account of asymmetries in power, and rather focus on the actual
socio-cognitive processes at hand in a specific context. In particular, we propose to pay
close attention to the practical premises for public action, as defined in Táíwò (2018)’s
practice first account of propaganda. Following our discussion in part 3, those
constitute a very direct constraint over the allocation of physiological and cognitive
resources by a community of agents, as they constitute the set of de facto expectations
they hold regarding over the accepted beliefs and norms within their shared context.
Hence, describing these practical premises and their evolution entails a direct causal
model of the socio-cognitive processes structuring social engagement within a given
context. Based on such an analysis, social power and its asymmetries may be defined a
posteriori based on two complementary dimensions of analysis: 1) what social acts are
afforded to specific actors within the accepted premises for public actions ; 2) which
actors are effectively able to (re)define the accepted premises for public actions. For
example, the discussion above has clearly established that UC leadership is dominant
in both dimensions – it is able to decide important parameters of the life of its
members without any form of reciprocal decision power, and it is able to almost
unilaterally define the terms of interaction within the community.
[6.7] An important element of this account is that it does not conceptualize social power and
social agency as being fundamentally antagonistic forces. By construction, the enaction
of social power (in the sense we conceptualize here) recruits rather than constrains
agency. The existence of accepted premises for public action entails by definition that
every single agent within a community or interaction effectively co-operates with the
frame they carry. This is not to say that conflict over social norms or specific decisions
may not exist within a community – on the contrary, the framework we propose here
may apply in a scale-free manner to nested level of interaction within any social
context, including agenda-driven coalitions within a broader community. However, any
conflict will typically revolve around the negotiation of specific premises within the
prior common ground of a given community or interaction, and will involve the
recruitment of already accepted premises to bring other parties to co-operate with the
controversial ones. This applies even in the edge case of overt coercion involving
violence or the threat thereof – saying “purse or life” communicates the expectation for
a specific norm within the interaction, and (assuming that they value their life over
their purse) implicitly carries the demand that the other party hand over their purse.
For the most part, these considerations were already explicit in Simon and Oakes (2006)
identity model of power. However, we propose here what may be a much more specific
description of the concrete socio-cognitive processes by which power is negotiated and
enacted within a given social context.
[6.8] A core reason is that, unlike narrative theories about the nature of social power, Active
Inference affords a very direct computational framework to test specific hypothesis by
reproducing the dynamics at play in a given context or produce artificial context for
“computational ethnography”. Indeed, the Active Inference Framework motivated the
development of specific libraries meant to emulate the mechanisms it proposes for
human cognition, most notably PyMDP (Heins et al. 2022) - which was notably used for
a model to the construction of epistemic communities (Albarracin et al. 2022). While it
is not presently adapted to the study of embodied activity or open-ended dynamics
(Guénin--Carlut 2024a), Active Inference may nonetheless serve as a constructive prior
model of human agency in socio-cultural dynamics (Guénin--Carlut 2022a). In other
words, we consider the validity of most of the theoretical insight discussed above to
remain conditional on the successful reproduction of “identity capture” in
computational settings – and ideally in a model representing the specific context set by
the UC. However, we do insist on the relevance of the broader analytic approach
demonstrated in the present document. Regardless of the aptitude of future modelers
to capture the dynamics we described, we do have strong reason to expect to human
cognition is indeed driven by predictive processes, and we do have strong reason to
expect that those processes display the very properties that we assumed to be verified
for our argument. In consequence, we would argue for the use of “practical premises of
public action” as a baseline framework to represent power dynamics, especially if those
are understood to include a-linguistic expectations grounded in embodied activity.
Albarracin, Mahault, Axel Constant, Karl Friston, and Maxwell James Ramstead. 2020. “A
Albarracin, Mahault, Daphne Demekas, Maxwell James Ramstead, and Conor Heins. 2022.
“Epistemic Communities under Active Inference,” January.
Anthony, Dick. 2001. “Tactical Ambiguity and Brainwashing Formulations: Science or
Pseudo-Science?” In Misunderstanding Cults: Searching for Objectivity in a
Controversial Field, 215. University of Toronto Press.
hl=fr&lr=&id=pJ9Nmc25xNAC&oi=fnd&pg=PA215&dq=Tactical+Ambiguity+and+
Brainwashing+Formulations:+Science+or+pseudoscience%3F&ots=wm3B9g-
3c8&sig=PXeu5I4vriJtBqdZUmUBj-1WZDY.
Anthony, Dick, and Thomas Robbins. 1995. “Negligence, Coercion, and the Protection of
Religious Belief.” Journal of Church and State 37 (3): 509–36.
Archer, Margaret S. 2003. Structure, Agency and the Internal Conversation. Cambridge
University Press.
———. 2007. Making Our Way through the World: Human Reflexivity and Social Mobility.
Cambridge University Press.
Banchoff, Thomas. 2007. Democracy and the New Religious Pluralism. Oxford University
Press.
Barandiaran, Xabier, Ezequiel Di Paolo, and Marieke Rohde. 2009. “Defining Agency:
Individuality, Normativity, Asymmetry, and Spatio-Temporality in Action.” Adaptive
Barker, Eileen. 1984. The Making of a Moonie: Choice Or Brainwashing? B. Blackwell.
Beirich, Heidi, and Mark Potok. 2005. “Washington Times Editor and Wife Promote Radical
Right Agenda.” Southern Poverty Law Center (blog). 2005.
editor-and-wife-promote-radical-right-agenda.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1972. “Esquisse d’une Théorie de La Pratique [Outline of a Theory of
Practice].” Paris: Éditions Droz.
Boyd, Robert, Peter J. Richerson, and Joseph Henrich. 2011. “The Cultural Niche: Why
Social Learning Is Essential for Human Adaptation.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 108 (Supplement 2): 10918–25.
Boyer, Pascal, and Pierre Liénard. 2020. “Ingredients of ‘Rituals’ and Their Cognitive
Underpinnings.” Philos Trans R Soc B.
Brandl, Eva, Ruth Mace, and Cecilia Heyes. 2023. “The Cultural Evolution of Teaching.”
Brauer, Markus, and Richard Y. Bourhis. 2006. “Social Power.” European Journal of Social
Bromley, David G. 1985. “Financing the Millennium: The Economic Structure of the
Unificationist Movement.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 24 (3): 253–74.
Bromley, David G., and Alexa Blonner. 2012. “From the Unification Church to the
Unification Movement and Back.” Nova Religio 16 (2): 86–95.
Bromley, David G., and Rachel S. Bobbitt. 2009. Challenges to Charismatic Authority in the
Unificationist Movement. Cambridge University Press Cambridge, UK.
hl=fr&lr=&id=2ama0nYRlB8C&oi=fnd&pg=PA129&ots=T6E34wnnNt&sig=gymrZ
Btm3x0ETs7thVw8FMuJxO0.
Bromley, David G., and Anson D. Shupe. 1979. “Moonies” in America: Cult, Church, and
Crusade. SAGE Publications.
Bromley, David G., Anson D. Shupe Jr., and J. C. Ventimiglia. 1979. “Atrocity Tales, the
Unification Church, and the Social Construction of Evil.” Journal of Communication
Bruineberg, Jelle, and Erik Rietveld. 2014. “Self-Organization, Free Energy Minimization,
and Optimal Grip on a Field of Affordances.” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8.
Campbell, Charlie. 2024. “The Unification Church’s Global Grasp for Power.” Time, April 4,
Clark, Andy. 2006. “Language, Embodiment, and the Cognitive Niche.” Trends in Cognitive
———. 2015. Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford
University Press.
———. 2020. “Beyond Desire? Agency, Choice, and the Predictive Mind.” Australasian
Descola, Philippe. 1993. “Les Lances Du Crépuscule: Terre Humaine.”
Fiske, Susan T., and Eric Dépret. 1996. “Control, Interdependence and Power: Understanding
Social Cognition in Its Social Context.” European Review of Social Psychology 7 (1):
Foucault, Michel. 1975. Surveiller et punir. Naissance de la prison. Editions Gallimard.
———. 1980. “Truth and Power In Gordon, C.(Ed.) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews
and Other Writings 1972-77.” Brighton: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Friston, Karl. 2019. “A Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics.” arXiv:1906.10184 [q-
Friston, Karl, Lancelot Da Costa, Noor Sajid, Conor Heins, Kai Ueltzhöffer, Grigorios A.
Pavliotis, and Thomas Parr. 2022. “The Free Energy Principle Made Simpler but Not
Too Simple.” arXiv:2201.06387 [Cond-Mat, Physics:Nlin, Physics:Physics, q-Bio],
Friston, Karl, Lancelot Da Costa, Dalton A. R. Sakthivadivel, Conor Heins, Grigorios A.
Pavliotis, Maxwell Ramstead, and Thomas Parr. 2023. “Path Integrals, Particular
Kinds, and Strange Things.” Physics of Life Reviews, August.
Friston, Karl, Jean Daunizeau, and Stefan J. Kiebel. 2009. “Reinforcement Learning or Active
Friston, Karl, Jean Daunizeau, James Kilner, and Stefan J. Kiebel. 2010. “Action and
Behavior: A Free-Energy Formulation.” Biological Cybernetics 102 (3): 227–60.
Friston, Karl, Thomas FitzGerald, Francesco Rigoli, Philipp Schwartenbeck, and Giovanni
Pezzulo. 2016. “Active Inference: A Process Theory.” Neural Computation 29 (1): 1–
Friston, Karl, James Kilner, and Lee Harrison. 2006. “A Free Energy Principle for the Brain.”
Journal of Physiology-Paris, Theoretical and Computational Neuroscience:
Understanding Brain Functions, 100 (1): 70–87.
Galanter, M. 1982. “Charismatic Religious Sects and Psychiatry: An Overview.” The
American Journal of Psychiatry 139 (12): 1539–48.
Galanter, M., R. Rabkin, J. Rabkin, and A. Deutsch. 1979. “The ‘Moonies’: A Psychological
Study of Conversion and Membership in a Contemporary Religious Sect.” The
American Journal of Psychiatry 136 (2): 165–70.
Giddens, Anthony. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration.
University of California Press.
Goffman, Erving. 1956. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Penguin Books, Limited.
———. 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. Harvard
University Press.
Gramsci, Antonio. 1947. Prison Notebooks - Gramsci. Lebooks Editora.
Guénin--Carlut, Avel. 2022a. “Cognitive Agency in Sociocultural Evolution.” OSF Preprints.
———. 2022b. “The Clothes of the Empire : An Active Inference Account of Identity
empire.
———. 2022c. “Thinking like a State: Embodied Intelligence in the Deep History of Our
Collective Mind.” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 1261
———. 2024a. “Contextuality, Cognitive Engagement, and Active Inference.” OSF.
———. 2024b. “From the Existential Stance to Social Constraints - How the Human Mind
Becomes Embedded in Our Social, Cultural and Material Context.” OSF.
Guénin--Carlut, Avel, and Mahault Albarracin. 2024. “On Embedded Normativity an Active
Inference Account of Agency Beyond Flesh.” In Active Inference, edited by
Christopher L. Buckley, Daniela Cialfi, Pablo Lanillos, Maxwell Ramstead, Noor
Sajid, Hideaki Shimazaki, Tim Verbelen, and Martijn Wisse, 91–105. Communications
in Computer and Information Science. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
Han, Yoonji. 2022. “From ‘slapping therapy’ to steep ‘liberation’ fees, ex-members speak out
about life inside the Moonies ‘cult.’” Business Insider Nederland, July 30, 2022.
members-speak-out-about-life-inside-the-moonies-cult/.
Heins, Conor, Beren Millidge, Daphne Demekas, Brennan Klein, Karl Friston, Iain D.
Couzin, and Alexander Tschantz. 2022. “Pymdp: A Python Library for Active
Inference in Discrete State Spaces.” Journal of Open Source Software 7 (73): 4098.
Henrich, Joseph. 2017. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution,
Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter. Princeton University Press.
Heyes, Cecilia. 2012a. “Grist and Mills: On the Cultural Origins of Cultural Learning.”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 367 (1599):
———. 2012b. “New Thinking: The Evolution of Human Cognition.” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 367 (1599): 2091–96.
———. 2012c. “What’s Social about Social Learning?” Journal of Comparative Psychology
———. 2019. “Précis of Cognitive Gadgets: The Cultural Evolution of Thinking.”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 42:e169.
Hipólito, Inês. 2022. “Cognition Without Neural Representation: Dynamics of a Complex
System.” Frontiers in Psychology 12:5472.
Hipólito, Inês, Manuel Baltieri, Karl Friston, and Maxwell James Ramstead. 2021.
“Embodied Skillful Performance: Where the Action Is.” Synthese, January.
Hobson, Nicholas M., Juliana Schroeder, Jane L. Risen, Dimitris Xygalatas, and Michael
Inzlicht. 2018. “The Psychology of Rituals: An Integrative Review and Process-Based
Framework.” Personality and Social Psychology Review 22 (3): 260–84.
Hohwy, Jakob. 2016. “The Self-Evidencing Brain.” Noûs 50 (2): 259–85.
Hunter, Edward. 1953. Brain-Washing in Red China. Vanguard Press.
Hunter, Howard O., and Polly J. Price. 2001. “Regulation of Religious Proselytism in the
United States.” Brigham Young University Law Review 2001:537.
Hyun, Cho. 2022. “Why did Abe appear in a Unification Church video?” Hankyoreh, 2022.
Kapitány, R., C. Kavanagh, and H. Whitehouse. 2020. “Ritual Morphospace Revisited: The
Form, Function and Factor Structure of Ritual Practice.” Philosophical Transactions
Kapitány, Rohan, and Mark Nielsen. 2015. “Adopting the Ritual Stance: The Role of Opacity
and Context in Ritual and Everyday Actions.” Cognition 145 (December):13–29.
Kaplan, Raphael, and Karl J. Friston. 2018. “Planning and Navigation as Active Inference.”
Keltner, Dacher, Deborah H. Gruenfeld, and Cameron Anderson. 2003. “Power, Approach,
295X.110.2.265.
Laland, K. N., J. Odling‐Smee, and M. W. Feldman. 2001. “Cultural Niche Construction and
Human Evolution.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 14 (1): 22–33.
Legare, C., and Mark Nielsen. 2020. “Ritual Explained: Interdisciplinary Answers to
Tinbergen’s Four Questions.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B.
Lewin, Kurt. 1975. Field Theory in Social Science: Selected Theoretical Papers. Greenwood
Press.
Lifton, Robert Jay. 1961. Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism: A Study Of.
Gollancz.
Lippmann, Walter. 2004. Public Opinion. Courier Corporation.
Lofland, John, and Rodney Stark. 1965. “Becoming a World-Saver: A Theory of Conversion
to a Deviant Perspective.” American Sociological Review 30 (6): 862–75.
McLellan, Dennis. 2003. “Margaret Singer, 82; Expert on Brainwashing, Cults Testified at
1976 Trial of Patricia Hearst.” Los Angeles Times, November 28, 2003, sec. World &
story.html.
Mead, George Herbert. 1934. Mind, Self & Society. University of Chicago Press.
Mickler, Michael. 2000. 40 Years in America.
Mickler, Michael L. 1993. “A History of the Unification Church in America 1959-1974:
Emergence of a National Movement.” Garland Publishing, Inc.
Moon, Sun Myung. 1966. “Exposition of the Divine Principle.” Tparents. 1996 translation
Nurcan, Elif Sercen, and Mürsel Doğrul. 2022. “Unification Church and Japan: A Historical
Review (Birleşme Kilisesi ve Japonya: Tarihsel Bir İnceleme).” Tarih İncelemeleri
Oransky, Ivan. 2004. “Margaret Thaler Singer.” The Lancet 363 (9406): 403.
Pansardi, Pamela, and Marianna Bindi. 2021. “The New Concepts of Power? Power-over,
Power-to and Power-With.” Journal of Political Power 14 (1): 51–71.
Parr, Thomas, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Karl Friston. 2022. Active Inference: The Free Energy
Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.
Parsons, Arthur S. 1986. “Messianic Personalism: A Role Analysis of the Unification
Church.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 25 (2): 141–61.
Ramstead, Maxwell, Samuel PL Veissière, and Laurence J. Kirmayer. 2016. “Cultural
Affordances: Scaffolding Local Worlds through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of
Attention.” Frontiers in Psychology 7:1090.
Richardson, James T., Mary Harder, and Robert B. Simmonds. 1972. “Thought Reform and
the Jesus Movement.” Youth & Society 4 (2): 185–202.
Richardson, James T., and Massimo Introvigne. 2001. “‘Brainwashing’ Theories in European
Parliamentary and Administrative Reports on ‘Cults’ and ‘Sects.’” Journal for the
Ridgeway, James. 2007. “Bush Sr. To Celebrate Rev. Sun Myung Moon – Again.” Mother
celebrate-rev-sun-myung-moon-again/.
Robbins, Thomas, and Dick Anthony. 1982. “Deprogramming, Brainwashing and the
Medicalization of Deviant Religious Groups*.” Social Problems 29 (3): 283–97.
Robbins, Thomas, and Benjamin David Zablocki. 2001. Misunderstanding Cults: Searching
for Objectivity in a Controversial Field. University of Toronto Press.
Rogers, Everett, and James Dearing. 1988. “Agenda-Setting Research: Where Has It Been,
Where Is It Going?” Annals of the International Communication Association 11 (1):
Samuels, Richard J. 2001. Kishi and Corruption: An Anatomy of the 1955 System. Japan
Policy Research Institute.
Savage, Patrick E., Psyche Loui, Bronwyn Tarr, Adena Schachner, Luke Glowacki, Steven
Mithen, and W. Tecumseh Fitch. 2021. “Music as a Coevolved System for Social
Bonding.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 44:1–36.
Scott, James C. 2009. The art of not being governed: an anarchist history of upland Southeast
Asia. New Haven (Conn.), Etats-Unis d’Amérique, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne
et d’Irlande du Nord.
———. 2020. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition
Have Failed. Yale University Press.
Sharp, Andy. 2022. “Barbs and Groans.” The Foreign Correspondants’ Club of Japan, 2022.
Shilton, Dor, Mati Breski, Daniel Dor, and Eva Jablonka. 2020. “Human Social Evolution:
Self-Domestication or Self-Control?” Frontiers in Psychology 11.
Sidanius, Jim, and Felicia Pratto. 1999. “Social Dominance Theory.” Handbook of Theories of
an=4912667&publisher=FZ7200#page=1025.
Simon, Bernd, and Penelope Oakes. 2006. “Beyond Dependence: An Identity Approach to
Social Power and Domination.” Human Relations 59 (1): 105–39.
Singer, Margaret Thaler, and Janja Lalich. 1995. “Cults in Our Midst: The Hidden Menace in
Our Everday Lives.”
Stalnaker, Robert. 2002. “Common Ground.” Linguistics and Philosophy 25 (5/6): 701–21.
Sterelny, Kim. 2018. “Religion Re-Explained.” Religion, Brain & Behavior 8 (4): 406–25.
———. 2020. “Religion: Costs, Signals, and the Neolithic Transition.” Religion, Brain &
Syn-Duk, Choi. 1967. “Korea’s Tong-Il Movement’.” The New Religions of Korea,
Transactions of the Korea Branch of The Royal Asiatic Society, XLIII, 167–80.
Taekon, Lee. 2014. “The Significance and History of the Unification Church Holy Wedding
Blessing Ceremony - Taekon Lee - July 29, 2014,” July.
Táíwò, Olúfẹ́mi O. 2018. “The Empire Has No Clothes.” Disputatio.
———. 2022. Elite Capture: How the Powerful Took Over Identity Politics (And Everything
Else). Haymarket Books.
Taylor, David Frank. 1978. “Social Organization of Recruitment in the Unification Church.”
Thomas, Alexander. 2012. “Urbanization before Cities: Lessons for Social Theory from the
Evolution of Cities.” Journal of World-Systems Research, August, 211–35.
Tomasello, Michael. 2016. “The Ontogeny of Cultural Learning.” Current Opinion in
Tomasello, Michael, and Malinda Carpenter. 2007. “Shared Intentionality.” Developmental
Tomasello, Michael, Malinda Carpenter, Josep Call, Tanya Behne, and Henrike Moll. 2005.
“Understanding and Sharing Intentions: The Origins of Cultural Cognition.”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28 (5): 675–91.
Tomasello, Michael, and Henrike Moll. 2010. “The Gap Is Social: Human Shared
Intentionality and Culture.” In Mind the Gap: Tracing the Origins of Human
Universals, edited by Peter M. Kappeler and Joan Silk, 331–49. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Turner, John C. 2005. “Explaining the Nature of Power: A Three-Process Theory.” European
title=Unification_Church&oldid=1260332763.
Unification Church of Japan. 2002. “Woo Group.” 2002.
Veissière, Samuel P. L., Axel Constant, Maxwell James Ramstead, Karl Friston, and Laurence
J. Kirmayer. 2020. “Thinking through Other Minds: A Variational Approach to
Cognition and Culture.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 43.
Walsh, Kevin S., David P. McGovern, Andy Clark, and Redmond G. O’Connell. 2020.
“Evaluating the Neurophysiological Evidence for Predictive Processing as a Model of
Perception.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1464 (1): 242–68.
Whitehouse, Harvey, and Jonathan A. Lanman. 2014. “The Ties That Bind Us: Ritual, Fusion,
and Identification.” Current Anthropology 55 (6): 674–95.
Wrangham, Richard W. 2019. “Hypotheses for the Evolution of Reduced Reactive Aggression
in the Context of Human Self-Domestication.” Frontiers in Psychology 10 (August).
Zablocki, Benjamin. 2001. “Towards a Demystified and Disinterested Scientific Theory of
Brainwashing.” In Misunderstanding Cults: Searching for Objectivity in a
Controversial Field, edited by Benjamin Zablocki and Thomas Robbins, 159–214.
Zawidzki, Tadeusz Wieslaw. 2013. Mindshaping: A New Framework for Understanding
Human Social Cognition. MIT Press.