Running head: DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 1
The effect of delayed rewards on human goal-directed actions
1,2,3 4
Omar D. Perez & Gonzalo P. Urcelay
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.
Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California, USA.
Instituto Sistemas Complejos de Ingeniería (ISCI), Chile.
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK.
Author Note
Correspondence regarding this article should be sent to Omar D. Perez
(omar.perez.r@uchile.cl) or Gonzalo P. Urcelay (gonzalo.urcelay@nottingham.ac.uk).
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 2
Abstract
Goal-directed actions are defined by their sensitivity to the causal association between
actions and outcomes, as well as the subjective value ascribed to those outcomes. When this
sensitivity diminishes, actions may transition into habitual behavior. Based on recent
findings from animal studies, we hypothesized that delaying outcomes relative to actions
would weaken sensitivity to outcome revaluation and reduce action rates. In three
experiments (N = 290), participants made fictitious investments in companies within
different contexts providing immediate or delayed feedback. After training, participants were
informed of a market crash that affected the performance of both companies, favoring one
over the other. Across all experiments, action rates were lower in the delayed-feedback
condition, and outcome revaluation had a more pronounced effect in the immediate-feedback
condition. Self-reported action-outcome knowledge revealed that participants were less aware
of the contingencies in the delayed condition. These findings suggest that delays in
reinforcement weaken the action-outcome association critical for goal-directed control. We
discuss the potential mechanisms underlying this phenomenon and its implications for
understanding real-life decisions.
Keywords: habits, goal-directed, delay
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 3
The effect of delayed rewards on human goal-directed actions
Goal-directed actions are defined as those sensitive to the causal attribution of their
consequences and the subjective value that subjects ascribe to those consequences. This
latter feature is typically examined through outcome-revaluation tests, in which the value of
the reward associated with an action is modified. Adams and Dickinson (1981) were the first
to demonstrate how animals’ behavior could be under goal-directed control with the use of
this technique. They trained hungry rats to lever press for a rewarding outcome (or
reinforcer) while an alternative reinforcer was delivered non-contingently to responding. To
decrease the relative value of one of the outcomes with respect to the other, Adams and
Dickinson established a flavor aversion to one of them by pairing its consumption with
gastric malaise until the animals no longer ate the outcome when freely presented (i.e., the
value of the outcome was reduced by the devaluation manipulation). During a test phase,
they gave animals the opportunity to press the same lever as in training but suspended
outcome delivery (i.e., on extinction). Critically, they found that animals whose devalued
outcome was the one contingent to responding decreased responding compared to animals
that had the non-contingent outcome devalued.
The Adams and Dickinson’s (1981) study clearly demonstrated the capacity of animals
to perform a lever response in anticipation of the outcome while encoding the relevance of
the outcome to their current motivational state (i.e., subjective value). In humans, the
goal-directed status of an action was later confirmed experimentally in an fMRI study in by
Valentin, Dickinson, and O’Doherty (2007), who trained thirsty participants to perform two
different actions yielding different liquid rewards. The revaluation procedure consisted of
devaluing one of the outcomes by satiation (i.e., allowing participants to freely consume the
outcome) before conducting a final extinction test with the two previously trained actions.
In accord with the animal results, participants responded less to the action associated with
the devalued outcome compared to the non-devalued outcome. Activity in the ventromedial
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 4
prefrontal cortex correlated with the value of the reward and participants’ behavior.
There is also evidence suggesting that numerous variables can render responses
insensitive to revaluation of the outcome. In this so-called habit mode, and in contrast to the
flexibility of goal-directed actions, subjects do not change their behavior after an outcome
has been revalued; they keep doing what was good in the past. Among such factors, using
interval as opposed to ratio reward schedules of reinforcement (Dickinson et al., 1983;
Gremel and Costa, 2013), single rather than multiple responses and outcomes (Colwill et al.,
1985; Holland, 2004; Kosaki and Dickinson, 2010), pre-exposing the outcome non-contingent
to responding (Adams, 1982), and extended periods of training (Adams, 1982; Pool et al.,
2022; Tricomi et al., 2009; but see de Wit et al. (2018)) can all promote habits. More
recently, Pool et al. (2022) found important individual differences in the extent to which
people deploy habitual control, and found that these differences could be linked to
differences in psychological traits and states such as stress and anxiety (see also Schwabe and
Wolf, 2009) . These results have spurred a gamut of theories where training conditions are
critical in modulating the extent to which behavior is controlled by goal-directed or habitual
systems (Daw et al., 2005; Dezfouli and Balleine, 2012; Keramati et al., 2011; Lee et al.,
2014; Miller et al., 2019; Perez and Dickinson, 2020).
Another factor, which has received comparably less attention, is the delay of
reinforcement. Under these procedures, the outcome of an action is delivered after a period
of time has elapsed from the performance of the action. Delays of reinforcement have been
shown to affect response rates and weaken causal beliefs, both of which are critical for
goal-directed control. For example, Dickinson et al. (1992) demonstrated that rats trained
with delayed reinforcement exhibited lower response rates than those trained with immediate
reinforcement. In humans, Okouchi (2009) found similar results. In his study, participants
were required to perform a specific sequence of responses and showed decreased response
rates and increased post-reinforcement pauses as the delay between the action and the
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 5
outcome increased, further emphasizing the importance of contiguity for acquiring
instrumental actions. The importance of delay of reinforcement in attributing causal beliefs
was demonstrated by Shanks (1989), who found that humans causally rate action-outcome
relationships less favorably when reinforcement is delayed. Across three experiments,
participants performed key presses to produce outcomes on a computer screen under varying
delays and rated the extent to which their actions caused the outcomes. Causality ratings
progressively decreased as delays increased, with participants in delayed conditions
attributing less causality to their actions compared to those in immediate conditions. These
results demonstrate the detrimental impact of delays on forming strong causal
action-outcome links.
Despite these well-established effects of reinforcement delays on response rates and
causal beliefs, its influence on devaluation sensitivity—the cardinal marker to infer
goal-directed control—remains underexplored. The only evidence comes from a single study
in rodents by Urcelay and Jonkman (2019). In one of their experiments, rats were trained in
two different contexts, each associated with different outcomes and reinforcement delays. In
one context, lever presses produced an immediate sucrose pellet reward, whereas in the other,
lever presses led to a delayed chocolate-flavored pellet (counterbalanced across subjects).
Following training, the rats underwent a satiety-specific devaluation procedure, in that they
were pre fed with the different reinforcers before lever-press tests on extinction. The results
revealed a significant interaction between context and devaluation: outcome devaluation was
effective in reducing responding in the immediate-reward context but not in the
delayed-reward context. These findings suggest that delayed reinforcement attenuates
sensitivity to changes in outcome value, weakening goal-directed control.
In summary, there is evidence that delays in reinforcement weaken responding and
causal action-outcome attribution in humans, suggesting that it may be affecting
goal-directed control, but no evidence has been provided that they would also affect
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 6
sensitivity to revaluation. This is the goal of the present study. Here, we test the hypothesis
that delayed rewards modulates outcome revaluation sensitivity and response rates in human
participants. We expect delays of reinforcement to reduce the impact of revaluation and lead
to lower response rates, highlighting the importance of temporal contiguity in maintaining
human goal-directed control.
General methods
In the three experiments reported in this paper, participants played the role of a
stockbroker, making investments in stocks from two companies (with the fictitious names
"Initech" and "Globex") in two different cities (contexts; Paris and London). In one context,
immediate feedback on stock purchases was provided, while in the other context feedback
was provided after a 5-sec delay . The delayed context, the instrumental response to make
the investments and the company that was revalued were counterbalanced across subjects.
Participants
A total of 290 participants took part across the experiments reported in this paper.
Experiment 1 (conducted in the laboratory with a sample composed of undergraduate
students: N=53; 6 males and 47 females, ages ranging from 18 to 31 (M = 19.67 years, SD =
1.93.)), Experiment 2 (run online with a sample composed of undergraduate students: N=39,
14 males and 24 females, ages ranging from 18 to 43 (M = 20.64 years, SD = 3.88)).; and
Experiment 3 (preregistered experiment run online with a sample recruited in Prolific:
N=198; 95 males and 97 females, ages ranging from 18 to 66 (M = 37.10 years, SD = 11.38)).
Participants were recruited through university subject pools (Experiments 1 and 2) and the
Prolific online platform (Experiment 3). This latter experiment was preregistered as a
replication of the first two. On the basis of Experiments 1 and 2, we performed a power
analysis (using ANOVAexact) which yielded that 198 participants were required to to
achieve .90 power to detect the interaction effect between Delay (immediate/delay context)
and Value (valued/devalued outcome) during Test. All participants provided informed
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 7
consent prior to participation. Participants in Experiment 3 (the online sample) were
required to be fluent in English, with no other specific inclusion criteria applied prior to
participating in the experiment (participants in Experiments 1 and 2 were undergraduate
students at UK institutions). In Experiments 1 and 2, participants took part in exchange for
course credit. In Experiment 3, participants were compensated with 8 pounds per hour for
their participation. Participants in Experiments 2 and 3 were also asked to report knowledge
about the action-outcome contingencies in each context.
Apparatus and Materials
For task presentation and data collection in-lab, the experiments were programmed
using the PsychoPy (version 1.82) software (Peirce, 2007). JavaScript was used for the online
samples. Participants performed the tasks on personal computers using their keyboards. The
main task involved key presses to simulate stock purchases, with immediate (continuous
reinforcement (CRF) or fixed ratio 1 (FR1)) or delayed feedback (CRF + delay of 5 seconds)
provided in different contexts (cities). A debounce time of 1 second was imposed in the
program, so that only one response every 1 second was effective in producing the an
investment.
provided to participants at the beginning of the experiment stated their role in the task and
what they should be trying to achieve (purchase shares for two different companies [R1 and
R2], in two different cities [S1 and S2]). During training, participants experienced 2 blocks
each of 2 minutes, in the two different contexts, S1 and S2, and the same two responses were
possible in each context (R1 and R2). To press the left button (and buy the share indicated
below) participants had to press the "a" key on the keyboard whereas to press the right
button the "l" key was required to be pressed. Participants were instructed that key presses
would earn them 3 shares, but that there was a cost of 1 share associated with each
investment (key press).
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 8
different buttons (R1, R2) to purchase stocks from two different companies (with the fictitious
about stock purchase was given immediately, whereas in another context (S2: London in
participants were informed that one of the companies had crashed while the other was doing
better (signified by the arrows point down or up, respectively). During the test phase,
participants were presented in the same contexts (S1 and S2) as before, but this time no
feedback or information about which company was associated with each button was provided.
The difference between responses to the valued and devalued companies in each context
indicates the degree to which participants were sensitive to revaluation of one of the outcomes
(companies) in each context.
Procedure
The procedure was as follows:
1. Training Phase: Participants were trained to press keys ("a" for the left button and
"l" for the right button) to purchase stocks from the two companies. The feedback was
presented immediately after the investment in one city, and after a 5-sec delay in the
other. The feedback consisted of a text with the phrase: "You have purchased a stock
from [name of the company]".
2. Revaluation Phase: Participants were informed that one company’s stock value had
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 9
crashed while the other company’s stock value had improved. The text presented to
subject was as follows: "The economy is booming, but not for all companies. The
company below has crashed: [name of the devalued company]. However, this company is
doing better: [name of the non-devalued company]". The company that crashed was
counterbalanced across subjects.
3. Test Phase: Participants were asked to make stock purchases without receiving
feedback or information about the companies associated with each button. The
instructions for this phase were as follows: "You shall continue trading in London and
Paris. However, due to a malfunction with the trading equipment you will not receive
any feedback. Press ’c’ to continue.". This cover story ensured that participants would
not see the outcome of their investments, so that no new learning was allowed during
the tests.
At issue were 1) The effect of delay on the response rates performed during training
and 2) the effect of revaluation of the outcome on the number of stocks purchased for the
revalued and devalued companies in each context. If delayed rewards have an impact on
goal-directed behavior, we should expect response rates to be lower in the delay condition
and, in addition, to observe a difference in stock purchasing for valued and devalued
companies that is larger in the immediate condition than in the delayed condition.
Data Analysis
The dependent measure in these experiments was the amount of presses in each block
of training, and during the two blocks of tests following revaluation. Because with count (i.e.,
keypresses) data the variance increases with the mean, all data were transformed (for data
analyses and presentation) by calculating the square root of presses during each block during
training and test.
We preregistered our statistical analysis in line with the previous study on delay of
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 10
reinforcement and revaluation sensitivity by Urcelay and Jonkman (2019). For each
experiment, we ran an ANOVA with Delay (immediate/delay) and Valued (valued/devalued)
as within-subject factors. The details of this preregistered analysis can be found in
performed on the final response rates (Block 2) of each experiment. Our analyses were all
performed using the R programming language under the RStudio IDE (RStudio Team, 2020).
Results
Preregistered analysis
Effect of Delay on Response rates
The final mean response rates and 95% CIs attained by participants are shown in
findings in animal and human studies (Dickinson et al., 1992; Okouchi, 2009), we
hypothesized that response rates would be affected by delays in reinforcement. This
hypothesis was supported by comparing the final response rates in the immediate and
delayed feedback conditions in each experiment. For Experiment 1, participants
demonstrated significantly higher response rates in the immediate condition compared to the
delayed condition, [t(69.26) = 7.66, p = 0.00, 95% CI [1.56, 2.66]]. Similarly, in Experiment
2, response rates were higher in the immediate condition compared to the delayed condition,
[t(70.73) = 2.57, p = .01, 95% CI [1.46, 11.55]]. This pattern persisted in Experiment 3, with
significantly higher response rates in the immediate condition [t(391.61) = 2.16, p = .03,
95% CI [0.20, 4.22]]. These results indicate that delaying reinforcement systematically
reduces response rates, consistent with the theoretical importance of temporal delay in
modulating goal-directed strength.
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 11
each experiment. a) Response rates during the two blocks of training in each context. b)
Response rates during the test phase under extinction. Error bars represent within-subject
standard errors of the mean (Morey, 2008).
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 12
Mean final response rates (sqrt transformed) by context and experiment.
Experiment Context Mean 95% CI
Immediate 9.43 [9.17, 9.68]
Experiment 1 (N=53)
Delayed 7.32 [7.07, 7.57]
Immediate 20.71 [18.59, 22.82]
Experiment 2 (N=39)
Delayed 14.20 [12.09, 16.32]
Immediate 17.25 [16.74, 17.75]
Experiment 3 (N=198)
Delayed 15.04 [14.54, 15.55]
Effect of Delay on Revaluation
The results of the final tests between the revalued (val) and devalued (deval)
the difference between response rates between the revalued and devalued companies was
more pronounced in the immediate (imm) than in the delay (delay) condition.
For Experiment 1, the main effect of Delay was not significant,
[F (1, 52) = 2.49, p = .12, η = .01]. The main effect of Val was significant,
[F (1, 52) = 5.77, p = .02, η = .06], indicating that responses were influenced by valuation.
The interaction between Delay and Val approached significance
[F (1, 52) = 3.63, p = .06, η = .01]. For Experiment 2, the main effect of Delay was not
significant, [F (1, 38) = 2.53, p = .12, η = .01]. The main effect of Val was significant,
[F (1, 38) = 5.31, p = .03, η = .05], demonstrating that valuation affected response rates.
The interaction between Delay and Val was not significant,
[F (1, 38) = 2.15, p = .15, η = .01]. For Experiment 3, the main effects of Delay and Val
were both not significant, [F (1, 197) = 0.58, p = .45, η = .00], and
[F (1, 197) = 0.13, p = .72, η < .00], respectively. The interaction between Delay and Val
approached significance, [F (1, 197) = 2.76, p = .10, η = .00].
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 13
Full sample analysis
Given the consistent direction of the effect and the fact that the task was the same in
all experiments, we performed the same preregistered analysis on the full dataset, whose
all experiments, the repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a marginal main effect of Delay,
[F (1, 289) = 3.11, p = .08, η = .01], and a significant main effect of Val,
[F (1, 289) = 4.01, p = .05, η = .01]. Importantly, the interaction between Delay and Val was
significant, [F (1, 289) = 5.69, p = .02, η = .02], showing that the influence of devaluation on
response rate was moderated by the delay condition: participants were less sensitive to
devaluation in the delay context compared to the immediate context. Consistent with the
interaction reported above, planned comparisons revealed an effect of revaluation in the
Immediate context (p = .00) but not in the Delay context (p = .86)
Exploratory analysis
The preregistered analysis showed that the interaction effect between Delay and Val
was evident only when the full dataset was analyzed. This result highlights the value of
combining data across experiments to enhance statistical power, particularly when the tasks
and hypotheses are identical. Moreover, the analysis of the full sample provides evidence
that delayed rewards reduce revaluation sensitivity and strengthens the idea that temporal
delays play a critical role in goal-directed control.
Motivated by evidence from prior studies in humans (Pool et al., 2022) which suggest
that individual sensitivity to outcome devaluation varies substantially across subjects, we
performed an exploratory analysis on our data. This variability is particularly noticeable in
free-operant, non-signaled tasks like the one employed in our experiments, where participants
differ widely in their ability to integrate reinforcement contingencies over time and respond
to changes in outcome value. Following visual inspection of the data, it became clear that
there was significant heterogeneity in participants’ sensitivity to devaluation across contexts,
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 14
all three experiments collapsed. a) Response rates during the two blocks of training in
each context. b) Response rates during the test phase under extinction. Error bars represent
within-subject standard errors of the mean (Morey, 2008).
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 15
reinforcing the need for a more nuanced and appropriate statistical approach for these data.
To formally account for these individual differences, we employed mixed-effects models
with random intercepts and slopes. These models allow for participant-level variability in
sensitivity to devaluation (random slopes for valuation) and delay (random slopes for delay)
while estimating fixed effects at the group level. To justify the inclusion of random effects,
we conducted a formal model comparison using likelihood-ratio tests and evaluated fit
statistics with the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).
The models were fitted using the lme4 package in R, with response rates (square-root
transformed, sqNResp) as the dependent variable, and Delay (immediate vs. delayed) and
Val (valued vs. devalued) as within-subject predictors. Each model incorporated a varying
degree of complexity in the random effects structure to determine the optimal balance
between explanatory power and parsimony. Each model included fixed effects for the
interaction between Delay and Val. Model comparisons were performed using Akaike
summarizes the fit statistics for each model. The model with the lowest AIC was M2, which
included random intercepts and a random slope for Val (revaluation sensitivity). This result
suggests that accounting for individual differences in how participants respond to outcome
revaluation substantially improves the model fit compared to a random-intercept-only model
(M1), which was the assumption in the preregistered analysis. In contrast, models including
random slopes for Delay (M3) or both Val and Delay (M4) did not provide additional
improvements in model fit.
The comparison indicated that the model with random intercepts and random slopes
for devaluation provided the best fit to the data, consistent with our expectation that
participants exhibit considerable variability in how they change responding after changes in
outcome value (Pool et al., 2022). The same analysis showed that there was no significant
individual differences in how participants change their responding between immediate and
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 16
delay condition.
Model fit statistics for mixed-effects models.
Model logLik AIC BIC
M1: Random intercept only -3977.4 7966.9 7997.2
M2: Random intercept + slope for Val -3921.0 7858.0 7898.5
M3: Random intercept + slope for Delay -3977.4 7970.0 8011.3
M4: Random intercept + slopes for Val and Delay -3920.6 7863.3 7918.9
reports the estimates for the influence of delay, revaluation, and their interaction on response
rates, while accounting for individual differences in revaluation sensitivity across participants.
Val in Experiments 1 and 3. Experiment 2 did not reach significance, possibly because the
sample size was still too small to detect the effect. In addition, the whole-sample analysis
confirmed our results from the preregistered analysis, in that the interaction was again
significant, providing further evidence that delayed rewards have a detrimental effect on
revaluation sensitivity.
Contingency knowledge
Our main hypothesis was that reinforcement delays would affect goal-directed strength
by weakening the causal connection with the outcome. To test the extent to which
knowledge of the causal link between actions and outcomes was encoded by subjects, at the
end of Experiments 2 and 3 we asked participants to report their knowledge about the
contingency between each action (the key press) and each outcome (shares of each company).
Participants were assigned a total accuracy score by counting the number of correct
action-outcome contingencies they reported correctly. Therefore, for each context, the score
ranged from 0 to 2, and the total accuracy ranged from 0 to 4, indicating the total number
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 17
of action-outcome contingencies they reported correctly. We expected that the delay context
would affect the action-outcome strength, and therefore that this contingency knowledge
score would be lower in this context than in the immediate context.
Consistent with our hypothesis, contingency knowledge scores were higher in the
immediate condition (M = 1.24, SD = 1.03) compared to the delay condition (M = 0.96,
SD = 1.03). A paired t-test revealed a significant difference between the two conditions
(t(236) = 3.03, p = 0.00), with a mean difference of 0.29 (95% CI = [0.10, 0.47]). These
findings suggest that delays in reinforcement negatively impact participants’ ability to
encode action-outcome contingencies, consistent with the hypothesis that temporal
contiguity is crucial for forming strong action-outcome associations.
Results of Mixed-Effects Model predicting response rates in experiments 1, 2, 3 and all
experiments collapsed. The values are the estimated betas (and standard errors in
parenthesis) for each factor. The hypothesis of delay affecting devaluation sensitivity is
illustrated by the Delay x Val interaction.
Coefficient Exp. 1 Exp. 2 Exp. 3 All Exps.
Delay (imm) -0.35 (0.28) -0.46 (1.56) -0.64 (0.51) -0.56 (0.41)
p = .20 p = .77 p = .21 p = .17
Val (val) 0.90 (0.62) 2.48 (2.19) -0.58 (0.69) 0.10 (0.57)
p = .15 p = .26 p = .40 p = .86
Delay × Val 1.00 (0.40) 3.76 (2.21) 1.58 (0.73) 1.77 (0.58)
p = .01 * p = .09 + p = .03 * p = .00 **
Num. Observations 212 156 792 1160
Discussion
Theories of goal-directed actions define them by their sensitivity to revaluation of
outcomes and changes in the causal association between actions and their outcomes
(Dickinson, 1994; Perez and Dickinson, 2020). Environmental factors, such as the
reinforcement schedule (Dickinson and Balleine, 1998; Perez and Dickinson, 2020), or
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 18
psychological states, like stress and anxiety (Pool et al., 2022), have been shown to modulate
goal-directed behavior. The goal of this study was to assess whether outcome revaluation
sensitivity is influenced by the temporal delay of action-outcome relationships in human
participants.
We found that when outcomes were delayed by just 5 seconds relative to the actions
producing them, participants attained lower action rates and showed reduced sensitivity to
revaluation compared to when outcomes were delivered with no delay. Although the
preregistered analyses did not detect significant interactions within each experiment, the
overall effect of delay on revaluation sensitivity was consistent across experiments and
evident when the data were analyzed as a whole. Furthermore, an analysis including
individual differences in sensitivity to revaluation supported the idea that delayed rewards
reduce revaluation sensitivity by showing the effect in Experiments 1 and 3 and in the whole
dataset. These findings align with the results obtained by Urcelay and Jonkman (2019) in
animal studies, where delayed reinforcement weakened outcome revaluation sensitivity.
In humans, delay of reinforcement has been predominantly studied in behavioral
economics. These studies focus on how time affects the subjective value of rewards,
estimating parameters like the discount rate to capture individual differences in valuing
immediate versus delayed outcomes. Participants consistently devalue future outcomes
relative to immediate ones, as modeled by hyperbolic discounting functions (Laibson, 1997;
Mazur and Vaughan, 1987). A similar emphasis on outcome value weighting is found in
Reinforcement Learning (RL) theories, where delays are assumed to down-weight the
expected utility of outcomes as agents solve the credit assignment problem (Sutton and
Barto, 2018) by ascribing value to actions in each state according to how far they are from
the delivery of the outcome.
These theories, therefore, focus on value rather than causal associations. In contrast,
our task explicitly tied feedback to participants’ actions, with no monetary contingencies.
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 19
The observed effects of delay in our study are therefore unlikely to reflect changes in
subjective outcome value. The most plausible explanation for our findings is that delays
weakened participants’ perceived causal link between their actions and outcomes, reducing
both response rates and sensitivity to revaluation. This interpretation is consistent with
studies showing that delay decreases causal ratings and response rates in humans (Okouchi,
2009; Shanks, 1989). We also observed that participants encoded action-outcome
contingencies more strongly in the immediate condition, further supporting the idea that
delays disrupt such action-outcome associations.
There are a number of theories of human actions that are consistent with present
findings by proposing that action-outcome relations or associations are weakened in the delay
condition. Hommel and colleagues postulate that such associations are contingent upon the
simultaneous activation of action codes and effect codes (outcomes; 2004, see also De Houwer
et al., 2018). They assert that the action-outcome contingency, defined as the likelihood of
an outcome being produced by the action as opposed to other potential causes, establishes a
robust action-outcome association, whereas reinforcement delays diminish its strength. In
one of their experiments, they observed that delays exceeding one second resulted in
decreased responsiveness and attenuated priming effects; specifically, presenting the outcome
associated with an action in the delay condition led to a reduced probability of that action
being executed upon presentation of the outcome.
In Urcelay and Jonkman’s (2019) study, the authors showed that delaying
reinforcement shifted causal attribution from actions to contextual cues, reducing sensitivity
to revaluation. In one of their experiments, the researchers extinguished the contextual
association in the delay condition and demonstrated that revaluation sensitivity was
reinstated. This finding supports the idea that reinforcement delays interfere with
goal-directed control by disrupting the action-outcome link. Specifically, when delays are
long in a controlled and stable environment—as is often the case in rodent studies—the
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 20
context itself becomes causally associated with the outcome. By extinguishing this
contextual association, the causal link between the animal’s actions and the outcomes is
restored, thereby reinstating sensitivity to outcome revaluation during the devaluation test.
Perhaps the formal framework that best captures all the above findings, including the
effect of extinguishing the context in restoring revaluation sensitivity is the goal-directed
system proposed by Perez and Dickinson (2024; 2020). In this theory, goal-directed strength
is determined by subjects’ experienced correlation between action and outcome rates and is
directly related to instrumental performance and sensitivity to outcome revaluation. Delays
disrupt this experienced correlation, weakening goal-directed control. Importantly, the
experienced correlation that subjects compute is given by a mnemonic system that includes
the representation of time samples, some of which are empty when the reward is delayed,
assigning to the context a causal relationship with the outcome. When the context is
extinguished, such relationship is weakened and the rate correlation experienced becomes
positive again. This framework integrates the observed effects of delay on revaluation
sensitivity, response rates, and action-outcome contingency knowledge, providing a
psychologically and computationally coherent account of our data. Furthermore, the theory
explains why ratio training supports higher action rates (Dickinson et al., 1983; Perez, 2021),
causal action-outcome beliefs (Reed, 2001) and outcome revaluation sensitivity (Dickinson
et al., 1983) than interval training, and anticipates that other manipulations of a causal
action-outcome association, such as degrading the contingency between actions and
outcomes, should also have an impact on action rates and outcome revaluation.
Crimmins et al. (2022) have recently provided evidence for this latter hypothesis. They
trained rats to perform two actions, each leading to different rewards, and degraded the
action-outcome contingency for one action by equalizing the probability of the outcome
occurring both in the absence and presence of the action. This manipulation was achieved
using a bidirectional lever, ensuring that both actions were equally associated with their
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 21
outcomes and neutralizing any Pavlovian motivational effects on responding after
devaluation. Using this design, they found that action rates decreased in the degraded
action, and that sensitivity to revaluation was stronger for the action that maintained a
contingent relationship with the outcome.
Even when studies of delay of reinforcement have been mostly theoretical, using either
animal subjects or humans playing fictitious tasks in the laboratory, the importance of this
variable in affecting goal-directed behavior cannot be underestimated. The implications of
these findings extend beyond laboratory settings and provide insight into real-world
decision-making processes in domains such as finance, medicine, and retirement savings.
Most real-life decisions involve rewards that are delayed, sometimes by significant periods.
The present findings suggest that poor self-control or unnecessary risk-taking in these
contexts may not solely arise from temporal discounting of future rewards, or the uncertainty
of impending rewards, as traditionally postulated. Instead, they may reflect a weakened
causal attribution of actions to delayed outcomes. For example, in the domain of retirement
savings, individuals might undervalue consistent contributions due to the long delay in seeing
tangible benefits, attributing less causal weight to their contributions. In finance, risky
investment decisions could result from attributing success or failure to stochastic factors
rather than the quality of their choices. Therefore, it is possible that the timing of
rewards—often beyond the control of individuals—can weaken the perceived action-outcome
link, highlighting the need for interventions that enhance it for long-term goal adherence.
In conclusion, our findings underscore the critical role of temporal contiguity in
maintaining goal-directed control, revealing that reinforcement delays systematically weaken
action-outcome associations, as reflected in diminished response rates, revaluation sensitivity,
and contingency knowledge.These results build on previous findings, showing that delay
weakens goal-directed strength and offering a computationally grounded explanation through
the rate correlation approach (Perez and Dickinson, 2020). Whether other manipulations of
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 22
causal action-outcome associations, such as extinction (where actions stop leading to
outcomes) or omission training (where actions and outcomes are inversely correlated),
influence goal-directed strength, remains to be tested.
Author note
Omar D. Perez is supported by Instituto Sistemas Complejos de Ingenieria (ISCI)
ANID PIA/PUENTE AFB220003, ANID-SIA 85220023 and ANID-FONDECYT 1231027.
Transparency and Openness Statement
In this paper, we utilized AI-assisted text editing to refine grammar and enhance
readability. Specifically, OpenAI’s GPT-4 (ChatGPT) was employed to assist non-native
English-speaking authors in improving the linguistic clarity of the manuscript. The AI was
not involved in content creation, data analysis, or interpretation; its role was strictly
confined to grammatical and stylistic enhancements.
DELAYED REWARDS IN HUMANS 23