UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 1
Uncertainty-Driven Exploration During Planning
1 2,3 3,4,5
Haoxue Fan , Fredrick Callaway , and Samuel J. Gershman
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University
Department of Psychology, New York University
Department of Psychology, Harvard University
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Author Note
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Haoxue Fan, Carney
Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, 164 Angell Street, Providence, RI, 02906.
E-mail: haoxue_fan@brown.edu
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 2
Abstract
In complex environments, the space of possible plans is vast. Generating a good plan
therefore requires judicious selection of which parts of the plan space to mentally explore.
Drawing on past studies of human exploration, we propose that mental exploration might
invoke similar mechanisms. In particular, we test the hypothesis that mental exploration
during planning is uncertainty-driven, such that people will exhibit a tendency to explore
parts of the plan space that have high epistemic uncertainty. We developed a
route-planning task, displayed as a binary tree, where participants were instructed to
collect as many treats (rewards) as possible by traversing the tree. By separating the
planning and execution phases, we encouraged participants to externalize their planning
process. We manipulated uncertainty by varying the number of potential future states
available from each current state. Across two studies, the data suggest that people
preferred to explore options with more successor states after controlling for value
differences, supporting the uncertainty-driven planning hypothesis. We also found that
uncertainty played a larger role during the planning phase than during the execution
phase, consistent with the hypothesis that the uncertainty effect primarily reflects a
property of human planning algorithms rather than an intrinsic preference for uncertainty.
Keywords: Uncertainty, Planning, Exploration
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 3
Uncertainty-Driven Exploration During Planning
Finding the optimal plan in a large environment is notoriously intractable, due to
the combinatorial explosion of possible decision sequences. Yet planning is also ubiquitous:
from spending a day in a new city to preparing a future career, planning underlies many
real-life sequential decision problems. For this to be possible, the brain must use algorithms
that intelligently search the space of decision sequences without brute-force enumeration.
For inspiration, we can look to planning algorithms that have been implemented in
machines (LaValle, 2006). The fundamental object of study is the decision tree, where each
node corresponds to a state and each edge corresponds to an action. The root node
represents the agent’s current state. Choosing an action in a particular state moves the
agent along the corresponding edge to a new state. Classical planning algorithms either
exhaustively enumerate the possible actions at a given level of the decision tree before
choosing one and moving to the next level (breadth-first search), or exhaustively enumerate
the possible actions along a single branch of the decision tree before moving to the next
branch (depth-first search). Both approaches can fail when the state space is very large or
the optimal plans are very long. More efficient algorithms selectively search along
particular paths based on an evaluation function that ranks the actions at each state
(best-first search). The basic challenge for these algorithms is to define a good evaluation
function that can be easily computed. A good choice of evaluation function may be
problem-specific, hindering the generic application of such algorithms.
An important insight into the design of efficient planning algorithms came from a
connection with the exploration-exploitation dilemma in reinforcement learning (Sutton &
Barto, 2018). An agent interacting with an environment faces the problem of
simultaneously optimizing reward and gathering information. The agent can choose to
exploit its current action value estimates, but this may yield suboptimal reward if the
estimates are poor. The agent can improve the estimates by exploring the environment,
but this runs the risk of incurring an opportunity cost if the explored states have low
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 4
reward. Although the optimal algorithm for balancing exploration and exploitation is
intractable, uncertainty-directed reinforcement learning algorithms have been highly
successful (Auer, 2002; Ciosek et al., 2019; Dayan & Sejnowski, 1996; Srinivas et al., 2010).
In particular, these algorithms add an “uncertainty bonus” to the action values based on
the agent’s ignorance about the true value. The Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
algorithm (Auer, 2002), for example, defines the uncertainty bonus based on a confidence
interval around the value estimate. By taking actions that have high upper confidence
bounds, the agent focuses their exploration on actions whose value could be much higher
than currently estimated.
It might seem that the exploration-exploitation dilemma does not apply in the case
of planning: exploration in reinforcement learning involves taking actions in an unknown
environment, whereas planning involves thinking about actions in a known environment.
However, both problem settings involve reducing uncertainty about state-action values by
traversing the state space (Hunt et al., 2021). Another difference between reinforcement
learning and planning is that there is no opportunity for true exploitation while planning,
since the agent does not actually receive the rewards associated with simulated actions.
Here the analogy is less precise. However, note that the goal of planning is to find a
high-value sequence of actions. If an action already has high estimated value, it is more
likely to be part of such a sequence. The agent can thus “exploit” this knowledge to focus
their search on more promising actions—indeed, this is precisely the idea behind best-first
search.
These arguments suggest that planning presents a form of exploration-exploitation
dilemma, in which an agent must strike a balance between refining promising plans
(exploitation) and seeking out new ones (exploration). This idea has been implemented in
many different ways (e.g., Bellman, 1956; Sanner et al., 2009; Sutton, 1990). One notable
example is UCT (Upper Confidence bounds applied to Trees; Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006),
the core mechanism of modern Monte Carlo tree search algorithms (Browne et al., 2012).
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 5
In UCT, the agent simulates several action sequences (or “rollouts”), applying a variant of
UCB (Auer, 2002) to decide which action to simulate at each step.
There is already considerable evidence that people use uncertainty-directed
algorithms for reinforcement learning in bandit tasks (Fan, Burke, et al., 2023; Fan,
Gershman, & Phelps, 2023; Frank et al., 2009; Gershman, 2018a, 2019; Schulz et al., 2020;
Speekenbrink & Konstantinidis, 2015; Wu et al., 2018, 2021), and that these algorithms
also appear to be used in real-world environments such as food purchasing (Schulz et al.,
2019). In this paper, we report two experiments designed to study the hypothesis that
people use a similar uncertainty-directed algorithm for planning. The key idea is to create
situations where participants have varying levels of uncertainty about different branches of
the decision tree. We accomplish this by varying the number of children nodes (branching
factor) at different nodes in the tree. All else being equal, there will be greater uncertainty
in the values of nodes with more children because these nodes lead to a greater number of
possible future rewards. The uncertainty about which of those rewards will actually be
attained as well as uncertainty in the rewards themselves will both contribute to higher
uncertainty in the node’s value.
One methodological challenge in studying the dynamics of planning in real-time is
that planning is a mental process that is not directly observable. To address this, planning
researchers often use process-tracing methods that make aspects of the planning process
observable, for example, think aloud (De Groot, 1965; Newell & Simon, 1972), eye tracking
(Callaway et al., 2024; Cristín et al., 2022; Kadner et al., 2023; van Opheusden et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2022), and mouse tracking (Callaway, van Opheusden, et al., 2022; Eluchans,
2024). Here, we adopt a similar approach, providing participants with an explicit interface
to perform rollouts before they commit to a plan. Forcing participants to structure their
planning in this way carries two benefits. First, it prevents participants from using more
flexible strategies, like best-first search, whose cognitive cost is artificially reduced by
presenting the full environment in a visual display. Second, it allows us to directly compare
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 6
participant data with rollout-based planning algorithms.
Method
The experiment design, sample size, exclusion criteria, and primary data analysis
University Committee on the Use of Human Subjects (IRB19-0789). Data and code to
regenerate results are publicly available at
Participants
Participants were recruited via the Prolific platform and informed consent was given
prior to testing. Participants were excluded if they did not utilize the PLAN phase or used
the PLAN phase for one trajectory in > 50% of all trials. We also excluded participants
who chose the more rewarding option < 60% in the EXECUTE phase (see Experiment
Design for more information on different phases of the experiment). The exclusion criteria
were pre-registered. We recruited 95 participants in total (Experiment 1: N = 42;
Experiment 2: N = 53) and the final sample size is 39 for Experiment 1 (25 male, 14
female; age: M = 36.8, SD = 10.3, range 21-59) and 45 for Experiment 2 (20 male, 25
female; age: M = 33.9, SD = 7.6, range 19-56).
Experiment Design
Trick-or-treat Game
Our game is a modified version of the Mouselab-MDP paradigm, which has been
widely used for studying human planning (Callaway, Jain, et al., 2022; Callaway et al.,
2017; He & Lieder, 2023; Jain et al., 2023). On each trial, participants were presented with
they were told that each node represents a house, and their goal was to collect as many
treats (reward) as possible by visiting a series of interconnected houses (nodes). See
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 7
Appendix A for full instructions. Participants moved between nodes using the arrow keys.
Upon arriving at a node, they received a pre-specified reward, drawn from a Normal
distribution, N (µ = 0, σ = 2.25). Critically, the reward associated with each node was
consistent within a trial, but was randomly sampled on each new trial. Thus, participants
could learn about the value of a path on the current trial, but could not do any useful
learning across trials.
There were two phases in the game: PLAN and EXECUTE. During the PLAN
phase—referred to as “ghost mode” in the instructions—participants could not collect
treats, but they could simulate possible action sequences as if they were actually executing
them (i.e., perform rollouts). Immediately before the PLAN phase, the rewards at all
nodes were displayed for 500 ms. This provides participants with a rough idea of the
reward function, allowing them to direct their rollouts towards higher rewards if they so
desired. At each moment during the PLAN phase, participants could either move to an
adjacent node and reveal its reward (arrow keys), jump back to the starting node (space),
or end the PLAN phase (letter key t). These respectively correspond to continuing a
rollout, cutting off a single rollout early, and terminating the planning process. Any reward
revealed during the PLAN phase remained visible until the next phase began. After 20
seconds, the PLAN phase was automatically terminated (if the participant had not already
done so). During the EXECUTE phase, participants committed to one route and received
the the total reward associated with all the nodes they visited . Participants were
incentivized with a monetary bonus proportional to the total number of treats they have
collected during the EXECUTE phase throughout the experiment.
In Experiment 1, participants encountered 2 types of tree structure
including the root node (level 0). The root node has two children (level 1), both of which
have two children (level 2) as well. The left (right) child node of nodes at levels 2 and 3 in
LEFT (RIGHT) tree has two children and the right (left) child node of nodes at levels 2
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 8
Task schematic.
A B
Current Round Ghost 🍬: 4
C D
Current Round Ghost 🍬: 0 Current Round 🍬: 0
Note. (A) Participants started in the PLAN phase, indicated by a transparent avatar.
The treats (rewards) were briefly flashed at the beginning of each trial (not shown here).
(B) Participants used arrow keys to traverse the tree. Reward along the same trajectory
remained visible during the rollout. (C) During the PLAN phase, participants can choose to
restart from the root node for additional rollouts. The previously revealed reward remained
visible throughout the PLAN phase. Participants had up to 20 seconds to carry out rollouts.
They could also choose to terminate the PLAN phase earlier if they were ready for the
EXECUTE phase. (D) When entering EXECUTE phase, indicated by a solid avatar, the
rewards revealed during PLAN phase disappeared. Participants committed to one route and
received the accumulated reward on the specific route.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 9
and 3 in LEFT (RIGHT) tree has 0 children. Nodes at level 4 are all leaf nodes. Trials
with LEFT and RIGHT tree structures were intermixed.
Experiment 2 expanded the tree structure repertoire that participants could interact
with. We generated all 68 tree structures that have 8 leaf nodes, have at least one branch
that reaches 5 levels, and each node has either 0 or 2 child nodes. The LEFT and RIGHT
tree structures used in Experiment 1 satisfied the above requirements and were included in
the set of 68 unique tree structures. Participants encountered each tree structure once. An
LEFT and RIGHT tree illustrations.
Tree LEFT
Tree RIGHT
Note. For the LEFT (RIGHT) tree, nodes on the left (right) at levels 2 and 3 (surrounded
by red and gray rectangles, respectively) have two child nodes, while their siblings have zero
child nodes. The panels on the right show the experiment interface for LEFT/RIGHT trees.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 10
Planning as Exploration Model
We hypothesized that people would use an exploration algorithm to determine which
node to visit next when performing rollouts in the PLAN phase. Sepecifically, our model
uses a Bayesian variant of the UCB algorithm (Gershman, 2018a; Schulz & Gershman,
2019; Srinivas et al., 2010), similar to that used in Monte Carlo tree search (Liu &
Tsuruoka, 2016). This model assumes that nodes are explored according to a priority score:
h = vˆ + w σ . (1)
s s σ s
That is, the priority, h, for exploring node s is a weighted sum of that node’s estimated
value, vˆ, and the uncertainty in that value, σ (defined below). The balance between value
and uncertainty is set by the w parameter, with larger values indicating more
uncertainty-directed planning.
At each step of a rollout, the model select the next node to visit by noisily
maximizing over the priority for the two child nodes, a and b. We assume the noise is
Gaussian with standard deviation 1/ , leading to choice probability:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
P (s = a) = Φ β(h − h ) , (2)
a b
where Φ(·) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution. β
can be understood as a determinacy parameter, analagous to an inverse softmax
temperature.
Value updates
Having defined the rollout policy, we now turn to how rollouts update the estimated
values. As mentioned above, the models tracks both the mean and variance (uncertainty)
in the value each node. Given the underlying Gaussian distribution of the rewards
Prior work has suggested that decision noise may itself be an exploration parameter (Fan, Burke, et al.,
2023; Fan, Gershman, & Phelps, 2023; Gershman, 2018a, 2019; Lee et al., 2023; Wilson et al., 2014);
however, our experiments were not designed to test this hypothesis.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 11
delivered at each node, we assume that the posterior value estimate of node s is a Gaussian
2 2
distribution N (vˆ , σ ). The model updates these estimates during the rollouts, applying a
Bayesian Bellman backup at each step. Intuitively, the value of a node is its reward plus
the value of its best child (s ), the one with maximal estimated value. However, if the
value of that child node is itself uncertain, this uncertainty must be “backed up” into the
value of its parent. We further assume that this backup may be only partially applied
(with a learning rate parameter η ∈ [0, 1]), and that participants may discount future
rewards (with a discount parameter, γ ∈ [0, 1]). This yields the following update equations:
∆vˆ = η(r + γvˆ − vˆ ) (3)
s s s∗ s
2 2 2 2
∆σ = η(γ σ − σ ), (4)
s s∗ s
These updates were applied backward along the entire trajectory at the end of each rollout
during the PLAN phase.
Prior value sketch
To initialize the value estimates, we assume that participants form a rough “sketch”
(gist memory) of the value function based on the 500ms reward display at the beginning of
each round. This sketch is formed in two steps. First, we compute Bayesian estimates of
the individual rewards given a reward prior, N (µ , σ ), and a noisy observation of the true
rewards, r ∼ N (r , σ ). For simplicity, we take a mean-field approximation over the
obs true
obs
observation noise, resulting in a posterior reward estimate N (ˆr, σ ) with parameters
est
1 r / + µ /
2 2
true σ r σ
σ 2 = , ˆr = obs true . (5)
est
1/ + 1/ σ2
2 2
σ σ
obs r r
In these equations, µ and σ are the true mean and variance of the distribution from
which rewards are drawn (0 and 2.25, respectively). We arbitrarily set the observation
Note that the posterior is only Gaussian if we ignore uncertainty in the policy itself. Specifically, our
belief update assumes that the policy deterministically selects the action with maximal estimated value at
every state. This is a simplifying assumption; see Tesauro et al. (2012) and Sezener and Dayan (2020) for
methods that incorporate policy-related uncertainty into value estimation.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 12
noise as σ = 0.25.
obs
Given these reward estimates, we then compute a distributional value function based
on the successor representation (SR) for a random walk policy (Dayan, 1993; Gershman,
2018b). Intuitively, we assume that participants know how likely they are (in general) to
visit each node starting from any other node, but that they do not initially account for how
that probability depends on their future actions, which may depend on the rewards.
Formally, the random walk policy induces a transition function, T , defined as:
1/|S | s ′ ∈ S
 s s
T = (6)
s,s′
0 otherwise,
where S is the set of states accessible from state s (the “children” of s). The SR is defined
as M = (I − γT) −1 . The value function can then be computed as vˆ = Mˆr (Dayan, 1993).
However, this only provides a point estimate, whereas we are interested in identifying a
distribution that captures uncertainty in the true value function. To do this, we begin by
adopting a probabilistic interpretation of the SR (Carvalho et al., 2024; Eysenbach et al.,
2021; Janner et al., 2021), treating M as the probability of reaching state s starting
s,s′
from s. We can then approximate the distribution over value as:
v˜ ∼ Bernoulli(M ) · N (rˆ , σ ). (7)
s s,s′ s′
est
s′
Finally, we initialize the value estimates using its mean and variance:
vˆ = E[v˜ ] = M rˆ (8)
s s s,s′ s′
s′
h i
2 2 2
σ = Var[v˜ ] = M σ + M (1 − M )rˆ . (9)
s s s,s′ est s,s′ s,s′ s′
s′
Note that we can directly interpret the entries of M as probabilities because the task environment is
tree-structured, meaning each state can be visited at most once. However, M only represents the marginal
probability of each state—it does not capture the dependencies between future states (e.g., you cannot visit
two states at one depth). This is the sense in which 7 is approximate.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 13
The variance term is of particular interest because it captures the initial uncertainty that
we hypothesize to drive participant’s early planning. To intuitively understand this
expression, observe that the full variance is the sum of two terms. The first term captures
uncertainty in the rewards themselves (σ ), weighted by the probability that they will be
est
attained (M ). The second term captures uncertainty in which of those rewards will be
s,s′
attained (M (1 − M )) weighted by the estimated magnitude of those rewards (rˆ ).
s,s′ s,s′
s′
Critically, note that both of these terms will be larger for nodes that have more successors.
Thus, a preference for exploring nodes with higher uncertainty will be behaviorally
revealed as a preference for nodes with more successors (including both children and
indirect descendants).
Model fitting
We fit the model to participants’ choice data from the PLAN phase using Stan
(Stan Development Team, 2024); see Appendix B for parameter recovery details. We fit
participant-specific parameters for the learning rate η and the discount factor γ, and both
group-level and participant-level parameters for coefficients β and w . For the i’th
participant, we set the priors on participant-specific parameters as follows:
η = ϕ(α), α ∼ N (0, 1) (10)
γ = ϕ(θ), θ ∼ N (0, 1) (11)
β ∼ N (µ , σ ) (12)
i 1 1
w ∼ N (µ , σ ) (13)
σi 2 2
The group level parameters were given weakly informative hyper-priors:
µ ∼ N (0, 1), µ ∼ N (0, 1), (14)
1 2
σ ∼ N (0, 1), σ ∼ N (0, 1), (15)
1 + 2 +
where N (0, 1) denotes the half-normal distribution.
For each model, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) was run with 4 chains. Each
chain was run for 2000 iterations, using the first 1000 for warmup. The Gelman-Rubin R
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 14
statistic was computed and ensured to be less than 1.1 for all variables. We report the
median estimate of posterior distribution and the 95% highest posterior density intervals
(HDIs). We treated an effect as statistically credible if the parameter’s 95% HDI did not
contain 0.
To supplement this model-based analysis, we also analyzed participants’ choices in a
more model-agnostic way. Concretely, we modeled participants’ choices as a function of the
number of child nodes (n ) and the number of indirect descendants (n ):
child ind
P (s = a) = Φ (w (n − n ) + w (n − n ) + w (v¯ − v¯ ))) , (16)
child child,a child,b ind ind,a ind,b val a b
where v¯ is computed as the average return received from node a prior to the current
rollout, serving as an empirical proxy for the posterior mean estimate vˆ . It is also worth
noting that since all tree structures are full binary trees (i.e., each node has 0 or 2 child
nodes), there exist three levels of relative number of child nodes: -2, 0, and 2. Given the
LEFT/RIGHT tree design in Experiment 1, there exist three levels of relative number of
indirect descendants as well: -2, 0, 2. In Experiment 2, more flexible tree structures lead to
more possible value for the relative number of indirect descendants, ranging from -10 to 10.
Our model simulation results suggest that when the uncertainty weight w is positive,
child ind
For this model-agnostic regression, we fit a Bayesian generalized mixed-effects model
with a probit link function, and included fixed and random effects for all regressors (w ,
child
w , and w ). Regressors were standardized before entering the regression. The random
ind val
effects were drawn from a multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean zero and unknown
covariance matrix. We implemented the model with the brms R package (Bürkner, 2017),
using the default prior for fixed effects (an improper flat prior over the reals). We used the
same MCMC sampling hyper-parameters and convergence criteria as for the main model.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 15
Simulated choice probability grouped by number of child nodes and indirect descendants
using different parameter combinations.
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
−2.5 0.0 2.5 −2.5 0.0 2.5
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
b „ , =
A 0 w 0
Experiment 2
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
−2.5 0.0 2.5
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
−2.5 0.0 2.5 −2.5 0.0 2.5
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
b „ , „
C 0 w 0
Experiment 2
0.6
0.5
0.4
−2.5 0.0 2.5
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
Number of child(left column) and grandchild(right column) nodes left<right left=right left>right
Note. All data are simulated using Eqs. 1-9 with different parameter combinations. In (A,B)
the determinacy parameter β is fitted and uncertainty weight w is fixed at 0. In (C,D) both
determinacy parameter and uncertainty weight are fitted. We use fitted parameter values
the yellow (green) line in (A,C) corresponds to the situation where the node on the left
(right) has 0 child nodes while its sibling has 2 child nodes. The gray lines correspond to the
situation where all nodes on the same level have either 0 or 2 child nodes. For (B,D), we only
plot data where both nodes at the current layer has the same number of child nodes—i.e.,
data contributing to the gray lines in (A,C). The standard deviation of reward distribution
is 1.5. Error bars indicate standard error. Gray ribbons indicate 95% confidence interval of
the predicted values.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 16
Results
Overall, participants performed the task well, choosing the more rewarding node
73.3 % of the time during EXECUTE phase. Though not required, people made use of the
PLAN phase. On average, people carried out 4.52 rollouts per graph (Experiment 1: 4.87;
Experiment 2: 4.51) and 91.2 % of the rollouts reached a leaf node (Experiment 1: 90.5%;
Experiment 2: 91.4 %). People also primarily visited the nodes that they inspected during
the PLAN phase (Experiment 1: 92.0% trials; Experiment 2: 93.0 %). Finally, people who
planned more (i.e., carried out more rollouts), earned more rewards during the EXECUTE
These results suggest that the PLAN phase effectively probes planning.
Relationship between average number of rollouts during the PLAN phase and performance
during the EXECUTE phase.
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8
Average number of rollouts during PLAN
)ETUCEXE
gnirud
noitpo
retteb
esoohC(P
Note. Each point represents one participant. The shaded area represents the 95% confidence
interval.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 17
Empirical choice probability grouped by number of child nodes (A) and indirect descendants
(B).
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
0.75
0.50
0.25
−2.5 0.0 2.5 −2.5 0.0 2.5
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
Experiment 2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
−2.5 0.0 2.5
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
Number of child nodes(A) and indirect descendants(B) left<right left=right left>right
Note. Because all tree structures are full binary trees, the yellow(green) line in (A) corre-
sponds to the situation where the node on the left(right) has 0 child nodes while its sibling
has 2 child nodes. The gray lines correspond to the situation where all nodes on the same
level have either 0 or 2 child nodes. For (B), we only plot data where both nodes at the
current layer has the same number of child nodes—i.e., data contributing to gray lines in
(A). The standard deviation of the reward distribution is 1.5. Error bars indicate standard
error. Gray ribbons indicate 95% confidence interval of the predicted values.
Planning reflect both value- and uncertainty-seeking
Our model proposes that human planners selectively explore states that have both
high estimated value and high uncertainty in value (Eq. 2). More concretely, simulations
from which more reward has been gained on average (v¯), as well as nodes that have more
children (n ; our experimental manipulation). These two features act as empirical
child
proxies of estimated value vˆ and uncertainty σ in Eq 2, respectively.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 18
Coefficient estimates for value difference, relative number of child nodes, and relative
number of indirect descendants during the PLAN phase for Experiments 1 (A) and 2 (B)
A B
Relative number of Relative number of
indirect descendants indirect descendants
Relative number of Relative number of
child nodes child nodes
Value difference Value difference
0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.150 0.175 0.200 0.225
Coefficient Estimate Coefficient Estimate
Note. Vertical lines indicate median estimate of the posterior. Shaded areas indicate 95%
credible interval of the posterior coefficient estimates.
probit regression described above (Eq. 16), we found that participant choices in the PLAN
phase were positively related to both value (w ; Experiment 1: M = 0.16, 95% HDI =
val
[0.11, 0.23]; Experiment 2: M = 0.19, 95% HDI = [0.16, 0.22]) and number of children
(w ; Experiment 1: M = 0.24, 95% HDI = [0.19, 0.29]; Experiment 2: M = 0.20, 95%
child
We aditionally found that participants were sensitive to a more far-sighted indicator
of uncertainty: the number of indirect descendants, that is, the number of nodes that could
be reached in more than one step. Because the true value (cumulative future reward) of
each child node depends on all its descendants, two nodes with the same number of child
nodes but different numbers of indirect descendants will have different levels of uncertainty.
This preference for nodes with more indirect descendants is also predicted by our model
the same number of children, participants were more likely to explore the node with more
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 19
Model comparison results for Experiments 1 and 2 using the leave-one-out information
criterion (LOOIC).
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
Model 1 12538.15 56689.44
Model 2 12124.44 55144.66
Model 3 12085.62 54672.62
Note. LOOIC is computed as -2 * expected log pointwise predictive density. Smaller LOOIC
indicates better model fit. For Model 1, the determinacy parameter β is fitted and the
uncertainty weight w is fixed at 0. For Model 2, the uncertainty weight is fitted and the
coefficient for value in Eq. 1 is fixed at 0. For Model 3, both the determinacy parameter
and the uncertainty weight are fitted.
indirect descendants (w ; Experiment 1: M = 0.13, 95% HDI = [0.08 0.17]; Experiment 2:
ind
Having confirmed our pre-registered behavioral predictions, we then fit our
theoretical model (Eq. 2) directly to participants’ planning behavior. This model implicitly
captures all the effects described above, as well as more specific belief-updating dynamics
that could yield more precise measures of value and uncertainty. The full model
outperformed nested models where the coefficient for value or uncertainty was fixed to be 0
were above 0 (Experiment 1 β: M = 0.061, 95% HDI = [0.053, 0.069], w : M = 4.58, 95%
HDI = [3.63, 5.53]; Experiment 2 β: M = 0.065, 95% HDI = [0.056, 0.075], w : M = 5.51,
The results above suggest that our participants were sensitive to value and
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 20
Posterior Estimates of determinacy β (A) and uncertainty weight w (B) in Experiments 1
and 2.
A B
Experiment 1 Experiment 1
Experiment 2 Experiment 2
0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 3 4 5 6
determinacy ( ) uncertainty weight (w )
Note. Dashed lines indicate the 95% credible interval of the posterior estimates.
uncertainty when choosing which action to simulate next during planning. However, it is
possible that these results reflect an inherent preference for states that have more
descendants (i.e., “keeping your options open”; Navarro et al., 2018). To address this, we
conducted an exploratory analysis using a different measure of uncertainty: the number of
participants were more likely to explore nodes that had been visited less often, controlling
for both estimated value and the number of descendants (coefficient for previous visit;
Experiment 1: M = −0.44, 95% HDI = [-0.52, -0.37]; Experiment 2: M = −0.38, 95% HDI
= [-0.26, -0.34]).
Uncertainty-seeking is selective to planning
Having confirmed an influence of uncertainty on participants’ planning, we next
considered a more subtle question. Is the exploratory behavior we observed specific to
planning, or does it instead reflect a general preference for uncertainty that is not sensitive
to the functional demands of planning vs. acting? Intuitively, simulated actions should be
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 21
Empirical choice probability grouped by number of previous visits.
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
−2 0 2 4 −2 0 2 4
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
Number of visits to nodes on the same layer left<right left=right left>right
Note. Choice probability was modeled using probit regression. The yellow (green) lines
correspond to the situation where the node on the left (right) has been visited more frequently
than its sibling before the current choice. The gray lines correspond to the situation where
all nodes on the same level have been visited the same number of times before the current
choice. The standard deviation of reward distribution is 1.5. Error bars indicate standard
error. Gray ribbons indicate 95% confidence interval of the predicted values.
more sensitive to uncertainty (and less sensitive to value) because these simulations can
directly inform the upcoming choice (and do not incur real consequences). In contrast, real
actions should be more sensitive to value (and less sensitive to uncertainty) because they
have real consequences (and have a less immediate impact on future choice—in our task,
one cannot learn any useful information while acting).
To test this intuitive prediction, we conducted an exploratory analysis comparing
and number of children in both phases. However, while uncertainty dominated in the
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 22
PLAN phase, value dominated in the EXECUTE phase. To statistically confirm this
pattern, we regressed choices on relative value and relative number of child nodes, using
the phase as an interaction term. Concretely, we constructed a regression analagous Eqs 2
and 1 to obtain parameters comparable to the determinacy β and uncertainty weight w in
the model-based analysis:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
′ proxy proxy
P (s = a) = β (v¯ − v¯ ) + w (n − n ) . (17)
a b child,a child,b
We then collapsed the data across the PLAN and EXECUTE phases and include
interactions between the proxy parameters and the experiment phase. Consistent with our
prediction, we found that people put less weight on uncertainty in the EXECUTE phase
proxy
(interaction between EXECUTE phase and w ; Experiment 1: M = −2.29, 95% HDI
column). People are also more deterministic during the EXECUTE phase (interaction
proxy
between EXECUTE phase and β ; Experiment 1: M = 1.17, 95% HDI = [1.00, 1.36];
Conducting a similar analysis using the cognitive model (fit to each stage
separately), we found that participants put a higher weight on model-derived uncertainty
in the PLAN phase (PLAN - EXECUTE ∆w ; Experiment 1: M = 3.39, 95% HDI =
[2.21, 4.61]; Experiment 2: M = 4.35, 95% HDI = [3.48, 5.12]) and showed overall more
deterministic behavior in the EXECUTE phase (PLAN - EXECUTE ∆β; Experiment 1:
M = −0.49, 95% HDI = [-0.57, -0.42]; Experiment 2: M = −0.52, 95% HDI = [-0.59,
-0.45]).
The differential effect of uncertainty on decision during PLAN and EXECUTE is
also reflected when we quantify uncertainty as the number of times the node had been
previously visited during planning. By regressing choices with previous visit, estimated
value, number of descendants and interactions between parameters and experiment phase,
while people tend to visit nodes that they have visited less often before during PLAN
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 23
phase, they tend to visit the option with more accumulated visits during EXECUTE phase
(interaction between EXECUTE phase and coefficient for previous visit; Experiment 1:
M = 0.78, 95 %HDI = [0.67, 0.88]; Experiment 2: M = 0.82, 95 %HDI = [0.77, 0.87];).
Relationship between number of child nodes and empirical choice probability in the PLAN
and EXECUTE phases.
Experiment 1 Experiment 1
PLAN EXECUTE
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Experiment 2 Experiment 2
PLAN EXECUTE
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
−2.5 0.0 2.5 −2.5 0.0 2.5
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
Relative number of child node (left−right) left < right left > right
Notes. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean. Gray ribbons indicate 95% confidence
interval of the predicted values.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 24
proxy proxy
Posterior estimates for determinacy proxy (β ) and uncertainty weight proxy (w ) in
the PLAN/EXECUTE phases, and their interactions with PLAN/EXECUTE phases for
Experiments 1 (A) and 2 (B)
determinacy uncertainty weight
Main effect
Interaction
0.5 1.0 1.5 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0
Coefficient Estimate
determinacy uncertainty weight
Main effect
Interaction
0.4 0.8 1.2 −1 0 1 2
Coefficient Estimate
Experiment Phase EXECUTE PLAN
Notes. Interaction terms are calculated using the PLAN phase as the reference level. Vertical
line indicate median estimate of the posterior. Shaded areas indicate 95% credible intervals
of the posterior coefficient estimates.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 25
Relationship between number of previous visits and empirical choice probability in the
PLAN and EXECUTE phases.
Experiment 1 Experiment 1
PLAN EXECUTE
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Experiment 2 Experiment 2
PLAN EXECUTE
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
−2 0 2 4 −2 0 2 4
Value difference (left−right)
)tfel
esoohc(P
Number of visits to nodes on the same layer left<right left=right
Notes. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean. Gray ribbons indicate 95% confidence
interval of the predicted values.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 26
Discussion
In two experiments, we studied the guidance of planning by uncertainty. The
central hypothesis was that mental exploration of decision trees may involve mechanisms
similar to overt exploration of environments during reinforcement learning (Schulz &
Gershman, 2019). In support of this hypothesis, we reported several converging measures
showing that people tend to explore parts of the decision tree with greater uncertainty (i.e.,
nodes with more children and indirect descendants). Quantitative comparison of
computational models confirmed that an uncertainty bonus (in addition to value) improves
fit to human data. We also found that this uncertainty seeking was selective to planning,
over and above a general tendency to take actions that lead to more future choices.
Our experimental paradigm has two important features. First, the planning phase
has a time limit (a maximum of 20 seconds). The time limit makes it almost impossible to
visit all nodes during planning, much like in naturalistic planning tasks. Therefore, this
design reduces the possibility of using strategies whose objective is to visit all states (e.g.,
breath-first or depth-first search). Second, before the start of the planning phase, all the
rewards were flashed quickly to the participant. This differs from previous work using the
Mouselab-MDP paradigm, where participants need to click the node to reveal the reward
for the first time (Callaway, van Opheusden, et al., 2022). Therefore, the act of visiting a
node in the current setup is ostensibly not for revealing reward information, but rather for
reducing uncertainty in the value estimate. Additionally, both the rewards and the tree
structure varies from trial to trial, especially in Experiment 2 where all tree structures are
different. This design prevents people from memorizing fixed action sequences (Huys et al.,
2015).
Uncertainty-directed actions occurred more frequently during the planning phase
Arguably, the brief exposure to the rewards means the rewards are remembered imperfectly by
participants, and therefore visiting the nodes during planning does in fact provide information. Future
work will be needed to investigate the extent to which this occurs.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 27
compared to the execution phase, consistent with the interpretation that these actions
primarily reflect exploration in support of planning. Intriguingly, we still found evidence
for (weaker) uncertainty-directed exploration during execution. This raises a normative
computational question: why does uncertainty persist in influencing actions even during
the execution phase? Presently, we can only offer speculation. One possibility is that
participants continued to engage in planning even after the planning phase; this would
indicate that our externalization protocol was not entirely successful. Another possibility is
that people have an intrinsic preference for information, separate from its instrumental role
in planning (van Lieshout et al., 2020).
It is important to note that the majority of previous studies, where the planning
phase is not externalized, tend to assume that people stick to their plan after its formation.
Our finding that people show preference for the uncertain option during EXECUTE phase
challenges this assumption. Additionally, we have shown that, although infrequent, people
visit nodes that they have not inspected during the PLAN phase. This is in line with
recent work extending uncertainty-driven exploration from a 1-step multi-armed bandit
problem to a temporally extended decision-making setting (Antonov & Dayan, 2023; Fox
et al., 2023).
The current study has several limitations. First, the experiment only allows
rollout-based planning. We chose this design in part because it allowed us to directly apply
exploration strategies from reinforcement learning to model participant’s planning.
However, this restriction may also act as a countermeasure against an artifact of the task.
Specifically, visually presenting the full state space makes it easy to jump between different
parts of the tree (e.g., by making a saccade). When planning entirely in one’s head (as one
must typically do), these jumps would likely incur substantial cognitive/computational
cost. Indeed, artificial planning agents often use rollout-based strategies when dealing with
extremely large state spaces (Barto et al., 1995; Silver et al., 2016). Thus, by restricting
participants to this class of strategies in our task, we may be better equipped to
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 28
understand the way they would plan in a real-world problem. On the other hand, people
and animals can employ other planning strategies, including ones that work backwards
from desirable states (Afsardeir & Keramati, 2018; Newell & Simon, 1972; Sharp & Eldar,
2024). Understanding the role of uncertainty in these types of algorithms is an important
direction for future work.
A second limitation is that, despite the fact that people can’t exhaustively traverse
the state space in our task, there is a substantial gap between the complexity of our task
and the complexity of real-world planning problems (van Opheusden & Ma, 2019;
van Opheusden et al., 2023). Tasks with large state spaces impose challenges on
appropriate uncertainty estimation, which could interact with the usage of
uncertainty-driven exploration during planning.
In summary, the current study examined the mental exploration process during
planning with a task that allows us to externalize the planning process together with an
experiment design that exogenously manipulates the value uncertainty in different states.
Our results show that people have a preference for approaching uncertain options during
planning (after controlling for value differences), suggesting that the mental exploration
process, similar to exploration during reinforcement learning, is guided by uncertainty.
UNCERTAINTY-DRIVEN PLANNING 29