Beyond Content: Psychological Structure of Political Beliefs
Gabriela Czarnek, Katarzyna Jaśko, Iwona Dudek, & Maja Piotrowska
Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University, Kraków (Poland)
Contact: gabriela.czarnek@uj.edu.pl
Acknowledgements
We thank Arie Kruglanski and Mark Brandt for providing feedback on this manuscript.
Funding
Study 1a was supported from Sonata grant (number 2021/43/D/HS6/03353; Polish sample) and a
grant funded by the Strategic Program Excellence Initiative at the Jagiellonian University (US
and India samples) awarded to Gabriela Czarnek. Study 2b was supported from the Norway
Grants 2014-2021 (registration number 2019/34/H/HS6/00739) awarded to Katarzyna Jaśko.
Abstract
Research on the structure of political beliefs is predominantly focused on identifying the
dimensions underlying issue positions. In contrast, the goal of this research was to uncover the
psychological structure underlying ideological beliefs regardless of their content. Drawing from
the diverse literature, we identified 18 potentially relevant dimensions that could describe political
beliefs. Guided by motivational model of belief, we expected three overarching factors:
importance, certainty, and metacognitive difficulty. Using a comprehensive list of 50 political
issues, we verified this structure across the three countries: the US, Poland, and India (total N =
2,838). Our predictions were largely confirmed in the US sample. However, in Poland and in India,
there were two main uncorrelated factors: (1) importance & certainty, and (2) metacognitive
difficulty. We also found that higher importance, higher certainty, and lower metacognitive
difficulty were associated with more extreme positions. However, importance was the key
predictor of advocacy intentions. These findings offer a unifying framework for describing
ideological beliefs regardless of their content and have implications for understanding ideological
thinking, political prejudice, or cultural differences in ideology.
Keywords: political ideology, political beliefs, political cognition, motivated social cognition
Statement of limitations
While our use of nearly 20 psychological constructs and nearly 50 political issues enhances
coverage, both lists are comprehensive but exhaustive. Furthermore, focusing on general advocacy
intentions without examining specific behaviors or past engagement may limit the depth of
understanding of real-world actions. Additionally, these correlational analyses cannot determine
causation, leaving unclear whether identified dimensions influence or result from position
extremity or advocacy intentions. Finally, findings are generalizable across three countries, the
US, Poland, and India, but limitations in the Indian sample, which disproportionately represents
individuals with higher educational attainment, may reduce cultural representativeness. Despite
these constraints, we believe this research makes significant contributions by offering a broad and
cross-national perspective on psychological structure of political ideology.
Introduction
Ideological beliefs are a subset of beliefs that define how society should be organized and
describe acceptable methods for achieving these ideals (Erikson & Tedin, 2015; Jost et al.,
2009). For example, a person might believe that combating climate change should be a top
government priority or that the government should have the authority to intervene in citizens'
private lives to fight terrorism. This definition of ideological beliefs emphasizes an individual’s
preferences for specific policies rather than their identification with labels such as "liberal" or
"conservative" (Ellis & Stimson, 2012).
Research on the structure of ideological beliefs predominantly focuses on their content
and seeks to identify its underlying dimensions. Currently, the debate concentrates on whether
ideology is best represented by one, two, or more dimensions. While ideology has traditionally
been understood along a single left-versus-right axis (Jost et al., 2003b, 2009), an alternative
view proposes two dimensions, which capture beliefs about social and economic issues
(Converse, 2006; Czarnek et al., 2017; Feldman & Johnston, 2014; Layman & Carsey, 2002;
Malka et al., 2014). Some scholars argue that even more dimensions are necessary to fully
represent the complexity of ideological beliefs (Clifford et al., 2023; Goren et al., 2016; Warncke
& Azevedo, 2024).
Despite numerous studies on the dimensions of ideological contents, this research faces
important limitations. First, contents tend to vary across contexts. For instance, while issues like
vaccines and climate change may be diagnostic for ideological orientation in some countries,
they do not consistently cluster with other ideological beliefs in others (Czarnek et al., 2021;
Hornsey et al., 2018a, 2018b). Even within a single country, the issues that define broad
ideological categories evolve over time (Kossowska et al., 2021; Pew Research Center, 2017).
Some topics, such as LGBTQ+ rights, have become increasingly salient, while others, like the
accountability of former regime officials in post-communist European countries, have faded
away. New issues that will shape future ideological divides are also likely to emerge. Finally,
analyses of measures of political beliefs show that while some issues, like abortion, are well
represented and appear across many scales, others, such as foreign policy or racial relations, are
rarely included (Azevedo & Bolesta, 2021). This highlights a lack of consensus on which issues
are core to an ideology, and which are peripheral.
But is there an alternative approach to studying the structure of ideological beliefs that
does not depend on their specific content? In this paper, we propose such an approach, which
examines ideological beliefs using psychological, content-free dimensions. Drawing on
theoretical models and prior research from various fields (e.g., motivated reasoning, lay
epistemic theory, attitude strength, Bayesian updating, metacognition, issue voting) we identify
close to 20 specific candidate dimensions and organize them into three groups. The first two
groups, which reflect belief importance and belief certainty, are inspired by motivational models
of beliefs (Kruglanski et al., 2020). Importance refers to the value an individual places on the
state of affairs represented by their beliefs, while certainty captures the individual's confidence in
the accuracy of those beliefs. Alongside these two dimensions, we introduce a third factor —
metacognitive difficulty —which reflects the mental effort experienced when thinking about a
particular issue (Schwarz, 2018).
In what follows, we propose that these three dimensions offer a compelling framework
for examining ideological beliefs and their significant social implications, including belief
extremity and advocacy intentions. After defining these dimensions, we present two studies that
tested this framework, encompassing nearly 50 political issues across three countries.
Importance of Beliefs
The first dimension of ideological beliefs is the importance of those beliefs to an
individual who holds them. This dimension reflects how closely a belief aligns with personal
goals. Political beliefs can range from being inconsequential—when they are irrelevant to one’s
goals—to highly significant, when they pertain to central personal concerns. For example, during
an economic recession, many individuals may prioritize tax policies while placing less emphasis
on environmental protection, regardless of their particular stance on these issues. Various
external and internal factors can influence the importance assigned to a particular belief
(Kruglanski et al., 2020; Sharot et al., 2023).
The role of belief importance has been extensively examined in the past literature.
Studies on motivated reasoning, including studies conducted in political contexts, suggest that
individuals form and maintain beliefs that align with their goals, while rejecting those that
conflict with them (Bolsen et al., 2014; Kunda, 1990; Taber & Lodge, 2006). Similarly, in the
literature on attitudes, importance is considered a key component of attitude strength (Boninger
et al., 1995). Related constructs, such as attitude centrality and issue interest, are often treated as
correlates or alternative measures of this underlying dimension.
Some theoretical frameworks argue that specific subsets of goals—such as personal
values, social identities, or moral convictions—are particularly strong drivers of ideological
beliefs. For example, research on sacred values demonstrates how beliefs tied to core values
influence behavior (Atran et al., 2014; Ginges & Atran, 2013; Tetlock, 2003; Whitehouse, 2018).
Similarly, the theory of moral conviction emphasizes the motivational power of beliefs rooted in
fundamental moral values (Skitka et al., 2005; Skitka & Morgan, 2014). Identity-related goals
have also been argued to uniquely shape ideological thinking (Kahan, 2013, 2017; Van Bavel &
Pereira, 2018). This body of research suggests that the perceived grounding of beliefs in moral
values or social identities may form a distinct factor that differentiates ideological issues.
Other approaches assume that the importance of a belief may arise from its connection to
any personal goal (Howe & Krosnick, 2017; Kruglanski et al., 2018, 2020; Sharot et al., 2023),
and they challenge the idea that morality- or identity-based beliefs hold a unique status. Philipp-
Muller and colleagues (2020), for instance, argue that moral convictions fall within the broader
dimension of attitude importance, alongside values and identity relevance. Similarly, other
analyses suggest that while attitude importance can be divided into subdimensions, these are
closely related. For example, Boninger and colleagues (1995) found that manipulating goal
importance in one way (e.g., through self-interest) generalize to importance ratings on other
dimensions (e.g., values). In summary, while distinct subfactors of belief importance may exist,
we predict that these subdimensions are strongly related and collectively form a single
overarching factor reflecting the extent to which a given ideological belief is important to an
individual.
Certainty of Beliefs
The second proposed dimension along which beliefs—regardless of their content—vary
is certainty. It reflects the level of confidence an individual has in the truth of a particular belief.
People can hold some beliefs with high certainty, such as when they firmly believe that smoking
in public spaces should be prohibited. However, they may hold other beliefs with less
confidence, like when a person is unsure whether freedom of speech on the Internet should be
restricted or not.
Various theoretical models identify certainty as a dimension distinct from belief
importance (e.g., Kruglanski et al., 2020). For example, Bayesian models of belief (e.g., Griffiths
et al., 2008), which have also been applied to ideology (Druckman & McGrath, 2019; Zmigrod,
2022), treat certainty as a critical component. In this framework, beliefs are viewed as
predictions about future states that are updated based on new evidence. The level of confidence
in these predictions affects how likely a person is to revise vs. protect their beliefs when faced
with new information.
The certainty of ideological beliefs can be influenced by several factors, including the
amount of factual knowledge an individual possesses the consistency of a belief with other
beliefs, or the clarity or ambiguity regarding the potential positive or negative outcomes of a
policy (e.g., Fazio & Zanna, 1978; Kaplan, 1972; Scott, 1969; Tormala & Rucker, 2018).
Although these factors have often been studied separately, research on attitude consistency,
complexity, and ambivalence suggests that these dimensions are closely correlated with belief
certainty (Philipp-Muller et al., 2020). Similarly, we expect these dimensions to correlate with
certainty in the context of ideological beliefs.
It is important to note that belief certainty is not free from motivational influences. It can
be shaped by epistemic goals—the desire to form, maintain, or avoid opinions based on their
perceived accuracy or certainty rather than their specific content (Kruglanski et al., 2020). For
instance, individuals with a high need for certainty may gravitate toward strong leaders, not
necessarily because they initially agree with the leader’s ideas, but because the leader inspires
confidence in their policies. Indeed, there is extensive research demonstrating the role of
epistemic needs in forming ideological beliefs (Adorno et al., 1969; Frenkel-Brunswik, 1954;
Jost et al., 2003a; Rokeach, 1960; Webster & Kruglanski, 1994)
The relationship between belief certainty and importance has been, however, viewed
differently across models. Some models treat these dimensions as independent (Kruglanski,
1990), while others suggest that there is a strong correlation between them (Bassili, 1996; Prislin,
1996). Since ideological beliefs reflect convictions about how the world should be and are
therefore less constrained by what is, there are theoretical reasons to expect a positive correlation
between importance and certainty. However, the question how strong this relationship is remains
open.
Metacognitive Difficulty of Beliefs
Drawing on research on metacognitive processes (Schwarz, 1990, 2018), we propose
metacognitive difficulty as the third general dimension describing ideological beliefs.
Metacognitive difficulty (vs. fluency) refers to the subjective experience of effort vs. ease
associated with thinking about a particular topic. The more effortful a cognitive activity (e.g.,
thinking about an issue), the less fluent the corresponding metacognitive experience tends to be.
Processing fluency and its psychological consequences have been extensively studied across
various domains. Objects processed in a fluent way are attributed higher value and fluent
statements are perceived as having greater truthfulness (Reber & Schwarz, 1999), and they are
held with greater confidence (Schwartz & Metcalfe, 1992). In the political domain, fluency has
been associated with a stronger tendency to believe fake news following their repeated exposure
(Pennycook et al., 2018).
Given these findings, subjective experience of ease vs. effort when thinking about
political issues may influence the perceived importance and certainty of beliefs about these
issues. Difficulty could therefore correlate with the other two dimensions we have proposed so
far. However, research shows that the interpretation of cognitive ease (or difficulty) varies
depending on the context (O’Donnell et al., 2023). In some cases, effortful processing can
increase the value of the object of thought, while in others, disfluency may lead to negative
evaluations. For example, in the art world, disfluency might enhance perceptions of novelty (Yoo
et al., 2024), while in moral contexts, it might signal a lack of integrity. Thus, the relationship
between fluency and the other dimensions characterizing ideological beliefs (i.e., importance and
certainty) remains unclear. Given that metacognitive difficulty is rarely featured in the analyses
of ideological beliefs, we treat it as a potentially separate factor, and we consider its relationship
to other dimensions as exploratory.
Another body of literature also examines issue difficulty, although it focuses on the
differences between political issues rather than on the individual experience of cognitive
difficulty. Specifically, political scientists have argued that some policy issues are inherently
“easy,” while others are “hard” (Carmines & Stimson, 1980). According to this view, easy
issues, such as abortion, tend to be understandable to the average person and are typically tied to
values and longstanding political agendas. In contrast, hard issues, like public healthcare, require
more knowledge and are less tied to identity or values. Some have suggested that easy issues are
more likely to belong to the domain of social policies, while hard issues are more associated with
economic policies (Johnston & Wronski, 2015).
However, classifying issues as "easy" or "hard" remains somewhat arbitrary. It also raises
questions about whether difficulty is an inherent property of the issue, a reflection of the
individual thinking about it, or a result of the broader context in which the issue arises. Given
that our study examined the perceptions of numerous issues, we were well-positioned to address
these questions and identify the extent to which processing difficulty depends on the specific
issue being considered vs. a person considering various issues.
Relations with Position Extremity and Advocacy
The primary goal of this paper was to identify the psychological structure underlying
ideological beliefs. Our additional goal was to examine the relationships between these
dimensions and two commonly studied outcome variables in this context: position extremity and
advocacy intentions. Position extremity is defined as the distance (in either direction) of one’s
opinion on the issue from the midpoint. Advocacy intentions refer to the willingness to get
involved in actions on behalf of the issue such as convincing other people to change their minds
about the issue, voting, or engaging in protest.
It has been shown that both attitude importance and certainty are correlated with position
extremity (Farc & Sagarin, 2009; Krosnick et al., 1993; Liu & Latane, 1998; Pomerantz et al.,
1995). For example, a study that examined this relationship across 14 different issues found that
issue importance correlated with extremity at both the individual and issue level (Liu & Latane,
1998). When it comes to advocacy, it was shown that both past behavior and advocacy intentions
are related to importance. For example, importance was related to whether people had contacted
officials or attended advocacy group meetings (Holbrook et al., 2016; Krosnick et al., 1993;
Visser et al., 2003) or reported willingness to do so (Farc & Sagarin, 2009; Liu & Latane, 1998;
Philipp-Muller et al., 2020; Pomerantz et al., 1995). Similarly, certainty predicted past
engagement and advocacy intentions, such as contacting officials, donating money, and voting
intention (Krosnick et al., 1993; Philipp-Muller et al., 2020; Pomerantz et al., 1995; Visser et al.,
2003).
Some studies report that importance might be a stronger predictor of advocacy than
certainty (Farc & Sagarin, 2009; Visser et al., 2003). However, with a few exceptions, past
research focused either on the importance or certainty and rarely investigated both predictors
simultaneously. We will thus extend this research by testing the relationships between
psychological dimensions and position extremity as well as advocacy intention across multiple
political issues. We expect that position extremity and advocacy intentions will be correlated
with importance and certainty. However, given lack of previous research analyzing relationship
between metacognitive difficulty and ideological extremity or advocacy, these analyzes are
exploratory.
Overview of the Present Work
The goal of this research is to uncover the underlying psychological structure of ideological
beliefs. Rather than focusing on the content of specific issues, we explore whether a limited
number of dimensions could describe ideological beliefs independent of their content. In short,
while knowing someone’s position on topics like abortion access or climate change is a
significant predictor of behaviors such as voting (Burgess et al., 2024; Etzerodt, 2024; Kann et
al., 2024), our study was inspired by the idea that it may be equally important to examine factors
such whether the person considers abortion a personally important issue, how confident or
uncertain they feel about their stance, and whether they perceive the issue as easy or difficult to
think about.
While previous work has proposed a content-free approach to the structure of political
ideology (e.g., Zmigrod, 2022), our approach is distinct in that we make theory-driven
predictions and provide their empirical validation across multiple ideological issues and
countries. Specifically, we compiled a set of 18 psychological dimensions that could characterize
ideological beliefs (e.g., morality-basis, personal importance, ambivalence, complexity; see
dimensions we also included three additional factors: perceived polarization on the issue,
novelty, and satisfaction with the current state of affairs with respect to a particular issue. The
latter are not typically studied within the frameworks reviewed above but they appear in
contemporary discussions on ideology (Holbrook et al., 2016; Levendusky & Malhotra, 2016;
Van Boven et al., 2012). They also relate to the time-specific aspects of the political issues and
may be used to identify issues that attract more current attention.
In addition to a large number of dimensions, we also used a wide array of 49 political
issues, collected comprehensively via the analyses of existing measurements of ideology (e.g.,
Azevedo & Bolesta, 2021), topics covered by political parties’ agendas (Volkens et al., 2020),
and policy priorities included in social surveys among general public (Pew Research Centre,
2023). This large set included popular issues like abortion and migration, but also less frequently
studied topics like foreign policy or institutions.
To verify the generalizability of our findings, we carried out our studies in three countries
representing distinct socio-political and cultural contexts: the US, Poland, and India. In each
survey, participants rated their beliefs on a randomly chosen subset of issues with regard to all
dimensions. We analyzed the structure of their responses in two ways. First, we applied
Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) to assess the fit of a theory-guided, top-down structure
assuming the existence of three factors: importance, certainty, and metacognitive difficulty. We
also conducted Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) to explore whether an alternative, bottom-up
structure would emerge. Furthermore, because each participant provided responses for multiple
issues, we were able to disentangle person-specific effects from issue-specific effects. This
analysis allowed us to determine how much of the variance in responses (e.g., regarding the
importance of beliefs) was attributable to differences between individuals versus differences
between specific issues. Finally, we examined whether the identified psychological structure
could help explain important phenomena, such as the extremity of an individual’s stance and
their likelihood of participating in advocacy efforts.
Constructs Included in the Analysis of Psychological Dimensions of Ideological Beliefs
Construct Operationalization
Importance
Personal importance Compared to how you feel about other public issues, how much do you
care about this issue? (1 = the least important of all issues, 7 = the most
important of all)
Interest To what extent is information related to this issue of interest to you?
(1 = not at all, 7 = very much)
Value-based To what degree is your view about this issue based on your core
values? (1 = not at all, 7 = very much)
Morality-based To what extent do you feel that your position on this issue is a moral
stance? (1 = not at all, 7 = very much)
Identity-based How much is your position on this issue central to your identity (i.e.,
a person you are)? (1 = not at all, 7 = very much)
Perceived country- How important the topic is for Americans/Poles/Indians? (1 = not at all
level importance important, 7 = very important)
Salience To what extent is this issue currently discussed in the
US/Poland/India? (1 = nearly absent, 7 = very often discussed)
Certainty
Certainty How certain are you of your position on this issue? (1 = very uncertain,
7 = very certain)
Knowledge How much do you know about this issue? (1 = I know essentially
nothing about it, 7 = I know essentially everything about it)
(low) Ambivalence How mixed are your thoughts and feelings about this issue? (1 = they
are very mixed, 7 = they are completely one-sided)
(low) Conflict with Do you think your beliefs on this issue are in conflict with your other
other important beliefs beliefs or are they consistent? (1 = they are in conflict with my other
beliefs, 7 = they are consistent with my other beliefs)
Metacognitive
Difficulty
(low) Fluency How much effort does thinking about this issue require? (1 = very
little, 7 = a lot)
Difficulty to How difficult is this issue to understand? (1 = very easy, 7 = very
understand difficult)
Difficulty to address How difficult it is to address this issue in practice (1 = very easy, 7 =
very difficult, and response option: “It doesn’t require any action”
coded as missing value)
Complexity How complex is this issue (1 = very simple, 1 = very complex)
Other constructs
Satisfaction with the How satisfactory is the current situation with regard to this issue in the
current state US/Poland/India? (1 = completely unsatisfactory, 7 = completely
satisfactory)
Perceived polarization Is American/Polish/Indian society divided on this issue? (1 = there is
almost complete agreement on this issue, 7 = the public is very divided
on this issue)
Novelty How long this issue has been on the political agenda? (1 = it has been
discussed for a very long time, 7 = it is rather novel issue)
Study 1
Method
Subjects
We requested responses from 800 participants per country through online panels. In the
US and India, we collected responses online through Syno International, while in Poland data
was collected by Pollster. The US sample was quota-matched on age, gender, race, ethnicity, and
region to the US adult population; the final sample was N = 821. In Poland, sample was quota-
matched on age, gender, and education to the Polish adult population; the final sample was N =
797. Finally, in India, the sample was quota matched on age and gender of the India adult
population; the final sample was N = 788. Further information about each sample demographics
Supplementary Materials Section S2.1.
Summary of the Demographics of the Samples in Study 1
The US Poland India
49% Men, 51% Men,
48% Men,
Gender 51% Women, 49% Women,
52% Women
<1% Other <1% Other
Average age 45.55 48.29 37.49
(SD) (16.16) (16.17) (14.15)
<1% No formal education, 1% No formal education,
1% Primary or Vocational, 37% Primary or Vocational, 3% Primary or Secondary,
Education
50% High School, 36% High School, 13% High School or Junior College,
48% University degree 27% University degree 84% University degree
78% White, 14% Black, 4%
Race/
Asian, 4% Other,
Ethnicity
16% Hispanic
37% South, 23% Midwest,
Region 21% West, 19% Northeast,
1% other
Measures
Issue positions. In order to measure a wide spectrum of ideological beliefs we aimed at creating
as comprehensive a list of political issues as possible. This process involved several steps. Here
Supplementary Materials Section S2.
Steps Involved in Creating a Pool of Issue Position Items
The initial item pool comprised 174 unique items. The items were sourced from scales
measuring issue positions (e.g., Azevedo & Bolesta, 2021). Next, each item was verified by three
members of the research team as to whether it satisfied the definition of ideological beliefs, was
clear, and could apply beyond a specific country context. This led to the exclusion of 44 items.
The item pool had 130 items at this point.
Items were next sorted into 32 broad topics (e.g., healthcare, protectionism, energy). For
each topic, we selected one item that was the most general in scope, thus avoiding very narrow
items. For example, “Abortion should be legal or illegal in all or most cases" would be selected
over an item asking about specific condition under which abortion should be allowed.
To ensure that all relevant ideological issues were included in our design, we reviewed
political topics identified through the analysis of party manifestos (Volkens et al., 2020) and
survey polls investigating citizen perception of political issues (Pew Research Centre, 2023). We
identified 15 additional topics, which were not covered in our item pool, e.g., civil liberties,
peace, terrorism. We selected one item to represent each of these additional categories. Finally,
we included two additional items that were widely discussed at the time of the study (trans-
gender people’s rights and regulating AI). Thus, the final item pool included 49 items.
Because items came from different sources, we formatted them so that the extremes
would represent support vs. opposition to a policy goal. All items were written in Polish. We
then translated them to English and consulted with the US and India subject-matter experts who
In the online survey for the Polish sample there was an error in the instruction for four
issues: capital punishment, peaceful foreign policy, engagement in international organizations,
and administrative efficiency. These issues were excluded from the analysis. Thus, in the
analysis of Polish data, we include 45, and not 49 issues.
Example of Issue Position Items
Now please think about [issue] Where do you stand on this issue? Please indicate your
position with the scale: [response scale]
financing of election campaigns by corporations. (...) 1 = "Corporations should not be
allowed to donate to election campaigns," 7 = "Corporations should be able to donate to
election campaigns without limits on the money they contribute"
foreign capital in the American/Polish/Indian economy. (…) 1 = “The presence of foreign
capital in the economy should not be restricted in any way”, 7 = "The presence of foreign
capital in the economy should be significantly restricted”
freedom of speech on the Internet. (...) 1 = "Citizens should be able to express their views on
the Internet, regardless of the content," 7 = "The government should restrict the expression of
certain views on the Internet, such as hate speech"
paid maternity leave. (...) 1 = "The government should not provide paid maternity leave," 7 =
"The government should provide at least 6 months of fully paid maternity leave."
the amount of government spending on defense. (...) 1 = "Government spending on defense
should be small," 7 = "Government spending on defense should be substantial"
the role of labor unions in companies. (...) 1 = "Unions should have no influence on the
activities of companies", 7 = "Unions should have a strong influence on the activities of
companies"
the role of religious institutions and state. (...) 1 = "Religious institutions should be
completely separate from state and should not be involved in politics", 7 = "Religious
institutions should have a significant influence on the affairs of state and its policies"
Psychological dimensions. Drawing from the literature reviewed in the introduction, we
identified 18 relevant psychological dimensions. These dimensions along with their
Advocacy intentions. Participants were asked about their willingness to engage for a cause
(“When thinking about your stance on this issue, to what extent would you be willing to engage
in action for it?”, 1 = “definitely no”, 7 = “definitely yes”).
Procedure
Participants were asked to provide informed consent, responded to several demographic
questions, and rated their positions on all issues. After this, they responded to questions
measuring all 18 psychological constructs (e.g., importance, interest, complexity) and advocacy
intentions for three randomly selected issues. Towards the end, participants were asked about
their seriousness of responding. Then, the study concluded, and subjects were thanked and
compensated.
Transparency and Openness
The hypotheses and the analyses plan were pre-registered for the data collected in the US
and India. For Poland, most of the analyses should be considered exploratory (in Study 2 we
corroborate these findings in pre-registered analyzes). Deviations from pre-registrations are
listed in Supplementary Materials Section S1. Pre-registrations are available at OSF: the US,
Poland, and India. Additional measures, not related to the main research questions, are
mentioned in the pre-registration. Data and materials are also available at OSF.
Studies were approved by Ethics Committees at the Institute of Psychology (protocol
#KE/68_2022) and the Faculty of Philosophy (protocol #221.042.62_2023) of the Jagiellonian
University.
Results
We used R (R Core Team, 2019) and RStudio (RStudio Team, 2019), with the haven
(Wickham & Miller, 2021), dplyr (Wickham et al., 2022), tidyr (Wickham & Girlich, 2022),
scales (Wickham & Seidel, 2020), psych (Revelle, 2023), lavaan (Rosseel, 2012), lmer (Bates et
al., 2015), lmerTest (Kuznetsova et al., 2017), emmeans (Lenth, 2019), effects (Fox & Weisberg,
2019), multcomp (Hothorn et al., 2008), ggeffects (Lüdecke, 2018a), sjPlot (Lüdecke, 2018b)
packages to clean, analyze, and visualize data.
Does the Theory-Driven Structure Hold?
To test whether the structure assuming theory-driven factors holds we ran a CFA with
three factors: importance, certainty, and metacognitive difficulty. We predicted that (1)
importance factor comprises: personal importance, perceived country-level importance, value-,
morality-, and identity-basis, interest in an issue, and salience; (2) certainty comprises: certainty,
(low) ambivalence, (low) conflict with other beliefs, and knowledge about an issue; and (3)
metacognitive difficulty comprises: difficulty in understanding an issue, difficulty in addressing
it, complexity, (low) fluency. This analysis did not consider the role of novelty, perceived
polarization, and satisfaction, as we did not have clear theory-driven prediction for their
positions in the psychological structure. Responses from each individual to three issues are
treated independently. In the interpretation of the fit statistics we use recommendations by Hu &
Bentler (1998, 1999).
In the US data, the model showed reasonable but not a great fit: χ2(86) = 953.83, p <
.001, CFI = 0.907, RMSEA = 0.072, 95%CI[0.068, 0.076], SRMR = 0.062, AIC = 117,649, BIC
= 117,833. In Poland, the model also showed reasonable but not a great fit to the data: χ (86) =
913.56, p < .001, CFI = 0.91, RMSEA = 0.067, 95%CI[0.064,0.071], SRMR = 0.055, AIC =
103,865, BIC = 104,045. Finally, similar results were found in India: the model was acceptable
but not excellent: χ (86) = 979.31, p < .001, CFI = 0.921, RMSEA = 0.067, 95%CI[0.064,
0.071], SRMR = 0.082, AIC = 122,027, BIC = 122,222).
As expected, Importance and Certainty factors were positively correlated in all three
samples. Also in line with expectations, Certainty and Difficulty had moderate negative
correlations in the US and Poland; however, this relationship was positive in India. In all three
countries, correlation between Importance and Difficulty was positive but small. The details of
these analyzes are shown in the Supplementary Tables S2 – S4.
What is the Psychological Structure of Ideological Beliefs as Revealed in EFA?
Because the CFA models fit was adequate but not excellent, we also conducted EFA to
explore alternative structures of ideological beliefs in each of the three countries. Additionally,
since our theory-driven predictions did not encompass all dimensions identified in the literature
and included in our study (e.g., novelty, satisfaction), the use of EFA could help identify where
these additional items might fit. As in the CFA, responses from each individual to three issues
are treated independently (for analysis focused on issue averages, see Supplementary materials
section S3.3).
To determine number of dimensions, we used parallel analysis (Horn, 1965), one of the
most accurate methods of identifying the optimal number of factors (Goldberg & Velicer, 2006).
Across all EFAs, we used weighted least square extraction method and a promax rotation, i.e.,
rotation that allows factor correlations.
The US. Parallel analysis suggested retention of five factors. Factor loadings are shown in
loading on the first factor were: country-level importance, personal importance, salience,
interest, and knowledge. Items loading on another factor were value-, morality-, and identity-
basis. These two factors were highly correlated (r = .70); we label these dimensions “Importance
subcomponent 1” and “Importance subcomponent 2”, respsectively. Another factor comprised
(low) ambivalence, certainty, and (low) conflict with other beliefs, and we label it certainty. The
next factor included items such as complexity, difficulty to understand, difficulty to address,
(low) fluency, and perceived polarization; we label it meta-cognitive difficulty. The fifth factor
comprised only two items: novelty and satisfaction. Apart from the two subcomponents of
importance, other factors showed moderate correlations with one another: certainty correlated
with importance subcomponent 1 and subcomponent 2 at r = .40 and r = .50, respectively;
metacognitive difficulty correlated with certainty at r = -0.30). We corroborated these findings
with Bass-Ackward factor analysis (Goldberg, 2006); details are shown in the Supplementary
Materials Section S3.2. In summary, the EFA largely identified similar factors to what would be
predicted theoretically but additionally distinguished two subcomponents of importance.
Factor Loadings of Psychological Dimensions of Ideological Beliefs in the US
Factor Factor Factor Factor Factor
1 2 3 4 5
Importance [subcomponent 1]
Country-level importance 0.72 0.04 -0.08 0.06 -0.15
Personal importance 0.60 -0.05 0.25 -0.11 0.07
Salience 0.52 0.10 -0.03 0.07 -0.03
Interest in issue 0.46 -0.04 0.31 -0.02 0.04
Knowledge 0.38 -0.07 0.18 0.21 0.11
Importance [subcomponent 2]
Value-basis 0.01 -0.01 0.70 0.07 -0.10
Morality-basis 0.00 -0.01 0.63 -0.03 -0.02
Identity-basis 0.13 -0.03 0.54 -0.01 0.18
Certainty
(low) Ambivalence 0.00 0.01 -0.05 0.72 0.16
Certainty 0.09 -0.01 0.18 0.54 -0.04
(low) Conflict with other beliefs 0.06 0.04 -0.03 0.54 -0.04
Metacognitive Difficulty
Complexity 0.09 0.77 -0.10 0.02 -0.03
Difficulty to address an issue -0.05 0.72 -0.06 0.11 -0.03
Difficulty to understand an issue -0.13 0.63 -0.05 -0.03 0.27
(low) Fluency 0.29 0.45 0.01 -0.21 0.14
Perceived polarization 0.04 0.36 0.17 0.01 -0.14
Other items
Novelty -0.25 0.08 0.10 0.06 0.51
Satisfaction with the current state of
affairs 0.22 -0.06 -0.08 0.01 0.44
Explained variance 11% 11% 9% 7% 4%
Psychological Structure of Ideology Across the Three Countries: The US (Panel A), Poland
(Panel B), and India (Panel C)
Note. The theory-driven structure is shown in rectangular frames and the EFA results correspond
to shaded areas: importance and its components in red, certainty in blue, importance & certainty
in purple, and difficulty in green.
Poland. Parallel analysis suggested retention of three factors. Items loading on the first factor
were: value-basis, interest, morality-basis, personal importance, knowledge, identity-basis,
perceived country-level importance, (low) ambivalence, (low) conflict with other beliefs, and
salience. According to our theory-driven predictions, we expected that these items would form
two separate dimensions: importance and certainty. We will refer to this unified dimension as
“importance & certainty.” The second factor comprised items such as complexity, difficulty to
understand and to address an issue, (low) fluency, and polarization. This factor resembled the
theory-driven metacognitive difficulty dimension (except for perceived polarization loading on
this dimension); and we will refer to this factor as metacognitive difficulty. The third factor had
only one item that loaded onto it: satisfaction with the current state. Finally, the novelty item did
the importance & certainty factor had small positive correlations with the difficulty factor (r =
.18). As previously, we corroborated these findings with Bass-Ackward factor analysis; details
are shown in the Supplementary Materials Section S3.2.
Factor Loadings of Psychological Structure of Ideological Beliefs in Poland
Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3
Importance & Certainty
Interest in issue 0.70 0.06 -0.13
Value-basis 0.68 0.01 0.19
Morality-basis 0.63 0.05 0.18
Certainty 0.61 -0.12 0.27
Personal importance 0.65 0.05 -0.23
Knowledge 0.62 -0.12 -0.09
Identity-basis 0.62 0.07 -0.09
Country-level importance 0.56 0.08 -0.14
(Low) Ambivalence 0.53 -0.24 0.10
(Low) Conflict with other beliefs 0.49 -0.09 0.25
Salience 0.39 0.10 -0.26
Metacognitive Difficulty
Complexity 0.00 0.74 0.14
Difficulty to address an issue 0.00 0.64 0.20
Difficulty to understand an issue -0.08 0.60 -0.10
(low) Fluency 0.08 0.57 -0.21
Perceived polarization 0.09 0.34 0.28
Other items
Satisfaction with the current state of affairs 0.04 -0.01 -0.33
Novelty -0.01 0.10 -0.02
Explained variance 22% 10% 4%
India. Parallel analysis suggested retention of three uncorrelated factors. We found that items
related to importance and certainty all loaded on just one dimension; we label this unified
dimension “importance & certainty.” The second dimension, which label metacognitive
difficulty, was very much in line with the theory-driven difficulty factor. However, fluency in the
Indian data had cross-loadings on the importance and metacognitive difficulty dimensions. The
corroborated with Bass-Ackward factor analysis (see Supplementary Materials Section S3.2).
Factor Loadings of Psychological Dimensions of Ideological Beliefs in India
Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3
Importance & Certainty
Interest in issue 0.78 0.00 -0.12
Value-basis 0.70 0.00 -0.05
Country-level importance 0.70 0.05 -0.20
Personal importance 0.70 0.05 -0.08
Identity-basis 0.68 0.02 0.01
Morality-basis 0.67 0.04 0.05
Knowledge 0.66 -0.09 0.06
Certainty 0.66 -0.03 -0.01
Salience 0.58 0.08 -0.09
(low) Conflict with other beliefs 0.49 -0.06 0.13
(low) Fluency 0.44 0.36 -0.11
Satisfaction with the current state of affairs 0.30 -0.07 0.19
(low) Ambivalence 0.30 -0.10 0.23
Metacognitive Difficulty
Difficulty to understand an issue -0.16 0.74 0.11
Complexity 0.05 0.68 -0.01
Difficulty to address an issue 0.02 0.67 -0.04
Perceived polarization 0.03 0.38 0.21
Other items
Novelty -0.13 0.14 0.64
Explained variance 27% 10% 3%
What are the Sources of Variance in Ratings of Psychological Dimensions?
Our next step was to analyze the extent to which ratings on the psychological dimensions
are driven predominantly by the issue (and are similar across different persons) or by a person
(and are similar across different issues). Specifically, we analyzed how much variance in ratings
were due to an issue and a subject using intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC). ICC for issue
shows how much variance is explained by differences between issues, or in other words how
much people agree in their perception of a particular issue, e.g., how important an issue is. ICC
for subjects shows how much variance is explained by differences between subjects, or in other
words, to what extent ratings within each subject are similar across different issues. For each
dimension, we calculated both the theory- and EFA-driven scores by averaging responses to
items comprising the relevant dimensions.
differences between subjects, while a much smaller fraction could be attributed to differences
between issues. In the US, 43–47% of variance across all dimensions was due to person, while
issue contributed 3–9%. Poland showed similar patterns, with 40–49% of variance explained by
person and 4–8% explained by issues. India exhibited the highest influence of a person, with 49–
64% of variance due to person, and under 4% due to issue. Across all countries, a much smaller
proportion of variance was explained by differences between issues, and a relatively large
proportion due to differences between people. This suggests that, in general, people have little
agreement when it comes to the perceived importance, certainty, or difficulty of a particular
issue. However, it seems that how an individual perceives one issue with regard to these
dimensions says a lot about how they rate another ideological issue. Additional item-level
ICCs for Psychological Dimensions in Study 1
The US Poland India
Dimension
Subject Issue Subject Issue Subject Issue
Theory- Importance 46% 8% 45% 9% 58% 4%
driven Certainty 47% 5% 47% 4% 52% 1%
Metacognitive Difficulty 44% 7% 40% 5% 51% 1%
EFA- Importance subcompontent 1 43% 9% – – – –
driven Importance subcompontent 2 45% 5% – – – –
Certainty 43% 3% – – – –
Importance & Certainty – – 48% 7% 64% 3%
Metacognitive Difficulty 44% 6% 41% 4% 49% 2%
What Are the Correlates of Psychological Aspects of Ideological Beliefs?
We next tested the association between psychological dimensions of ideological beliefs
and position extremity and advocacy intentions. Position extremity was calculated as deviation
from the scale midpoint of responses to items measuring issue positions. Low values represent
moderate responses, and high values represent more extreme responding. We used psychological
dimensions as predictors and for each dimension, we calculated both the theory- and EFA-driven
scores by averaging responses to items comprising the relevant dimensions. Next, all variables
were also rescaled between 0 and 1 to aid model convergence and interpretation.
In the following analysis, we include subject average perceptions as well as subject-
centered perceptions of issues as predictors. In these models, coefficients of subject averages
inform whether a person with a tendency to perceive political issues in a particular way, e.g., as
important, also tend to have more extreme issue positions or higher advocacy intentions in
general; and subject-centered scores coefficients inform whether a deviation from a subject mean
perception, e.g., higher importance than a person’s average, is related to more extreme issue
positions or higher advocacy intentions for that issue. In all models we included random
intercepts for subjects and issues and controlled for gender, age, and education. Importantly, we
will use theory-driven dimensions as predictors and run separate models for the EFA-driven
driven dimensions.
were related to more extreme positions. Both perceiving issues as important and being certain in
general (subject averages) and perceiving particular issue as more important and having higher
certainty than on other issues (subject-centered scores) were positively associated with position
extremity, except subject average certainty in India. For metacognitive difficulty, we found that
it was related to less extreme attitudes. However, these associations were somewhat smaller and
tended to be non-significant in India. In the US, the effects of certainty seemed to be somewhat
stronger compared to the effects of importance and difficulty. In contrast, in Poland and India,
the effects of importance, tended to be somewhat stronger than the effects of certainty or
difficulty. Model details are shown in Supplementary Tables S9-S10, S12-S13, S15-S16.
Effects of Psychological Dimensions of Ideology on Position Extremity in the US (Panels A and
B), Poland (Panels C and D), and India (Panels E and F)
Advocacy intentions. Importance was a key predictor of advocacy intentions in all three
different issues as important (subject average) and the higher importance of specific issues above
other issues (subject-centered scores), the higher advocacy intentions. The effects of certainty
were smaller, and in some cases non-significant or even negative for subject averages. It means
that willingness to act for an issue might not be related to being certain in general, but with
certainty on the very specific issue relative to other issues. The effects of metacognitive
difficulty were the smallest and inconsistent across the three countries. Model details are shown
in Supplementary Tables S9-S10, S12-S13, S15-S16.
Effects of Psychological Dimensions of Ideology on Advocacy Intentions in the US (Panels A and
B), Poland (Panels C and D), and India (Panels E and F)
Discussion
This study examined the psychological structure of ideological beliefs, focusing on three
dimensions: importance, certainty, and metacognitive difficulty. CFA largely supported the
theory-guided predictions but also suggested other models might better fit the data. EFA revealed
additional insights. Specifically, in the US, EFA identified two correlated importance
subdimensions and separate certainty dimension, while in Poland and India, importance and
certainty formed a single factor. The emergence of metacognitive difficulty factor was consistent
across countries, aligning with theory and additionally incorporating perceived polarization.
Across samples, variance in psychological dimensions was primarily due to individual
differences, with less than 10% explained by issues. Finally, position extremity was linked to
higher importance and certainty and lower metacognitive difficulty (except in India). Advocacy
intentions were driven by importance and, to a lesser extent, certainty.
In Study 2 we seek to replicate and extend the findings from Study 1 using a new study
design. Our goal was to ensure the findings in Study 1 are not due to the fact that each subject
was asked about their perception of only three issues. Thus, in Study 2 all participants have
responded to all issues. However, to make the study feasible, we have selected a subsample of
issues and measured psychological aspects of ideological beliefs with one question per theory-
driven dimension. Finally, because several analysis details and hypotheses were not pre-
registered for the Polish sample in Study 1, this provided us an opportunity to corroborate several
findings in this sample.
Study 2
Method
Subjects
This study was conducted only in Poland. We collected responses online through Pollster,
a survey company. We requested 400 responses and quota sampling on age (above 18 years old),
gender, and education to ensure representation of adult Poles. The final sample was N = 432 (209
men, 222 women, 2 people identified as “other”; average age M = 47.16, SD = 16.04; education:
149 people with primary/vocational education, 162 with high school education, and 121 with a
university degree). Further details are shown in Supplementary Materials Section S4.1.
Measures
Issue positions. We selected the 30 political issues that maximized the variance in average
ratings in psychological dimensions and represented multiple topics. A full list of selected issues
is presented in Supplementary Materials Section S4.2.
Psychological dimensions and advocacy intentions. We have selected one question to measure
each theory-driven dimension : personal importance (“Compared to how you feel about other
public issues, how much do you care about this issue?” 1 = “least important of all issues,” 7 =
“the most important of all”), certainty (“How certain are you of your position on this issue?”, 1 =
“very uncertain,” 7 = “very certain”), metacognitive difficulty (“How difficult is this issue to
understand?”, 1 = “very easy,” 7 = “very difficult”). Participants were also asked about their
advocacy intentions.
1 Because of the fact that we include only 3 items measuring psychological structure, we do not run factor analysis
in Study 2.
Procedure
After providing consent, participants responded to a series of demographic questions.
Next, they indicated their positions on 30 political issues. After that, they responded to questions
measuring psychological aspects of ideological beliefs and advocacy intentions. There were two
versions of the way the questions about psychological dimensions and advocacy intentions were
asked: issue-wise design or dimension-wise design. In the issue-wise design, participants rated
personal importance, certainty, difficulty, and advocacy intention for a particular issue and then
moved on to the next issue. In the dimension-wise design, subjects rated their perception of each
issue on a particular dimension and then moved to rating their perceptions of all issues on
another dimension. This way we address the question of whether the presentation order of the
question (issue-wise vs. dimension-wise) influences the results. Subjects responded to questions
for all 30 issues. Towards the end, participants were asked about their seriousness of responding.
Then, the study concluded and subjects were thanked and compensated.
Transparency and Openness
The research questions, hypotheses, and analyzes were pre-registered at OSF (deviations
from pre-registration are reported in Supplementary Materials Section S1). Apart from the
measures described above, we measured several additional variables, not related to the main
research question (the full procedure is available in the pre-registration).
Results
How Similar are Ratings of Psychological Aspects of Ideological Beliefs within a Person and
within an Issue?
For personal importance ratings, we found that 24% of variance was due to a person and
12% due to an issue; for certainty 33% of variance was due to a person and 5% due to issue; for
difficulty to understand an issue, 43% of variance was due to person, 4% due to issue. Very
similar ICCs were found for the two study designs (issue- and dimension-wise designs;
agreement about an issue importance, certainty, and difficulty is not an artifact that comes from
the fact that people respond to a small subset of all issues (as in Study 1) or because of a
particular question order (as tested in Study 2).
What are the Correlates of Psychological Aspects of Ideological Beliefs?
We expected that position extremity is associated with higher importance, higher
certainty, and lower difficulty. This has been largely confirmed. Furthermore, we found that
certainty was a key predictor of position extremity, which was not the case for Poland in Study 1.
S19 – S20.
Effects of Psychological Dimensions of Ideological Beliefs on Position Extremity in Study 2
We also expected that advocacy intention will be associated with higher importance and
certainty. We found that importance was a key factor predicting advocacy intentions. With
regard to certainty, we found support for hypothesis about its positive relationship with advocacy
intentions only for subject-centered scores, i.e., the more certain a person feel about this issue
compared to other issues, report higher advocacy intentions. This replicate results from Study 1.
S19 – S20.
Separate analyses of the responses in two design conditions (dimension- vs. issue-wise)
did not reveal substantial differences between them; the details are presented in the
Supplementary Tables S21 – S24. This suggests that the findings reported in Study 1 are not due
to a specific design, nor due to a particular order of questions, as in Study 1.
Effects of Psychological Dimensions of Ideological Beliefs on Advocacy Intentions in Study 2
General Discussion
The goal of the present research was to analyze the psychological dimensions that
characterize ideological beliefs beyond their specific content and verify their underlying
structure. While the content of the beliefs clearly matters and, in many cases is of primary
theoretical or practical interest, we proposed that capturing the psychological structure of
ideological beliefs could offer additional insights into ideological thinking. This research
provides evidence of key psychological aspects of ideological beliefs: its building blocks,
relationships between them, and correlates such as position extremity and advocacy intentions.
Drawing from a broad range of theories, we identified 18 potential candidate dimensions.
Guided by motivational models of belief (Kruglanski et al., 2020; Schwarz, 2018), we grouped
most of these dimensions into three broad categories: importance, certainty, and metacognitive
difficulty. We also included a few dimensions that did not clearly map onto the theoretical model
but were featured in the literature on ideological beliefs, such as perceived polarization, policy
satisfaction, and novelty (Holbrook et al., 2016; Levendusky & Malhotra, 2016; Van Boven et
al., 2012). In addition to a large number of dimensions, we have collected a large number of
ideological issues. While we do not claim these to be complete or exhaustive lists, our coverage
of psychological dimensions and issues included in one study extends beyond past research.
Finally, we tested the model in three countries to verify the generalizability of the identified
structure.
Dimensions of Ideological Beliefs
Our predictions regarding the underlying structure were guided by theoretical models, but
we compared the theory-driven categorizations with empirical results from exploratory analyses.
The results offered some support to the theory-driven categorization but also suggested possible
adjustments that varied by cultural context. Specifically, while both types of analyses identified
metacognitive difficulty as a separate factor, a slightly different pattern emerged in the US vs.
Poland and India when it comes to the dimensions of importance and certainty.
In the US the exploratory analysis differentiated two (very closely related) facets of the
importance of beliefs, one more general and one related to morality- and identity-related aspects.
These two factors were separate from belief certainty. The fact that we were able to reduce a
large number of specific dimensions to a limited number of overarching factors suggests that
motivational framework largely applied in the US. This result is also in line with past research on
attitude strength (e.g., Philipp-Muller et al., 2020). Although attitudes are different psychological
constructs than ideological beliefs, much of this research has in fact examined evaluations of
political issues, such as support for abortion, LGBTQ+ rights or environmental protection (e.g.,
Abelson, 1988; Eaton et al., 2008; Krosnick et al., 1993; Pomerantz et al., 1995). Interestingly,
several studies converge on the idea that dimensions related to importance and personal
involvement form one cluster, while aspects including certainty form another one. The results
obtained in the US would be consistent with these findings. At the same time, the perceptions of
beliefs as rooted in morality, values, and identities formed a separate dimension, although it was
strongly correlated with the other importance subdimension. It is consistent with theoretical
accounts that argue for their unique role (Atran et al., 2014; Skitka et al., 2005; Van Bavel &
Pereira, 2018). This result is interesting and raises questions whether this finding is specific to
ideological beliefs or would similarly apply to other types of beliefs as well.
The merging of two theory-driven factors—importance and certainty—into a single,
more general factor in Poland and India warrants further explanation. One possible interpretation
is that important ideological beliefs, due to their moral and black-and-white nature, are more
frequently associated with high certainty. If this is the case, then the more granular findings from
the US might be the surprising exception. Notably, the factor structure found in the US data
aligns most closely with our theory-driven predictions. This raises the question of whether
theories of political beliefs, which are predominantly developed in the US context, can be
applied to other contexts uncritically.
By incorporating dimensions related to metacognitive difficulty, we introduced a third
factor, which has been rarely addressed in previous analyses of political beliefs. The findings
show that this framework is promising. Across all samples difficulty constituted a unique
contribution to the understanding of beliefs about ideological issues. One important question that
emerges is the theoretical status of this dimension in relation to the other two factors grounded in
the motivational model of cognition. It could be that metacognitive experience represents a
unique contribution to the psychological representation of ideological beliefs. However, more
complex models in which their effects are mediated by the value of beliefs and their certainty are
also possible. Interestingly, in contrast to past research, we did not observe a strong connection
between metacognitive difficulty and the (low) certainty of beliefs. It could suggest that the
domain of ideological beliefs is one of these in which people may hold different lay theories as
to the interpretation of ease of processing.
Importantly, difficulty perceptions were not driven as much by the content of the issues,
as could be suggested by prior literature distinguishing inherently "hard" and "easy" issues
(Carmines & Stimson, 1980; Johnston & Wronski, 2015), as they were by differences between
people in how they perceived various issues. Future studies could uncover specific person-level
characteristics that make thinking about political content more or less fluent. One obvious
characteristic could be general cognitive ability or objective knowledge about the issue.
However, research shows that the relationship between the ability and the perception of issue
complexity is non-linear (Jansen et al., 2021; Kruger & Dunning, 1999).
Among the additional dimensions, only perceived polarization was consistently, although
weakly, aligned with the metacognitive difficulty factor. The underlying factors driving this
relationship could be explored in future studies. One possible interpretation is that the more
divided the public is perceived to be on an issue, the greater the cognitive and emotional effort
required to engage with it; or the greater the awareness of the arguments in favor and against
particular policies. Finally, additional specific dimensions included in the analyses were not
consistently related to these three main factors across samples. Future studies could add further
dimensions to verify whether the three (or two) theory-driven factors are reproduced or whether
new psychological dimensions will appear.
Sources of Variance and Correlates
Our study offers several additional insights due to the particular design of the studies.
First, we have found that the ratings of psychological aspects of ideological beliefs varied greatly
between people but not as much between issues. For example, only under 10% of the variance in
scores on importance, certainty, and difficulty dimensions could be attributed to the issue. In
contrast, individual level explained between 20% to nearly 60% of variance. Importantly, we
were able to observe that only because we included a large number of issues (each person rated
three issues in Study 1 and 30 issues in Study 2). While we acknowledge that issue positions may
exhibit greater variability, our findings suggest that much of the variance in psychological factors
originates from individuals. These individual differences are not necessarily tied to stable
personal traits, though prior research (e.g., Zmigrod, 2022) suggests this as a possibility.
Alternatively, they could result from temporary political engagement, which influences ratings
across multiple issues. This raises questions about the concept of single-issue voters, who are
believed to prioritize one issue above others (e.g., Congleton, 1991). If, for example, importance
ratings are correlated across multiple issues, it might suggest that the emphasis on single issues is
overestimated and could be a byproduct of the way the relevant measurements are designed.
We also analyzed the relationship between the identified dimensions and two important
phenomena: position extremity and advocacy intentions. We found that advocacy was strongly
related to importance across all three countries. This finding is line with previous work showing
that when analyzed simultaneously, only importance but not certainty predicts frequency of
discussing the topic, intentions to attempt at convincing others to vote for a preferred candidate,
and actual voting turnout (Farc & Sagarin, 2009; Visser et al., 2003). The current findings extend
this literature across multiple issues, contexts, and analytical methods while also separating
subject and subject-issue effects. Additional analyzes showed that identified psychological
dimensions predict advocacy much more strongly than position extremity or issue position (see
Supplementary Tables S11, S14, S17).
Furthermore, we found that extremity was more closely related to certainty of beliefs in
the US and in Poland in Study 2. This is noteworthy because these outcomes may in fact be
driven by different properties of beliefs. Nevertheless, the causal direction remains unclear, and
while it seems more likely that people act on beliefs that they consider important, the link
between extremity and certainty could work in both directions as well. Further research could
examine other correlates and consequences of the identified dimensions, e.g., stability of beliefs,
resistance to persuasion, and person and group evaluations.
Future Directions
In addition to providing knowledge on the psychological structure of ideological beliefs,
it could also help navigating issue selection for future studies. There is a considerable variation
in findings on phenomena such as source cue effects or motivated reasoning, at least partially
owing to specific issues being investigated (e.g., Tappin, 2022). In this research, we identified
the dimensions of ideological beliefs that might account for the variability in the studies on
political belief revision and help make informed choices when selecting issues to study.
These findings can be also useful in addressing theoretical debates. For example, issue
selection lies at the heart of the ideological asymmetry debate (Baron & Jost, 2019; Ditto, Clark,
et al., 2019; Ditto, Liu, et al., 2019); we propose that focusing on the psychological aspects of the
ideological beliefs could help elucidate on whether the effects of ideology are symmetric or not.
Relatedly, the current findings might also help address the role of ideology in prejudice.
Specifically, it has been shown that ideological prejudice is rather symmetric across the political
spectrum but stronger for some domains than others (cultural vs. economic; Crawford et al.,
2017; Czarnek et al., 2019); however, it is possible that the prejudice can be better predicted
using psychological aspects of ideological beliefs rather than a broad-brushed dimensions of
ideology such as social or economic beliefs.
Summary
Drawing on various theoretical traditions and guided by motivational theories of belief,
we proposed a three-dimensional structure of ideological belief consisting of importance,
certainty, and metacognitive difficulty. Our analyses largely support these theory-driven
predictions in the US, though a simpler structure emerged in Poland and India. While importance
was the strongest predictor of advocacy intentions, all three dimensions were linked to position
extremity. Additionally, our findings reveal that most of the variance in responses is driven by
individual differences, with far less attributable to differences between issues. Taken together,
this research provides a promising framework for understanding the motivational foundations of
ideological beliefs, independent of their specific content.
Limitations
Limitation Explanation How to address
Comprehensive but Although we believe our theoretical analysis is Adding other relevant
not exhaustive list comprehensive, it is possible that some important dimensions, if identified.
of psychological dimensions of beliefs were omitted. For example, we did
dimensions not study affective or emotional reactions to issues
because from our point of view such evaluations are not
suitable to examine desirability of political goals. This is
because such evaluations might be biased by a particular
context and satisfaction with the policy. Instead, we asked
about the satisfaction with a current state with regard to
the issue policy.
Comprehensive but While we used nearly 50 political issues, it may not cover Identifying other sources of
not exhaustive list every relevant topic, it does represent a wide variety of political issues, e.g., newspaper
of political issues political issues. These categories were deemed important articles, social media
by authors of previous scales measuring ideology, experts discussions.
in political science describing party positions, and lay
people mentioning key issues.
Focusing on We focused on ideological beliefs, defined as preferences Extending items to cover other
political goals for political goals. A broader category of political beliefs aspects of ideology (e.g.,
could also include factual beliefs about politics or focusing on means to achieving
evaluations of political actors; some authors (e.g., Jost et political goals or factual beliefs).
al., 2009) include these in their definitions of political
ideology. While we expect similar dimensions to emerge
for these other types of beliefs, the structural relationships
may differ. For example, the correlations between
importance and certainty might be weaker for factual
beliefs than for preferences.
Generalizability We analyze responses from the three countries that differ Collecting data from other
across cultures in their socio-political and cultural contexts. The samples countries, assuring population
were matched to adult populations on multiple representativeness.
dimensions across the three countries. It is worth noting
that quota-sampling was more extensive in the US and in
Poland. In contrast, in India our sample
representativeness is limited to people with higher
educational attainment (although across broad spectrum
of caste representation). Still, we believe the current
research provides an important extensions of the current
knowledge of ideology even with the limitations
regarding the samples.
Analysis of We do not evaluate the causal order in the analysis of the Longitudinal and experimental
correlates, not correlates. Specifically, we do not know whether the studies (e.g., manipulating
consequences dimensions we identified are antecedents or consequences perception of an issue on a
of position extremity or advocacy intentions. particular dimension).
Measurement of We focus on general advocacy intention (i.e., willingness Using more specific questions
general advocacy to act for a cause), without specifying what these actions about advocacy intentions (e.g.,
intentions, not are, nor whether participants engaged in the past or what what kind of action someone is
specific intentions, is the actual level of their engagement to advance an issue willing to take), measure past
past engagement, is. engagement, and focus on actual
or behavior behavior.