Representational Momentum Transcends Motion
1,* 1,2
Dillon Plunkett and Jorge Morales
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University
Department of Philosophy, Northeastern University
Corresponding author: d.plunkett@northeastern.edu
December 19, 2024
Abstract
To navigate the world, our minds must represent not only how things are now (perception),
but how they are about to be (prediction). However, perception and prediction blur together
for objects in motion, a classic finding known as “representational momentum”. If you glance
at a photo of a person diving into a lake, you will tend to remember them closer to the
water than they really were. In six experiments, we show that this phenomenon transcends
motion: Our minds make predictions that distort our memories about changes that involve
no motion whatsoever, including changes in brightness and color saturation. Additionally,
we use representational momentum to map the limits of automatic prediction, showing
that there are no analogous effects for changes in hue. Our automatic predictions distort
our memories in many domains—not just motion—and the presence or absence of these
distortions expose the inner workings of perception, cognition, and memory.
Introduction
Things change. Dawn brightens. Predators approach. Alliances fray. To navigate the world, our
minds must represent not only how things are now, but how they are about to be. Even just to
perceive the world, our minds rely on prediction. It is easier to hit a baseball if you anticipate
where it is about to be (Poulton, 1957), but it is also easier to see a baseball if you anticipate
seeing one (Bar, 2004; De Lange et al., 2018; von Helmholtz, 1924).
A striking consequence of this constant prediction is representational momentum: Our
memories of moving things tend to reflect not just what we saw, but what we were anticipating
(Freyd, 1983; Freyd and Finke, 1984; Hubbard, 2005, 2014). Watch a shape rotate and you will
tend to remember it as having rotated a few extra degrees (Freyd and Finke, 1984). Watch it
move left-to-right and you will tend to remember its final position too far to the right (Hubbard
and Bharucha, 1988). This occurs even with still images of things in motion. Glance at a photo
of a person jumping off a ledge and you will tend to remember seeing them closer to the ground
(Freyd, 1983).
Is representational momentum a motion-specific phenomenon? Or do we make automatic
predictions that distort our memories for other components of our experience, revealing something
more general about the relationship between prediction, perception, and memory? On one
hypothesis, our minds represent the trajectory of any predictable, continuous change that we
perceive, resulting in representational momentum in many domains, not just motion (Freyd,
1993; Freyd et al., 1990). Consistent with this hypothesis, people experience representational
momentum for changes in auditory pitch (Kelly and Freyd, 1987) and state (e.g., an ice cube
melting into a puddle; Hafri et al., 2022). On an opposing hypothesis, we represent the trajectory
of change, make corresponding predictions, and experience representational momentum only
for observed or inferred motion (Brehaut and Tipper, 1996). On this view, representational
momentum for pitch is just another case of representational momentum for motion because
rising and falling pitches sound like objects in motion. Meanwhile, the state changes that are
known to induce representational momentum still involve motion (e.g., a shrinking ice cube
and expanding puddle). And, most notably, experiments have failed to find representational
momentum for changes in brightness (Brehaut and Tipper, 1996; Favretto, 2002), casting doubt
on the generality of representational momentum beyond motion.
Here, we show that representational momentum transcends motion: Our minds make predic-
tions that distort our memories about changes that involve no motion whatsoever. In our first
four (preregistered) experiments, we demonstrate that—contrary to the established view (Brehaut
and Tipper, 1996; Hubbard, 2015)—people do experience representational momentum for changes
in the brightness of completely motionless stimuli. Participants misremember brightening stimuli
as brighter than they really were and darkening stimuli as darker than they really were. In
our fifth experiment, we show the same for another dimension of change entirely unrelated to
motion: changes in color saturation. Participants remember saturating stimuli as more saturated
and desaturating stimuli as less saturated. In our final experiment, we investigate the limits
of automatic prediction. We hypothesize that the mind does not automatically represent the
trajectory of changing hue. Even though there is latent organization to hue representation, we
suspect that our minds do not naturally compute or explicitly represent the trajectory of changes
within this latent space and, therefore, do not make automatic predictions about changing hue.
Consistent with this hypothesis, our participants do not experience representational momentum
for changing hue.
Research Transparency Statement
All of our experiments were preregistered. All six preregistrations and all experiment scripts,
Experiment 1: Representational Momentum for Brightness
Do our minds make automatic predictions that distort our memories for anything other than
motion (observed or implied)? Experiment 1 performed a basic test for representational momen-
tum for changing brightness: We showed people a brightening or darkening animation and asked
them to indicate how the animation ended, then checked whether they overestimated how bright
the brightening animations had become overestimated how dark the darkening animations had
become.
This approach differs from prior experiments that failed to find representational momentum
for brightness (Brehaut and Tipper, 1996), which adapted the earliest methods used to study
representational momentum for motion. Those experiments used impoverished stimuli (e.g.,
staccato three-frame animations), whereas our experiments used longer, smoother stimuli that
provided a much stronger signal of the trajectory of change to serve as a basis for prediction.
Find the final frame
tt
ii
animation + mask recall task
1.5 – 4.5 s 1 s until response
watched an animation of a square that became either brighter or darker. A mask abruptly cut
off the animation at a random point on each trial. After the mask, participants used a slider to
move frame-by-frame through the full animation to try to select the last frame displayed before
the mask.
Method
On each trial of Experiment 1, participants watched an animation of a gray square that gradually
square was abruptly hidden by a mask. Participants then tried to identify the last frame that they
saw before the mask appeared by using a slider to move frame-by-frame through the animation
(adapting the methods of Hafri et al., 2022).
If people experience representational momentum for changing brightness, participants’ re-
sponses would be biased toward later frames: They would recall the last frame of a brightening
animation as brighter than what was actually shown and the last frame of a darkening animation
as darker than what was actually shown.
Implementation Details
The animation consisted of 180 frames equally spaced in CIELCh space between lightness values
of 5 and 95, displayed at 30 frames per second. Brightening animations always started at lightness
5 (almost black), darkening animations at lightness 95 (almost white). Chroma and hue angle
values were fixed at 0. The square was 240 by 240 pixels with a 1 pixel black border. The entire
experiment was presented on a middle gray background (RGB: #777777; CIELCh lightness
50.03).
The final frame displayed before the mask varied randomly from frame number 23 to frame
frame number 157, with all points within that range equally likely. Accordingly, the mask could
appear anywhere from 0.77 to 5.23 seconds into the animation. The mask was one of seven
different grayscale noise images, selected at random on each trial. This mask was displayed for
1 second before the slider appeared. The draggable button on the slider started at a random
location on each trial, but no frame from the animation was displayed until the participant
clicked or dragged it to a new location. The far left of the slider corresponded to the first frame
of the animation (i.e., the darkest square for a brightening animation and the brightest for a
darkening animation) and the far right to the last frame of the animation. When satisfied with
their chosen frame, participants clicked a button to submit their response and proceed to the
next trial.
Each participant completed 4 practice trials, followed by 30 analyzed trials. Except for the
first practice trial, participants received no feedback.
For each participant, the direction of the animation (brightening vs. darkening) was the same
on every trial. Participants were randomly assigned to the brightening or darkening condition.
This was the only between-subjects manipulation.
Participants
In all six experiments, participants were adults in the United States recruited through the online
platform Prolific. All experiments were approved by the Northeastern University Institutional
Review Board.
220 participants completed Experiment 1 (126 male, 88 female, 4 non-binary, 2 declined
to specify; mean age 39). Our final analyses included 124 participants who saw a brightening
stimulus and 91 who saw a darkening stimulus. The remaining 5 participants were excluded by
our preregistered exclusion criteria (see Statistical Analyses).
Statistical Analyses
Our measure of interest was the error in each participant’s response on each trial: the difference
between the frame number of the last frame that they remembered seeing and the frame number
of the last frame that was actually presented. If the last frame they remembered seeing was
before the final frame, this would be a negative error. By contrast, if the last frame that they
remembered seeing was an upcoming frame that never appeared on that trial, this was a positive
error. If people experience representational momentum for changes in brightness, this would
shift their errors in the positive direction.
Adhering to our preregistered analysis plan, we excluded participants from our analyses if
the absolute value of their error was more than 2.5 standard deviations larger than the mean of
all participants’ mean absolute error.
We modeled participants’ errors with a simple Bayesian multilevel model using brms and Stan
(Bürkner, 2017; Carpenter et al., 2017). We modeled participants’ errors as a linear function of
the direction of the animation they saw (brightening or darkening) plus Gaussian noise, while
allowing random intercepts for each participant, and using Gaussian distributions centered on
0 and bounded at (-90, 90) with standard deviation 15 as the priors for the intercept and the
effect of direction.
We used effect coding for the direction variable so that the intercept coefficient could be
interpreted as the overall error and calculated a 95% posterior highest density interval (HDI)
for the intercept coefficient. Our preregistered prediction was positive overall error (i.e., a 95%
posterior HDI entirely above 0). We also computed 95% HDIs for the effect in each of the two
direction conditions.
For all experiments, additional details about the procedural and analytical methods are
seciohc
desaib-erutuf
fo
noitroporp
70%
65%
60%
55%
50% 0
-2
Exp. 4 Exp. 5 Exp. 6
brightness saturation hue
semarf
5± 3± 1±
erutuf
eht
otni
noitcejorp
fo
semarf
-2
Exp. 1 Exp. 2 Exp. 3
erutuf
eht
otni
noitcejorp
fo
semarf
basic reversed two
colors
case slider alternatives -2
mutnemoM
lanoitatneserpeR
erutuf
eht
otni
noitcejorp
fo
semarf
A B C
ness (Panel A; Exps. 1-4). When tasked with choosing the final frame in an animation that was
cut short, they tended to choose upcoming frames that had not yet been displayed (brighter
squares for brightening squares and darker squares for darkening ones). This did not reflect a
simple bias to respond to the right of the slider (Exp. 2), held for different colors (Exp. 3), and
held when participants were only given two (equally incorrect) frames to choose between (Exp.
4). Participants also experienced representational momentum for changes in color saturation, a
second variety of change that unrelated to motion (Panel B; Exp. 5). They did not experience
representational momentum for changes in hue (Panel C; Exp. 6), which serves as a power
control for the other experiments, in addition to locating a limit of automatic prediction. Error
bars correspond to posterior 95% highest density intervals.
provided in the Supplementary Materials.
Results
Participants exhibited representational momentum for changing brightness: When the animation
was growing brighter, they tended to remember the final frame as brighter than it really was, but
On average, the final frame of the animation that participants remembered seeing was a frame
that had not appeared yet and would not have been displayed until 5.54 frames (∼ 183 ms) after
the mask appeared (posterior 95% highest density interval [HDI] for the model intercept: [4.08,
6.02]). Importantly, this effect held for both brightening and darkening stimuli—with 95% HDIs
of [6.90, 9.40] and [0.49, 3.45], respectively—which confirms that it is not driven by a simple bias
to remember everything as brighter (or everything as darker) than it really was.
Experiments 2–4: Replications with Different Tasks and Stimuli
Experiments 2 through 4 verified that people consistently exhibit representational momentum
for changes in brightness across variations in the stimuli and tasks used to elicit it.
In Experiment 1, participants chose the last frame that they remembered seeing by using a
slider that moved frame-by-frame through the animation as the slider was moved from left to
right. Accordingly, what looked like representational momentum (i.e., a bias to choose a later
frame) could have been merely a bias to respond toward the right of the slider. Experiment 2
directly replicated Experiment 1 while also ruling out this possibility by reversing the direction
of the slider.
Experiment 3 replicated Experiment 1 using red, green, and blue stimuli, rather than
achromatic stimuli. Although brightness and hue are classically considered to be independent
features of visual stimuli (e.g., Krantz, 1972), changes in one can impact the representation and
perception of the other (e.g., Burns and Shepp, 1988). Accordingly, it is conceivable that the mind
could make automatic predictions only about changes in the brightness of achromatic stimuli,
or only for certain hues. Experiment 3 demonstrated that people experience representational
momentum for changes in brightness along a variety of different trajectories through color space,
and not just for achromatic stimuli.
Experiment 4 showed that people experience representational momentum for changes in
brightness using a different measure, eschewing the slider-based response entirely for a two-
alternative choice task.
Method
Experiment 2 exactly replicated Experiment 1 except that the response slider ran in reverse: the
far left of the slider corresponded to the last frame of the animation (e.g., the darkest frame for
a brightening animation) and the far right of the slider corresponded to the first frame of the
animation. Our statistical analyses were identical to those used for Experiment 1.
Experiment 3 exactly replicated Experiment 1, except that the brightening or darkening
square on each trial was red, green, or blue, rather than gray (determined randomly on each trial,
with all three options equally likely). Each animation consisted of 180 frames equally spaced in
HSL space between lightness values of 0 and 1. All three stimuli had a fixed saturation value of
1. The red, green, and blue stimuli had fixed hue angles of 0, 120, and 240 degrees, respectively.
The random noise mask on each trial was matched to the hue of the stimulus on that trial. Our
methods for analyzing the data in Experiment 3 were identical to those for Experiments 1 and 2,
except we also included stimulus color as a predictor (using effect coding so that the intercept
coefficient could still be interpreted as the overall error, and including random slopes for the
effect of color, as it was a within-subjects manipulation).
Experiment 4 replicated Experiment 1 except that i) participants were only provided two
options when asked to report the final frame that they remembered seeing, and ii) there were
60 trials instead of 30. After the brightening or darkening animation was masked, participants
were presented with two side-by-side squares (both also 240 x 240 pixels). Unbeknownst to the
participants, one option was always slightly lighter than the final frame before the mask and
the other was always slightly darker than the final frame before the mask. Participants were
asked to choose the option that best matched their memory of the final frame before the mask.
Participants responded using their keyboard, pressing the left or right arrow to indicate their
choice. The two options were always an equal number of frames off from the final frame that
was displayed, with the number of frames varying randomly between 1, 3, and 5 frames from
trial to trial (each option equally likely). The position of the two options (brighter on the left vs.
darker on the left) varied randomly from trial to trial (with each option equally likely).
In Experiment 4, our measure of interest was the probability that participants chose the
upcoming, unseen frame from among the two alternatives. In other words, when a participant
was asked to choose the best match for their memory of the final frame of a brightening square,
what was the probability that they would choose the option that was too bright (rather than
too dark)? And vice versa for a darkening frame. We used a simple Bayesian multilevel model
for this probability, analogous to the models used in Experiments 1–3, adding the offset of the
two options (1, 3, or 5 frames from correct) as a predictor (see the Supplementary Materials for
details). Adhering to our preregistered analysis plan, we excluded all trials with response times
faster than 200 ms or slower than 6000 ms. We also excluded all trials from participants who
responded outside of this range on 10% or more of the trials.
110 participants completed Experiment 2 (61 male, 47 female, 2 non-binary; mean age 36): 2
who were excluded by our preregistered exclusion criteria, 64 who saw a brightening stimulus
and 44 who saw a darkening stimulus. 100 participants completed Experiment 3 (49 male, 50
female, 1 non-binary; mean age 38): 2 who were excluded, 44 who saw a brightening stimulus,
and 54 who saw a darkening stimulus. 110 participants completed Experiment 4 (44 male, 63
female, 3 non-binary; mean age 38): 11 excluded, 58 who saw a brightening stimulus, and 41
who saw a darkening stimulus.
Results
Experiments 2–4 all found that participants exhibited representational momentum for changes
in brightness.
Experiment 2 replicated the results of Experiment 1: Participants’ memories for the final
frame of a brightening animation were projected an average of 11.0 frames into the future and
their memories of a darkening animation were projected an average of 6.3 frames into the future
(95% HDIs: [9.32, 12.78] and [4.28, 8.45], respectively). Thus, if anything, the momentum effect
was stronger when moving left-to-right on the response slider moved backward through time
instead of forward. The effects seen in Experiment 1 cannot simply be attributed to a bias to
respond to the right of the slider.
Experiment 3 found representational momentum for chromatic stimuli in all cases that we
tested, with 95% HDIs of [3.10, 5.67], [3.83, 6.64], and [5.15, 7.91] for red, green, and blue,
respectively (collapsing brightening and darkening conditions), verifying that it is not specific to
the achromatic stimuli.
Experiment 4 also found the signature of representational momentum in the two-alternative
choice task: Participants who saw the stimulus getting brighter chose the too-bright option 63.1%
of the time while those who saw it getting darker instead chose the too-dark option 56.1% of the
time (95% HDIs: [59.8%, 65.9%] and [54.2%, 61.6%], respectively; [57.9%, 62.9%] overall ). This
held regardless of whether the two options were 5, 3, or even just 1 frame removed from the true
final frame (95% HDIs: [60.5%, 69.9%], [57.9%, 62.9%], [52.2%, 57.34%], respectively).
Experiment 5: Representational Momentum for Saturation
Experiments 1–4 demonstrated that people experience representational momentum for increasing
or decreasing brightness, a dimension of change that involves no motion whatsoever. Experiment
5 demonstrated that representational momentum extends to a second case of this kind: changes
in color saturation. Like brightness, saturation is a rare example of a perceptual feature that can
undergo continuous change without associated motion, providing the opportunity for a second,
independent demonstration that representational momentum is not merely a quirk of motion
perception, but a more general phenomenon.
Method
Experiment 5 followed the procedure of Experiment 1 except that the stimuli were red, green,
or blue squares that increased or decreased in color saturation, rather than brightness, and the
animations changed at 15 frames per second instead of 30 frames per second. The animations
consisted of 90 frames equally spaced in CIELCh space between chroma values of 0 and 75. The
red stimulus had fixed lightness of 55 and hue angle of 30. The green stimulus had fixed lightness
of 75 and hue angle of 135. The blue stimulus had a fixed lightness of 45 and hue angle of 290.
These values (and the change to 15 fps from 30 fps) ensured that every frame of each animation
Converted to probabilities from the log-odds used in our preregistered analyses for simplicity.
Even the CIELCh color space does not have perfectly independent and perceptually uniform dimensions
(due to the Helmholtz–Kohlrausch effect and individual differences in color perception; Fairchild and Pirrotta,
1991; Judd, 1958; Kohlrausch, 1935), so our participants may have perceived slight changes in the brightness of
the stimuli even with the CIELCh lightness fixed. However, any such changes would have been miniscule (and
irregular) compared to the dramatic changes in brightness in Experiments 1–4. We exclude the highest saturation
values of each color to minimize this effect.
used a distinct RGB value that could be displayed on a standard display (i.e., no two frames were
the same and the value of each RGB color channels was always between 0 and 255). Stimulus
hue varied randomly from trial to trial with each of the three hues equally likely.
100 participants completed Experiment 5 (45 male, 53 female, 2 non-binary; mean age 37): 4
participants excluded according to our preregistered exclusion criteria, 53 participants who saw
saturating stimuli, and 43 participants who saw desaturating stimuli.
Our statistical analyses were identical to those used for Experiment 1 except that we included
stimulus color as a predictor.
Results
Participants experienced representational momentum for both increasing and decreasing satu-
ration (95% HDIs of [3.53, 6.25] and [1.03, 4.08], respectively, [2.71, 4.69] overall), and for all
three stimulus colors (95% HDIs: [3.62, 6.09] for red, [1.36, 3.76] for green, [2.52, 5.01] for blue).
Participants who watched the stimulus become more saturated remembered it being even more
saturated than it really was in the final frame of the animation. Participants who watched it
become less saturated exhibited the opposite effect.
Experiment 6: The Representation of Hue and the Limits
of Automatic Prediction
Experiments 1–5 show that there are at least two cases where people appear to experience
representational momentum for a dimension of change that involves no motion whatsoever:
changes in brightness (Experiments 1–4) and changes in color saturation (Experiment 5).
Experiment 6 tested whether people experience representational momentum for changes in
hue, the third of the three perceptual features that we initially identified that can undergo
continuous change without involving or strongly implying motion. However, unlike changing
brightness or saturation, we hypothesize that the mind does not automatically represent the
trajectory of changing hue. Brightness and saturation are magnitudes and the trajectory of a
monotonic change in either is exceedingly obvious to an observer. By comparison, hue is not a
magnitude and—even though there is latent organization to hue representation that is captured
by color appearance models (e.g., orange is judged more similar to red than to blue; Fairchild,
2013)—our minds may not automatically compute and explicitly represent the trajectory of
hue change through this latent space. As such, our (preregistered) hypothesis was that people
would not have strong automatic predictions about changes in hue, and, therefore, not exhibit
representational momentum for changing hue.
Experiment 6 also served as a powerful control. It used the exact same procedure as
Experiments 1 and 5, except that the stimulus changed in hue, rather than brightness or
saturation. Accordingly, a negative result would verify that our approach does not merely yield
future-biased responses in all cases and that the momentum effects that we observe are induced
by particular stimuli, rather than some artifact of our experimental procedure.
Method
Experiment 6 exactly replicated Experiment 1 except that the stimuli changed hue instead of
becoming brighter or darker. The animation consisted of 180 frames equally spaced in CIELCh
space between hue angles of 10 and 330 (again displayed at 30 frames per second). Lightness
was held constant at 70 and chroma held constant at 36. The random noise mask on each trial
featured the full range of hues. The direction of hue change (red-to-purple vs. purple-to-red)
was randomly varied between participants (each direction equally likely).
200 participants completed Experiment 6 (94 male, 102 female, 4 non-binary; mean age 38): 7
participants who were excluded according to our preregistered exclusion criteria, 93 participants
who saw red-to-purple animations, and 100 participants who saw purple-to-red animations.
Results
As we predicted, participants did not experience representational momentum for changing hue:
On average, the last frame they reported seeing was 1.5 frames before the final frame displayed
(95% HDI: [-2.12, -1.00] overall, [-3.06, -1.43] for red-to-purple, [-1.63, -0.06] for purple-to-red).
Our preregistered standard for “no effect” was a 95% HDI entirely within the range [-2.5, 2.5], as
we find here.
Discussion
Representational momentum transcends motion. Our minds are continually trying to predict
the trajectory of our experiences and these predictions can distort our memories whether or
not they are about motion. Here, we demonstrate representational momentum for changes in
brightness (Experiments 1 through 4) and color saturation (Experiment 5) in stimuli that involve
no motion whatsoever. People misremember brightening stimuli as having brightened more than
they really did and make analogous errors for darkening, saturating, and desaturating stimuli.
Our findings also directly refute the longstanding claim that changes in brightness do not produce
representational momentum (using large, preregistered experiments with richer, more naturalistic
stimuli).
We show that representational momentum is more than merely a motion-specific phenomenon,
but its true breadth remains unknown. Does it extend to changes in higher level visual features,
other perceptual modalities, or beyond perception? A fundamental challenge in future research
exploring these questions will be establishing that novel representational momentum effects
are not merely disguised representational momentum for motion. As we noted previously, the
state changes that have previously been shown to elicit representational momentum involve
motion (e.g., a shrinking ice cube), and prior demonstrations of representational momentum
for changing pitch have been challenged on the ground that this occurs only because changes
in pitch sound like objects in motion (Brehaut and Tipper, 1996). Gradual changes that do
not involve actual, apparent, or implied motion are surprisingly rare. However, this challenge is
not insurmountable. For example, we are curious whether people experience representational
momentum for changing numerosity, which ought to be testable using stimuli that involve no
coherent motion (e.g., by adding or removing items from a set only without changing its convex
hull; Salti et al., 2017; Shilat et al., 2021). In the related phenomenon of operational momentum,
people exhibit a momentum effect when estimating operations like arithmetic (e.g., overestimating
sums and underestimating subtractions McCrink et al., 2007), but we know of no work yet
showing representational momentum for the perception of numerosity.
In our final experiment, we probe the limits of automatic prediction. We show that, under
identical conditions, people experience no discernible representational momentum for changes
in hue (Experiment 6). Although these results alone cannot determine why this is the case,
our hypothesis is that the mind does not automatically compute and explicitly represent the
trajectory of hue change through latent color space in the way that it might do naturally for
brightness and saturation, which are simple magnitudes. An interesting direction for future
research would be to further test this hypothesis by providing people with extensive experience
with continuous hue change. If, after this training, people begin to experience representational
momentum for changing hue, this would be strong evidence that the absence of momentum for
hue change in the rest of us directly follows from the fact that we cannot or do not automatically
represent the trajectory of changing hue. (And this would be a particularly persuasive result
given that we might otherwise expect expertise in an area to make us less likely to make memory
errors in that area, rather than more.)
Although our results in our final experiment met our preregistered standard for “no effect”, it
is worth commenting on the fact that participants robustly exhibited 1 to 2 frames of “negative
momentum” for changing hue, rather than showing no bias. There are many possible explanations
for why participants’ responses leaned slightly negative, but we believe that the most likely
explanation is that backward masking prevents people from seeing the final 1–2 frames of the
stimulus that are on the screen before the onset of the mask (e.g., Raab, 1963). Accordingly, the
final frame that participants recall seeing is 1–2 frames before the final frame that was presented.
Indeed, similar backward masking effects were likely at work in Experiments 1–5 and, as such, we
think it is likely that Experiments 1–5 slightly underestimate the magnitude of the momentum
Although it hints at the possibility that spatial metaphor and spatial representations underwrite numerous
cognitive capacities, including prediction (Constantinescu et al., 2016; Hubbard, 2014, 2015; Pinker, 2007), the
existence of operational momentum does not already establish that representational momentum transcends motion;
operational momentum occurs for mental operations, not extrapolating the trajectory of perceived changes.
effects for changing brightness and saturation. (If the last frame that people actually saw was 2
frames before the last frame that was presented, then their future-biased responses are projecting
2 frames further into the future than our methods would detect.)
Our minds automatically predict the trajectory of objects through physical space. More
generally, however, we show here that they predict the trajectory of other varieties of change
within their respective representational spaces. These predictions distort our memories, and the
presence or absence of these distortions offer a window into the inner workings of perception,
memory and cognition. Finding representational momentum for a given variety of change (such
as brightness or color saturation) strongly suggests that the mind represents trajectory through
the corresponding representational space, and that it uses this representation of trajectory to
engage in prediction. By contrast, the absence of representational momentum (as in the case of
hue) suggests that the mind only represents current and past position within the corresponding
representational space, and does not automatically compute and represent the trajectory of
changes through that space.
Navigating the world requires that our minds represent how things are and how they are
about to be. But, as is so often the case, systematic errors in these processes can reveal a great
deal about how the mind works.