Emotion (Dys)Regulation and National Narcissism
Short title: Emotion Regulation & National Narcissism
Note: This manuscript is currently under review.
Zuzanna Molenda* ,
Marta Marchlewska ,
Aleksandra Cislak
Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences
Jaracza 1, 00-378, Warsaw, Poland
Center for Research on Social Relations, SWPS University
Chodakowska 19/31, 03-815, Warsaw, Poland
Authors note
* Corresponding author: Zuzanna Molenda, Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Jaracza 1, 00-378, Warsaw, Poland (email: zmolenda@psych.pan.pl, telephone:
+48225831380, fax: +48225831381).
Abstract
National narcissism (i.e., an unrealistic belief about the national group’s greatness that
is derived from individual’s unsatisfied needs) has been previously predicted by negative
emotionality. This research aimed to further investigate the emotional roots of national
narcissism by examining its’ link with emotion dysregulation. Across three cross-sectional
studies conducted among British (Study 1, N = 473), American (Study 2, N = 444), and Polish
(Study 1, N = 633) participants, we found that greater deficiencies in emotion regulation were
consistently linked with higher national narcissism. We also replicated past effects of emotion
dysregulation and national narcissism on conspiracy beliefs and demonstrated the indirect
effect of emotion dysregulation on conspiracy beliefs via national narcissism. These results
suggest that the emotional deficiencies of individuals are important in shaping group-level
phenomena. We discuss these findings’ potential limitations and significance.
Keywords: emotion dysregulation, negative emotions, national narcissism, national
identification, conspiracy beliefs
Declarations of interest: none.
Data availability statement: Data, code, and supplementary materials for all studies are
available at the Open Science Framework:
Funding/Acknowledgements: This work was supported by: the Polish Ministry of Science
and Higher Education (Science for Society Grant, No. NdS/529303/2021/2022; financing
amount PLN 1,714,305.00, total project value PLN 1,714,305.00), the National Science
Centre Poland under Opus grant [2019/35/B/HS6/00123], and the Norface Democratic
Governance in a Turbulent Age Research Programme (project Threat, identity, and dissent:
Understanding and addressing political polarization in European democracies is financially
supported by the NORFACE Joint Research Programme on Democratic Governance in a
Turbulent Age and co-funded by National Science Centre, Poland and the European
Commission through Horizon 2020 under grant agreement No 822166). The funding sources
were not involved in conducting this research or preparing the article.
We would like to thank Dr. Marta Rogoza for her assistance with collecting data for Study 2
and her comments on the early versions of the manuscript.
Ethical approval: Informed consent was obtained from all participants involved in the
studies. All studies were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and
approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy
of Sciences (numbers of approvals: 18/XI/2019, 27/X/2020, 19/IX/2022).
Emotion (Dys)Regulation and National Narcissism
Abstract
National narcissism (i.e., an unrealistic belief about the national group’s greatness that
is derived from individual’s unsatisfied needs) has been previously predicted by negative
emotionality. This research aimed to further investigate the emotional roots of national
narcissism by examining its’ link with emotion dysregulation. Across three cross-sectional
studies conducted among British (Study 1, N = 473), American (Study 2, N = 444), and Polish
(Study 1, N = 633) participants, we found that greater deficiencies in emotion regulation were
consistently linked with higher national narcissism. We also replicated past effects of emotion
dysregulation and national narcissism on conspiracy beliefs and demonstrated the indirect
effect of emotion dysregulation on conspiracy beliefs via national narcissism. These results
suggest that the emotional deficiencies of individuals are important in shaping group-level
phenomena. We discuss these findings’ potential limitations and significance.
Keywords: emotion dysregulation, negative emotions, national narcissism, national
identification, conspiracy beliefs
Emotion (Dys)Regulation and National Narcissism
In 1985, in Brussels, 39 people died, and more than 600 individuals were injured in a
calamitous incident that transpired during an important football game. Supporters of one club
initiated an attack on the fans of the other, which resulted in one of the stadium’s walls
collapsing because of the fans’ aggressive behavior. This is (unfortunately) one of the too
many examples of stadium aggression, but this one was particularly tragic, and thus it was
followed by the intense debates regarding hooliganism or stadium safety (Realfonzo, 2023).
However, one might also ponder the psychological mechanisms contributing to such
incidents. One possible answer is that attacking fans could not manage their emotions
properly, which led to aggressive acts. Yet, since a group of fans attacked another club’s
supporters, one factor cannot be omitted: their social identity – they participated in this event
considering themselves members of a particular social group, which is associated with one’s
perception of the self (e.g., Tajfel, 1974). Past work found that particularly narcissistic social
identity is associated with prejudice, hostility, and aggressive tendencies toward outgroup
members (Cichocka et al., 2017; Golec de Zavala et al., 2013). In this vein, Larkin and Fink
(2019) investigated collective narcissism in the context of dysfunctional sports fans’ behaviors
and demonstrated that team identification was linked to fans’ aggression only at higher levels
of collective narcissism. Thus, this research suggests that narcissistic identification plays a
significant role in explaining socially undesirable intergroup tendencies. The tragic example
described above suggests that emotion (dys)regulation and social identity might intertwine in
shaping certain behaviors. However, the relationships between emotion (dys)regulation and
the forms of social identities are not well understood yet. This research attempts to probe this
issue by focusing on a specific form of in-group identity: collective narcissism.
Collective narcissism is characterized by grandiose beliefs about the in-group’s
greatness with a certitude that this group is not adequately valued by others (Golec de Zavala
et al., 2009). While the early research on collective narcissism was focused rather on its’
potential social consequences (e.g., Golec de Zavala et al., 2009; 2013), the issue of its’
possible roots remains more obscure. The current research aims to shed new light on this
matter by examining the link between emotion dysregulation and collective narcissism. In line
with past theories and studies, considering threatened ego or individual deficiencies as the
source of adopting a narcissistic identity (e.g., Cichocka, 2016; Fromm, 1973; Golec de
Zavala et al., 2020; Marchlewska, Górska, Green, et al., 2022; Molenda, Marchlewska,
Rogoza, & Szczepańska, 2023; for a review see Cislak & Cichocka, 2023), we hypothesized
that deficiencies in emotion regulation – which is crucial for human functioning – could be
linked with higher collective narcissism. Although past research (e.g., Golec de Zavala et al.,
2019) suggested the emotional deficits antecedents of collective narcissism, to our knowledge,
we are the first to empirically examine the relationship between emotion dysregulation and
this narcissistic identity in three different socio-political contexts.
Collective Narcissism
The phenomenon of collective narcissism encapsulates unrealistic beliefs about the in-
group’s greatness and importance (often captured as a grandiose in-group image), yet
alongside a conviction that one’s group is not adequately acknowledged and valued by others,
and deserves special treatment (e.g., Cichocka, 2016; Cislak & Cichocka, 2023; Golec de
Zavala et al., 2009). While the idea of collective narcissism originates from classic theorizing
on social identity by Adorno (1963/1998) and Fromm (1973), it got broad attention in the late
00s with Golec de Zavala et al.’s research (2009). However, both classic theories (Adorno,
1963/1998; Fromm, 1973), arguing that collective narcissism has its underpinnings in a
threatened ego, and contemporary research (e.g., Cichocka et al., 2018; Marchlewska, Górska,
Green, et al., 2022), suggesting that individual’s unsatisfied needs and shortcomings are at the
roots of collective narcissism, are congruent with looking for causes of adopting collective
narcissism as social identity in individual’s frustrated motives, thereby implying that
collective narcissism might constitute a compensatory function. Research so far indicated
several potential antecedents of collective narcissism, such as lowered personal control
(Cichocka et al., 2018; Marchlewska et al., 2020), low self-esteem (Golec de Zavala et al.,
2020), anxious attachment style (Marchlewska, Górska, Green, et al., 2022), and deficiencies
in coping with stress (Molenda, Marchlewska, Rogoza, & Szczepańska, 2023). Although
collective narcissism is usually considered as a compensation mechanism for individual
shortcomings by identifying with a group that is perceived as strong and important, the
abovementioned research (which included longitudinal and experimental designs) suggests
that it is merely an attempt – as it does not seem to satisfy the needs or improve the
shortcomings. Indeed, it can even be linked to deterioration of individual’s problems, for
instance, heightening attachment anxiety (Marchlewska, Górska, Green, et al., 2022) or
adopting maladaptive ways of coping with stress (Molenda, Marchlewska, Rogoza, &
Szczepańska, 2023).
Since its’ grandiose and defensive features, collective narcissism has primarily adverse
effects on intra- and inter-group relations (e.g., Maciantowicz et al., 2023; Molenda,
Marchlewska, & Rogoza, 2023; Sternisko et al., 2023; Szczepańska et al., 2024; for a review
see Cislak & Cichocka, 2023). Starting with the latter, holding grandiose beliefs about one’s
group affects intergroup perceptions and attitudes, as collective narcissism was linked to
prejudice and out-group derogation (e.g., Golec de Zavala & Cichocka, 2012; Golec de
Zavala et al., 2013), as well as conspiracy beliefs (e.g., Cichocka et al., 2016; Cislak et al.,
2021; Górska et al., 2022; Sternisko et al., 2023) and hostility (Golec de Zavala et al., 2016).
This is due to the immense absorption in the in-group’s image, which makes those high in
collective narcissism very sensitive to any signs of threat to the in-group’s good name, and
consequently resulting in a fixation with defending the in-group from (real or imagined)
enemies (Cichocka, 2016). Moreover, believing that other groups are plotting against the in-
group might serve as an explanation for the in-group’s misfortunes. Thus, conspiracy beliefs
(and out-group hostility) are more pronounced among those adopting narcissistic in-group
identity, serving as tactics to manage any hardships of the in-group’s image (Cichocka, 2016;
Cichocka et al., 2016). Recent research also showed that collective narcissism is not really
advantageous to the in-groups, as it was related to in-group disloyalty (Marchlewska et al.,
2020), instrumental treatment of in-group members (Cichocka et al., 2022), and even
intentions to conspire against the in-group (Biddlestone et al., 2022; Marchlewska, Górska,
Green, et al., 2022; Molenda, Marchlewska, & Rogoza, 2023) or put in-group members’
health and well-being at risk (Gronfeldt, Cislak, Sternisko, et al., 2023). This suggests that
those higher in collective narcissism are more prone to seek individual rather than group
profits. Importantly, collective narcissism can refer to various groups, and its’ socially
undesirable consequences manifest in miscellaneous contexts, for instance, among sports
teams’ fans (Larkin & Fink, 2019), business organizations and workplace teams (Biddlestone
et al., 2022; Cichocka et al., 2022), political parties (Gronfeldt, Cislak, Wyatt, & Cichocka,
2023), religious (Marchlewska et al., 2019) or gender groups (Marchlewska, Górska,
Malinowska, & Kowalski, 2022), and nations (for a review see Cislak & Cichocka, 2023),
which is the most commonly examined context and the one we investigated in the current
research.
Summing it up, as collective narcissism derives from various individual shortcomings
and is supposed to compensate for these unsatisfied needs or difficulties (Cichocka, 2016), we
argue that it might also be linked to deficits in the essential, basic processes of an individual’s
emotion regulation. The importance of emotion regulation in human life seems invaluable
(e.g., Gross, 2014; Hofmann et al., 2012); thus, deficiencies in this area could be linked with
identifying with a group in a narcissistic way to make up for these shortcomings. It seems
even more plausible since emotion regulation was related to socially adverse phenomena,
such as aggression, hostility, prejudice, and conspiracy beliefs (Contardi et al., 2016; Donahue
et al., 2014; Molenda, Green, et al., 2023; Steele et al., 2019), which also has been recognized
as unfavorable manifestations of collective narcissism. Crucially, emotion (dys)regulation was
theorized to predict collective narcissism (Golec de Zavala et al., 2019), and thus, we aimed to
empirically verify whether deficiencies in emotion regulation are linked to narcissistic
identification with one’s group. So, what exactly is emotion regulation, and why is it so
important?
Emotion Regulation
Emotions are an inherent part of humans’ lives, but to be advantageous, they should be
effectively managed via numerous processes affecting how, when, and which emotions we
feel (Johnstone & Walter, 2014). Emotion regulation refers to the processes in which
individuals shape their emotions, including occurrence (i.e., which emotion and when
arouses), experience, and expression of emotions (Gross, 1998, 2014). These processes have a
genetic and neural basis (e.g., Caspi et al., 2010; Ochsner & Gross, 2014) and are examined at
multiple levels, including neurotransmitters or cortical structures (Johnstone & Walter, 2014).
Emotion regulation is present from infancy and improves through childhood and adolescence
(e.g., Eisenberg et al., 2010, 2014). This development of emotion regulation skills is
considered one of the main aims of socialization, with a particular importance of socialization
within a family, which can significantly influence the progression of children’s
neurobiological and behavioral capacities (Thompson, 2014). Importantly, emotion regulation
is crucial for well-being and mental health and substantial for the efficient execution of tasks
and goal achievement (e.g., Aldao et al., 2010, 2015).
However, dysfunction of emotion regulation processes might result in emotion
dysregulation (or difficulties with emotion regulation) – often related to various mood and
anxiety disorders (Johnstone & Walter, 2014). Gratz and Roemer (2004) distinguished several
essential components of emotion (dys)regulation, which can affect mental health and well-
being in case of deficiencies in any of these areas, and developed a tool measuring these
deficiencies (i.e., Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale; DERS). These major emotion
(dys)regulation components include lack of emotional awareness, lack of emotional clarity,
nonacceptance of emotions, difficulties in committing to goal-directed behaviors, difficulties
with controlling impulses (or one’s behaviors), and limited access to regulation strategies
(Gratz & Roemer, 2004).
Emotion dysregulation is considered one of the cores of mood and anxiety disorders
(see Hofmann et al., 2012), including depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, as well as
alcohol and drug abuse (Bradley et al., 2011). Early research in the field suggested that some
difficulties with emotion regulation (e.g., habitual use of more maladaptive strategies) were
related to experiencing more negative emotions, worse interpersonal functioning, and lower
well-being (Gross & John, 2003). Subsequent studies also indicated that emotion
dysregulation is associated with negative affect and aggression (Donahue et al., 2014). Thus,
the literature seems congruent that emotion regulation is a crucial personal resource for
individual’s functioning and well-being (e.g., Buruck et al., 2016). Yet, some research also
suggested that it is also important for the social sphere, such as intergroup relations or
political attitudes (Gross, 2014). For instance, adaptive emotion regulation reduced prejudice
and support for aggressive policies toward out-groups (Halperin et al., 2013; Steele et al.,
2019). Interestingly, recent studies also indicated that emotion dysregulation is linked to
higher conspiracy beliefs (Molenda, Green, et al., 2023), suggesting that how we manage our
1 Based on Gratz and Roemer’s (2004) work, we used the terms emotion dysregulation and difficulties in
emotion regulation interchangeably across the article.
emotions might be related to how we perceive and interpret the social world. In the current
research, we argue that emotion dysregulation might also be linked to how we identify with
an in-group, that is, to collective narcissism.
Collective Narcissism and Emotion Regulation
In this research, we argue that deficiencies in emotion regulation processes might be
linked to higher collective narcissism. Although this association was not examined before,
past theories and empirical studies provide abundant indirect evidence to support our
assumption. Mainly, both psychological theorizing and contemporary research are congruent
with searching for sources of collective narcissism in an individual’s unsatisfied needs or
shortcomings (e.g., Cichocka, 2016; Fromm, 1973; Golec de Zavala et al., 2020;
Marchlewska, Górska, Green, et al., 2022; Molenda, Marchlewska, Rogoza, & Szczepańska,
2023). This suggests that one’s deficiencies in the essential spheres of human functioning
might lead to adopting this form of in-group identity. Thus, we propose that difficulties in
emotion regulation could be considered one of the individual’s deficiencies linked to
collective narcissism. Importantly, Molenda, Marchlewska, Rogoza, and Szczepańska (2023)
demonstrated that deficiencies in coping with stress predicted higher collective narcissism,
arguing that fundamental processes of coping with stress could underline adopting a
narcissistic identity. In other words, deficiencies in coping – linked to unfavorable
psychological outcomes, such as decreased well-being – might motivate individuals to seek a
strong collective and identify with it in a narcissistic way to compensate for individual
shortcomings (Aldwin, 2011; Cichocka, 2016; Golec de Zavala, 2019). Although coping with
stress and emotion regulation are not the same, they are related and might be seen as parts of
the broader construct of affect regulation (Gross, 2014; Hofmann et al., 2012). Therefore, it
seems plausible that also deficiencies in emotion regulation could be linked with higher
collective narcissism.
Moreover, recent studies indicated a positive relationship between emotion
dysregulation and conspiracy beliefs (Molenda, Green, et al., 2023; Scandurra et al., 2022; see
also Marchlewska, Green, et al., 2022, for studies on coping), with the latter being also
considered one of the adverse consequences of collective narcissism (e.g., Cichocka et al.,
2016; Cislak et al., 2021; Marchlewska et al., 2019; Marchlewska, Górska, Green, et al.,
2022). Molenda, Green, et al. (2023) argued that since emotion dysregulation leads to adverse
emotional outcomes, making people more prone to focusing on negative aspects of the
environment, then those with higher emotion dysregulation might be more inclined to
perceive mostly hostile cues while interpreting important world events, so adopting
conspiracy theories could be more appealing for them. Interestingly, one of the characteristics
of collective narcissism is an exaggerated fear about the outgroups’ bad intentions (Cichocka,
2016; Golec de Zavala et al., 2019), which is one of the reasons why narcissistic identity is a
robust predictor of conspiracy beliefs. While research suggests that defensiveness plays a role
in fostering conspiracy beliefs (Douglas et al., 2017), defensive (i.e., narcissistic) in-group
identity was indeed consistently linked to such beliefs, as they may constitute a justification
for the group’s misfortunes in service of positive in-group image maintenance (Cichocka,
2016; Cislak et al., 2021). In light of the abovementioned research, we assume that emotion
dysregulation might also be linked with higher national narcissism which, in turn, may result
in higher conspiracy beliefs.
Most notably, similar assumptions were previously suggested in the literature. For
instance, Golec de Zavala (2019) showed that collective narcissism is linked to negative
emotionality and implied that narcissistic identity might be, in fact, underscored by
“dispositional deficits in emotional resilience” (p. 12). Here, it is worth reiterating that
emotion dysregulation has effects on negative affect and mood disorders (e.g., depression;
Donahue et al., 2014; Hofmann et al., 2012). Moreover, Golec de Zavala and colleagues
directly suggested that “deficits in the ability to regulate negative emotions may be associated
with likelihood to uphold the collective narcissist belief about the in-group” (2019, p. 60).
This idea was recently supported by Molenda, Marchlewska, Rogoza, and Szczepańska’s
(2023) findings in the related area of coping with stress. However, according to our
knowledge, this assumption was not directly tested in the emotion dysregulation sphere.
In this work, we assumed that collective narcissism can serve a compensatory function
for individuals’ deficiencies in the fundamental human emotion regulation processes. As
emotion dysregulation results in worsened mood and lower well-being, individuals might be
motivated to seek a source of soothing, a reason to feel better about themselves. Hence, they
might look for a strong collective to identify with in order to compensate for their emotional
shortcomings (Cichocka et al., 2016; Fromm, 1973; Golec ze Zavala et al., 2019; Hofmann et
al., 2012). Thus, building on past research regarding the nature of collective narcissism (e.g.,
Cichocka, 2016) and incorporating Golec de Zavala et al.’s (2019) ideas, supported by
empirical reports (Golec de Zavala, 2019; Molenda, Marchlewska, Rogoza, & Szczepańska,
2023), we investigated the role of difficulties in emotion regulation in group-related processes
(i.e., adopting narcissistic identity; Studies 1-3; and endorsing conspiracy theories; Study 3).
Overview of the Present Research
We examined our hypotheses in three cross-sectional studies conducted among British
(Study 1), American (Study 2), and Polish (Study 3) participants, aiming to increase the
generalizability of our findings. Across these three studies, we tested the prediction that
greater emotion dysregulation would be linked to higher national narcissism (H1), that is,
collective narcissism applied to the national context. Moreover, we aimed to verify whether
socially undesirable manifestations of national narcissism, such as conspiracy beliefs, are
indeed related to emotion dysregulation (H2). Therefore, in Study 3, we included a measure of
conspiracy beliefs – previously found to be related to both emotion dysregulation (Molenda,
Green, et al., 2023; Scandurra et al., 2022) and national narcissism (e.g., Cislak et al., 2021;
Marchlewska, Górska, Green, et al., 2022). Finally, we also hypothesized and tested whether
national narcissism would account for the link between emotion dysregulation and conspiracy
beliefs (H3).
In all studies, we also controlled for conventional national identification (Cameron,
2004). As national narcissism is positively correlated with national identification, it is
important to co-vary out the variance shared between them to control for the effects of
national identity per se – a different form of positive regard for one’s nation, without
defensive (narcissistic) component, captured as constructive attitude and commitment to the
national in-group, independent of the acknowledgment of this group in others’ eyes (Cichocka
& Cislak, 2020; Golec de Zavala et al., 2013); also called a secure national identity (e.g.,
Marchlewska, Cichocka, et al., 2022). This is a commonly used methodological approach
(e.g., Biddlestone et al., 2022; Marchlewska, Cichocka, et al., 2022; see also Paulhus et al.,
2004; for a review, see Cichocka & Cislak, 2020), which allows to observe (after co-varying
out) the unique effects of national narcissism versus secure national identification.
In each study, we aimed to recruit at least 400 participants, as with the power of 0.80
for detecting small associations between variables, G*Power (Faul et al., 2009) provides a
target of 395 participants for r = .14 (Fritz & MacKinnon, 2007). In all studies we additionally
controlled for political orientation and demographics, as these variables have been linked to
national narcissism in the previous research (e.g., Biddlestone et al., 2022; Gronfeldt, Cislak,
Sternisko, et al., 2023; Szczepańska et al., 2022).
Transparency and Openness
The studies were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and
informed consent was obtained from all participants. We report all data exclusions (if any), all
manipulations, all measures included in the studies, as well as how we determined our sample
sizes. Data were analyzed using SPSS v.29 (all studies) and Process 4.1 (Hayes, 2021; Study
3). These studies’ designs and analyses were not preregistered. All the data, analysis codes,
research materials, as well as supplements are available at
Study 1
Study 1 served as an initial test of our first hypothesis (H1) that emotion dysregulation
should be positively linked to national narcissism. In this study, we tested this hypothesis
among British participants.
Method
Participants and Procedure
Data for Study 1 were obtained in 2021 through an online survey conducted among
British participants via Prolific Academic. The survey was filled out by 501 participants. They
were asked to complete demographic questions, measures of difficulties with emotion
regulation, national narcissism, and national identification, with a debrief at the end of the
survey. The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the [blinded for the
review] (number of approval: 18/XI/2019). Because we were interested in examining British
collective narcissism, we excluded from the analyses anyone who reported their national
identification as other than UK (n = 25). We also excluded participants (n = 3) who reported
their gender as ‘other.’ The responses of all of the remaining participants (N = 473, 339
women, 134 men, M = 34.20 years, SD = 12.32, range = 18 – 75) were included in the
age age
final analyses.
2 Besides the variables reported here, the survey also involved measures of political engagement and a set of
individual differences variables included for the purposes of different projects (please see the OSF project site or
contact the first author for details). This dataset (albeit using other variables) was used by [blinded for review] et
al., 2022 and [blinded for review] et al., 2023.
3 For the purposes of this study, participants who chose ‘other’ as their gender were not considered in the final
data analysis. We focused on responses from those who identified as ‘man’ or ‘woman’. This decision was taken
to maintain data homogeneity for this specific analysis, but we acknowledge and respect the importance of all
gender identities.
Measures
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation. We used six items from the 36-item Difficulties
in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS; Gratz & Roemer, 2004). These items covered all six
subscales of the original measure, that is: clarity (“I have no idea how I am feeling”), goals
(“When I’m upset, I have difficulty thinking about anything else”), impulse (“When I’m
upset, I have difficulty controlling my behaviors”), nonacceptance (“When I’m upset, I
become irritated at myself for feeling that way”), awareness (“I pay attention to how I feel,”
reverse-coded item), and strategies (“When I’m upset, I believe that I will remain that way for
a long time”). The scale demonstrated acceptable reliability, α = .69. Items were scored on a
five-point scale, from 1 = almost never to 5 = almost always. Higher scores indicated greater
emotion dysregulation.
National Narcissism. We measured it using the five-item version of the Collective
Narcissism Scale (Golec de Zavala et al., 2013) with reference to the national in-group (e.g.,
“British people deserve special treatment”). The scale had very good reliability, α = .85.
Participants responded on a six-point scale, from 1 = I strongly disagree to 6 = I strongly
agree. Higher scores indicated higher level of national narcissism.
National Identification. It was measured with a short three-item Social Identification
Scale (Górska et al., 2020; see also Cislak et al., 2021; Study 3), adapted from Cameron
(2004), with respect to the national in-group (e.g., “I have a lot in common with other British
people”). The scale’s reliability was very good, α = .85. Participants answered on a six-point
scale, from 1 = I strongly disagree to 6 = I strongly agree. Higher scores indicated higher
level of national identification.
Covariates. In addition to age and gender (coded as 0 = woman, 1 = man), we
measured participants’ political orientation, asking them to rate their political orientation on a
scale from 1 = extremely liberal to 11 = extremely conservative. Higher scores indicated
higher levels of political conservatism.
Results and Discussion
analysis showed that emotion dysregulation was not significantly linked to national
narcissism, national identification, or conservatism. Emotion dysregulation was, however,
negatively related to age, while age itself was positively linked to national narcissism,
national identification, and conservatism. National narcissism and national identification were
correlated with each other.
Means, Standard Deviations, and Zero-Order Correlations (Study 1)
Measure M SD 1 2 3 4 5
1. DERS 2.57 0.71 - .05 -.09 -.08 -.26***
2. National narcissim 2.19 1.00 - .59*** .44*** .18***
3. National identification 3.35 1.19 - .37*** .16***
4. Political conservatism 4.77 2.19 - .26***
5. Age 34.20 12.32 -
Note. DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
Secondly, we performed a regression analysis with national narcissism as the outcome
2022), to observe the unique effects of national narcissism, it is necessary to control for the
effects of national identification – thus, we added it to the model. We also included age,
gender, and political conservatism as covariates. The overall regression model was significant.
In line with our hypothesis, emotion dysregulation significantly and positively predicted
national narcissism (controlled for national identification). Additionally, national
identification and political conservatism also positively predicted national narcissism, while
the effects of age and gender were non-significant.
Predictors of National Narcissism (Study 1)
Variable B 95% CI β p
DERS 0.20 [0.10, 0.30] .14 < .001
National identification 0.42 [0.36, 0.48] .50 < .001
Political conservatism 0.11 [0.08, 0.15] .25 < .001
Age 0.01 [0.00, 0.01] .07 .061
Gender (0 = woman, 1 = man) 0.12 [-0.03, 0.28] .06 .116
R .43
F F(5, 467) = 70.18***
Note. DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale
***p < .001.
4 Although the main focus of this paper was national narcissism, we also performed a similar analysis with
national identification as the outcome variable (controlling for the effects of national narcissism). The effects of
emotion dysregulation on national identification were significant and negative in all three studies. Please see the
Supplementary Materials for details.
Overall, Study 1 demonstrated that emotion dysregulation was uniquely linked to
higher national narcissism (after controlling for national identification), providing initial
support for our hypothesis (H1). However, in this study, we used short (or ultra-short in the
case of DERS) measures. Moreover, this sample had a big disproportion between men and
women. Thus, in Study 2, we aimed to address these limitations, and we decided to use full
scales for all the measured constructs and conduct a study in a different (and more gender-
balanced) sample.
Study 2
In Study 2, we aimed to replicate the relationship between emotion dysregulation and
national narcissism (H1). This time, however, we used full measures of our main variables to
capture these constructs better. Moreover, we conducted this study in a different sample, this
time among American participants, to increase the generalizability of our findings.
Method
Participants and Procedure
Data for Study 2 were collected in 2023 through an online survey conducted among
American participants via Prolific Academic. We recruited 452 participants. They were asked
to complete full measures of difficulties with emotion regulation, national narcissism, and
national identification, followed by a few demographic questions and a debrief. The study was
approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the [blinded for the review] (number of
approval: 27/X/2020). Because we were interested in examining American collective
narcissism, we excluded from the analyses anyone who reported their national identification
as other than US (n = 5). As in Study 1, we excluded participants (n = 3) who reported their
gender as ‘other.’ The responses of all of the remaining participants (N = 444, 219 women,
225 men, M = 41.33 years, SD = 13.94, range = 18 – 85) were included in the final
age age
analyses.
Measures
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation. We measured emotion dysregulation using a full
36-item Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS; Gratz & Roemer, 2004). The scale
demonstrated excellent reliability, α = .95. As in Study 1, items were scored on a five-point
scale, from 1 = almost never to 5 = almost always. Higher scores indicated greater emotion
dysregulation.
National Narcissism. It was measured with a full nine-item Collective Narcissism
Scale (Golec de Zavala et al., 2009), with respect to the national (American) in-group. The
scale had very good reliability, α = .90. In this study, items were scored on a five-point scale,
from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. Higher scores indicated higher level of
national narcissism.
National Identification. We measured it using a full 12-item Social Identification
Scale (Cameron, 2004), with reference to the national (American) in-group. The scale showed
excellent reliability, α = .91. In this study, participants responded on a five-point scale, from 1
= strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. Higher scores indicated higher level of national
identification.
Covariates. As in Study 1, in addition to age and gender (coded as 0 = woman, 1 =
man), we asked about participants’ political orientation on a scale from 1 = extremely liberal
to 11 = extremely conservative. Higher scores indicated higher levels of political
conservatism.
Results and Discussion
correlation analysis indicated that, as in Study 1, emotion dysregulation was not significantly
5 This scale consists of six subscales that measure different aspects of emotion dysregulation. We only report the
total DERS-36 score here, as we were only concerned with general levels of emotion dysregulation. Please see
the Supplements for analyses, including the six subfactors of DERS.
related to national narcissism or political conservatism, albeit it was negatively linked to
national identification and age. Again, age was positively related to national narcissism,
national identification, and political conservatism, while national narcissism and national
identification were positively correlated.
Means, Standard Deviations, and Zero-Order Correlations (Study 2)
Measure M SD 1 2 3 4 5
1. DERS 2.17 0.67 - .06 -.21*** .02 -.30***
2. National narcissim 2.12 0.85 - .61*** .45*** .11*
3. National identification 3.26 0.84 - .40*** .30***
4. Political conservatism 4.87 2.96 - .11*
5. Age 41.33 13.94 -
Note. DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
In the second step, we conducted a regression analysis with national narcissism as the
added age, gender, and political conservatism as covariates. The overall regression model was
significant. Consistently with our hypothesis and Study 1 results, emotion dysregulation
significantly and positively predicted national narcissism (controlled for national
identification). Again, national identification and political conservatism also positively
predicted national narcissism. The effects of age and gender were non-significant.
Predictors of National Narcissism (Study 2)
Variable B 95% CI β p
DERS 0.21 [0.12, 0.30] .17 < .001
National identification 0.57 [0.49, 0.65] .57 < .001
Political conservatism 0.06 [0.04, 0.08] .22 < .001
Age -0.002 [-0.01, 0.003] -.03 .474
Gender (0 = woman, 1 = man) 0.07 [-0.05, 0.19] .04 .265
R .46
F F(5, 438) = 73.16***
Note. DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale
***p < .001.
In Study 2, we replicated the results of Study 1 on a different sample using full scales,
showing that emotion dysregulation was related to higher national narcissism (when
controlling for national identification), providing further support for our hypothesis. In the
next study, we aimed to expand these results.
Study 3
In Study 3, we also measured conspiracy beliefs besides replicating (H1) our previous
results in a different sample. Belief in conspiracy theories (i.e., secret actions performed by
malevolent groups; Douglas et al., 2017) has been considered one of the unfavorable
outcomes of national narcissism (e.g., Cichocka et al., 2016). Moreover, it has been linked to
difficulties in emotion regulation (Molenda, Green, et al., 2023), as greater emotion
dysregulation predicted higher conspiracy beliefs. Thus, we aimed to replicate the pattern of
associations between emotion dysregulation and conspiracy beliefs (H2). Finally, we assumed
that national narcissism would mediate the link between emotion dysregulation and
conspiracy beliefs (H3).
Method
Participants and Procedure
Study 3 was conducted online in 2023 on a nationwide sample of adult Poles via a
Polish online research panel that had been used for academic research before (e.g., Molenda,
Marchlewska, & Rogoza, 2023). Participants filled out demographic questions, measures of
difficulties with emotion regulation, national narcissism, national identification, and
conspiracy beliefs, followed by a debrief at the end of the survey. The study was approved by
the Research Ethics Committee of the [blinded for the review] (number of approval:
19/IX/2022). The panel was responsible for recruiting the respondents and screening only
those who declared their national identity as Polish. A total of 633 participants (336 women,
297 men, M = 47.93 years, SD = 16.52, range = 18 – 81) were included in the final
age age
analyses.
Measures
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation. We measured emotion dysregulation using a
brief 18-item version of the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS-18; Victor &
Klonsky, 2016) based on the questionnaire by Gratz and Roemer (2004). The scale
demonstrated very good reliability, α = .90. As previously, participants responded on a five-
point scale, from 1 = almost never to 5 = almost always. Higher scores indicated greater
emotion dysregulation.
6 Besides the variables reported here, the survey also involved various measures (e.g., a set of individual
differences variables) included for the purposes of different projects (please see the OSF project site or contact
the first author for details). This dataset (albeit using other variables) was used by [blinded for review] et al.,
2023 and [blinded for review] et al., 2024.
National Narcissism. It was measured as in Study 1, with the five-item Collective
Narcissism Scale (Golec de Zavala et al., 2013), but this time referencing the Polish national
in-group. The scale showed very good reliability, α = .89. Participants answered on a five-
point scale, from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. Higher scores indicated higher
national narcissism.
National Identification. It was assessed as in Study 2, with the 12-item Social
Identification Scale (Cameron, 2004), with reference to the Polish national in-group. The
scale had excellent reliability, α = .92. As in Study 2, items were scored on a five-point scale,
from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. Higher scores indicated higher national
identification.
Conspiracy Beliefs. We employed the Generic Conspiracist Beliefs Scale (GCB;
Brotherton et al., 2013) – a 15-item, widely used tool for measuring conspiracy beliefs. The
scale demonstrated excellent reliability, α = .94. Statements of this measure described general
notions of conspiracy (e.g., “Certain significant events have been the result of the activity of a
small group who secretly manipulate world events”), and participants responded to them on a
five-point scale, from 1 = definitely not true to 5 = definitely true. Higher scores indicated
higher level of conspiracy beliefs.
Covariates. As previously, besides age and gender (coded as 0 = woman, 1 = man),
we asked about participants’ political orientation on a scale from 1 = definitely left-wing to 7 =
definitely right-wing. Higher scores indicated higher levels of political conservatism.
Results and Discussion
Again, emotion dysregulation was not significantly related to national narcissism or political
conservatism, but it was negatively linked to national identification and age. Moreover, it was
positively associated with conspiracy beliefs. Age was positively related to national
identification but not to national narcissism or political conservatism. Conspiracy beliefs were
negatively linked to age and positively to national narcissism but not to national
identification. As before, national narcissism and national identification were positively
correlated.
Means, Standard Deviations, and Zero-Order Correlations (Study 3)
Measure M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6
1. DERS 2.09 0.64 - .07 -.24*** .17*** .02 -.34***
2. National narcissim 2.82 1.08 - .48*** .15*** .44*** .06
3. National identification 3.67 0.82 - -.07 .34*** .33***
4. Conspiracy beliefs 2.93 0.96 - .04 -.10*
5. Political conservatism 4.01 1.65 - -.07
6. Age 47.93 16.52 -
Note. DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
Then, we computed a regression analysis with national narcissism as the outcome
age, gender, and political conservatism as covariates. The overall regression model was
significant. According to our hypothesis and previous results, emotion dysregulation
positively predicted national narcissism (controlled for national identification). National
identification and political conservatism also positively predicted national narcissism. The
effect of age was non-significant. However, rather unexpectedly, the effect of gender was
negative, suggesting that women were more likely to indicate higher national narcissism.
Predictors of National Narcissism (Study 3)
Variable B 95% CI β p
DERS 0.28 [0.16, 0.39] .16 < .001
National identification 0.55 [0.45, 0.65] .41 < .001
Political conservatism 0.20 [0.15, 0.24] .30 < .001
Age 0.00 [-0.004, 0.01] .002 .952
Gender (0 = woman, 1 = man) -0.25 [-0.39, -0.11] -.12 < .001
R .35
F F(5, 627) = 68.07***
Note. DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale
***p < .001.
Next, we conducted a hierarchical regression analysis to examine the effects of
step, we included emotion dysregulation and added political conservatism, age, and gender as
covariates. This model was significant. Emotion dysregulation was a significant positive
predictor of conspiracy beliefs. None of the covariates had significant effects. In the second
step, we introduced national narcissism and national identification as predictors. This model
was also significant. The effect of emotion dysregulation remained significant and positive,
albeit weaker. The covariates did not reach significance again. National narcissism was a
significant positive predictor of conspiracy beliefs, while national identification had a
significant negative effect on the outcome variable.
Predictors of Conspiracy Beliefs (Study 3)
Model 1 Model 2
Variables β B 95% CI β B 95% CI
DERS .15*** 0.22 [0.10, 0.35] .11* 0.17 [0.04, 0.29]
Political conservatism .04 0.02 [-0.02, 0.07] -.01 -0.004 [-0.06, 0.05]
Age -.05 -0.003 [-0.01, 0.002] -.04 -0.002 [-0.01, 0.003]
Gender -.04 -.08 [-0.23, 0.07] -.02 -0.04 [-0.19, 0.11]
(0 = woman, 1 = man)
National narcissism .21*** 0.18 [0.10, 0.27]
National identification -.13* -0.15 [-0.26, -0.04]
R .03 .06
F(4, 628) = 5.34*** F(6, 626) = 6.87***
ΔR .03
ΔF F(2, 626) = 9.63***
Note. DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
Finally, to test our last hypothesis, we performed a mediation analysis using model 4
national narcissism mediated the path between emotion dysregulation and conspiracy beliefs.
We used national identification, political conservatism, age, and gender as covariates. The
significance of the mediation analysis was tested with bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals
for the standardized indirect effects (5,000 resamples). The indirect effect of emotion
dysregulation on conspiracy beliefs via national narcissism of 0.05 was significant, with a
bootstrapped 95% bias-corrected confidence interval of 0.01 to 0.06.
Indirect Effect of Emotion Dysregulation on Conspiracy Beliefs via National Narcissism
Note. Entries are unstandardized coefficients. Dotted line indicates total effect (not controlling
for the third variable). DERS = Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale.
* ** ***
p < .05. p < .01. p < .001.
Overall, Study 3 replicated the results of our previous studies, indicating that emotion
dysregulation is related to higher national narcissism. This study, however, also added to the
literature on conspiracy beliefs by replicating the positive link between emotion dysregulation
and conspiracy beliefs (Molenda, Green, et al., 2023). Importantly, by combining past
research lines, our study revealed that the relationship between emotion dysregulation and
conspiracy beliefs was (partially) accounted for by national narcissism.
General Discussion
Across three cross-sectional studies conducted among British, American, and Polish
participants, we examined the relationship between emotion dysregulation and national
narcissism. We hypothesized and found that emotion dysregulation was linked with higher
national narcissism (controlled for national identification), supporting H1. Moreover, in Study
3, we managed to replicate the results of past studies (Molenda, Green, et al., 2023) by
demonstrating that emotion dysregulation (H2) was related to higher conspiracy beliefs. Our
findings also indicated an indirect effect of national narcissism between emotion
dysregulation and conspiracy beliefs (H3), suggesting that the association between emotion
dysregulation and conspiracy beliefs could be partly accounted for by national narcissism.
Additionally, it is worth noting that political conservatism, as in past studies (e.g., Biddlestone
et al., 2022; Gronfeldt, Cislak, Sternisko, et al., 2023), was consistently linked to higher
national narcissism across all the samples we investigated.
Theoretical Implications
Our findings supported and extended past theorizing about the role of individual
deficiencies in adopting narcissistic in-group identity. The results consistently showed that
greater emotion dysregulation was linked with higher national narcissism. Therefore,
deficiencies in the processes of emotion regulation – crucial for human functioning and well-
being (e.g., Hofmann et al., 2012) and often result in worse interpersonal functioning,
negative affect, or aggression (Donahue et al., 2014; Gross & John, 2003) – were linked to
searching for compensation for these shortcomings in the form of narcissistic identity with a
strong collective, in this case – the national in-group. It is worth noting that although emotion
dysregulation was linked to higher narcissistic national identity, it was also related to lower
non-narcissistic national identity. In other words, those with better emotion regulation tend to
gravitate toward a more secure, authentic attachment to one’s nation, without the grandiose,
narcissistic component. This also aligns with past findings demonstrating that non-narcissistic
national identity is based on a secure self and satisfied needs (e.g., Marchlewska, Górska,
Green, et al., 2022; for a review see Cislak & Cichocka, 2023) – here, we also showed that
individuals with fewer difficulties regulating their emotions might be more prone to identify
with their nation in a non-narcissistic way.
Notably, the current research empirically supported Golec de Zavala et al.’s (2019)
suggestions that “deficits in the ability to regulate negative emotions” (p. 60) might be linked
to adopting national narcissist identity. Our findings also enhanced Golec de Zavala’s (2019)
research about the associations between national narcissism and negative emotionality,
underlining that difficulties in the emotional sphere might indeed underpin this form of in-
group identity. Moreover, we managed to extend Molenda, Marchlewska, Rogoza, and
Szczepańska’s (2023) findings regarding the role of deficiencies in coping with stress in
acquiring national narcissism. It seems that not only shortcomings in coping strategies but
also difficulties in the related field of emotion regulation are linked to higher national
narcissism. Likewise, our results align with previous studies indicating the role of emotion
(dys)regulation not only for an individual’s well-being but also for social phenomena (e.g.,
prejudice; Halperin et al., 2013; Steele et al., 2019). Here, we suggest that difficulties in
emotion regulation also matter for social identity research, specifically collective narcissism.
Furthermore, the present results corroborated and extended previous research on
emotion dysregulation (Molenda, Green, et al., 2023; Scandurra et al., 2022), national
narcissism (Cichocka et al., 2016; Cislak et al., 2021; Marchlewska, Górska, Green, et al.,
2022), and conspiracy beliefs. Specifically, we demonstrated that national narcissism may
account for the relation between emotion dysregulation and conspiracy beliefs. Thus, it seems
at least plausible that those with greater deficiencies in emotion regulation are more prone to
adopt a narcissistic national identity, which further might translate into a higher inclination to
believe in conspiracy theories. Our studies suggest that the matters of emotion
(dys)regulation, narcissistic national identification, and endorsement of conspiracy theories
are possibly intertwined.
Limitations and Future Directions
While our research enhanced past findings regarding potential roots and concomitants
of national narcissism, several points of caution in interpreting and generalizing these results
must be raised. Most importantly, all our studies were cross-sectional; hence, inferencing
about the causal nature of examined relationships is vastly limited. Thus, future research
should employ longitudinal and experimental designs to thoroughly investigate whether these
associations are indeed causal. Whereas emotion regulation processes are rather basic
psychological phenomena present from early childhood (Eisenberg et al., 2010; Johnstone &
Walter, 2014), future studies could manipulate some narrow areas of this phenomena, for
example, emotion regulation self-efficacy or emotion regulation strategies (e.g., Benfer et al.,
2018; Gross & John, 2003) to examine the effects of not just broadly emotion dysregulation
(as we did in the current research) but also the effects of some specific processes. Moreover,
the mediation model proposed and tested in Study 3, although based on strong theoretical
foundations, was examined using a cross-sectional study, thus limiting conclusions about the
character of examined relationships. Future research should employ carefully designed
experiments or longitudinal studies (e.g., Kline, 2015). In fact, it seems also at least plausible
that higher emotion dysregulation can lead to conspiracy beliefs and, in turn, strengthen
defensive in-group identity in the form of national narcissism.
Constraints on Generality
Moreover, some limitations should be noticed regarding the generality of our studies,
including samples and methods. Although our research used samples from three different
countries (UK, US, Poland), future studies should also examine these associations with
samples drawn from different cultures, particularly outside of WEIRD contexts (Western,
Educated, Industrialised, Rich, and Democratic; Henrich et al., 2010), which would allow for
greater generalizability of the findings. Moreover, while we investigated our hypotheses in a
specific context of collective narcissism (i.e., in the national groups), we argue that these
effects also should manifest in other group contexts (e.g., among sports fans; Larkin & Fink,
2019) – it should be, however, examined in future studies. Also, the next investigations could
replicate our findings using different tools for emotion dysregulation (e.g., Preece et al., 2018)
or examine beyond self-reported measures, for example, focusing on real behaviors or data
obtained from social media platforms.
Conclusions
Our findings suggest that individuals with greater emotion dysregulation might be
more prone to identify with the nation in a narcissistic way to compensate for their
deficiencies. This is in line with past theorizing (Golec de Zavala et al., 2019) and indicates
that those who are less effective in regulating their emotions or stress (Molenda,
Marchlewska, Rogoza, & Szczepańska, 2023) could search for a strong collective and identify
with it with the hope that belongingness to such a group would make themselves seem
stronger and more important, thereby increasing their feelings of self-worthiness and making
up for their shortcomings. National narcissism could also explain the relationship between
emotion dysregulation and conspiracy beliefs, thus emphasizing the role that emotion
(dys)regulation might play in shaping some social phenomena. A future challenge would be to
investigate whether improving the regulation of affective processes (emotion, mood, stress)
could decrease these adverse social outcomes.